604677	TITLE *604677 COLLAGEN, TYPE IV, ALPHA-3 BINDING PROTEIN; COL4A3BP
;;GOODPASTURE ANTIGEN-BINDING PROTEIN; GPBP
DESCRIPTION In patients with Goodpasture syndrome (233450), autoantibodies against
the noncollagenous C-terminal domain (NC1) of the alpha-3 chain of
collagen IV, or Goodpasture antigen (COL4A3; 120070), cause a rapid
glomerulonephritis and often lung hemorrhage. The N terminus of the
alpha-3 chain of humans is highly divergent from that of other species
as well as from the other 5 alpha(IV) chains and contains a unique
5-amino acid motif, KGRDS. The motif conforms to a functional
phosphorylation site for type A protein kinases. In addition, COL4A3 has
a number of splice variants, the presence of which upregulates
phosphorylation of the N terminus of the Goodpasture antigen.

By screening multiple cDNA libraries for proteins interacting with the
divergent region of the Goodpasture antigen, Raya et al. (1999)
identified a HeLa cell cDNA encoding a deduced 624-amino acid protein,
designated COL4A3BP. Raya et al. (1999) termed the protein GPBP (for
Goodpasture antigen-binding protein). Sequence analysis revealed that
18% of the GPBP residues are phosphorylatable and 16% are acidic. Serine
residues comprise 9% of the protein, but in 2 regions account for 40% of
the amino acids. There is also a pleckstrin homology domain at the N
terminus. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of 2 major
transcripts of approximately 4.4 and 7.5 kb. Expression is highest in
skeletal muscle and heart muscle, moderate in brain, placenta, kidney,
and pancreas, and lowest in lung and liver. Immunoblot analysis revealed
an 80- to 89-kD antigen, suggesting differential posttranslational
modifications. Affinity purification and kinase renaturation assays
defined GPBP as a novel nonconventional serine/threonine kinase.
Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse, predominantly cytosolic staining of
specific cell types in numerous tissues, many of which are targets of
autoimmune responses.

Ceramide is synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum and translocated to
the Golgi compartment for conversion to sphingomyelin. The main pathway
of ceramide transport to the Golgi is genetically impaired in a
mammalian mutant cell line, LY-A. Hanada et al. (2003) identified CERT
as a splicing variant of the Goodpasture antigen-binding protein
(GPBP-delta26). GPBP was initially identified as a protein that could
bind a carboxy-terminal noncollagenous region of human collagen alpha3
(IV) chain in a cell-free system. GPBP-delta26, which has 26 fewer amino
acid residues than GPBP, is a more common isoform and is expressed
widely in various tissues, although its expression varies according to
the cell type. Both GPBPs are hydrophilic cytoplasmic proteins, which
conflicts with their proposed pathologic role in the phosphorylation of
extracellular collagen. CERT is a cytoplasmic protein with a
phosphatidylinositol-4-monophosphate-binding domain and a putative
domain for catalyzing lipid transfer. In vitro assays showed that this
lipid transfer-catalyzing domain specifically extracts ceramide from
phospholipid bilayers. CERT expressed in LY-A cells has an amino acid
substitution that destroys its
phosphatidylinositol-4-monophosphate-binding activity, thereby impairing
its Golgi targeting function. Hanada et al. (2003) concluded that CERT
mediates intracellular trafficking of ceramide in a nonvesicular manner.

REFERENCE 1. Hanada, K.; Kumagai, K.; Yasuda, S.; Miura, Y.; Kawano, M.; Fukasawa,
M.; Nishijima, M.: Molecular machinery for non-vesicular trafficking
of ceramide. Nature 426: 803-809, 2003.

2. Raya, A.; Revert, F.; Navarro, S.; Saus, J.: Characterization
of a novel type of serine/threonine kinase that specifically phosphorylates
the human Goodpasture antigen. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 12642-12649,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/13/2000

EDITED alopez: 12/31/2003
terry: 12/30/2003
carol: 3/13/2000

604850	TITLE *604850 COP9, SUBUNIT 5; COPS5
;;JUN ACTIVATION DOMAIN-BINDING PROTEIN; JAB1;;
SGN5;;
MOV34 FAMILY, 38-KD MEMBER
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the more variable activation domain of JUN (165160) as bait in a
yeast 2-hybrid system, Claret et al. (1996) identified a protein, which
they called JAB1 for 'Jun activation domain-binding protein,' that
interacts with JUN and JUND (165162) but not with JUNB (165161) or
v-jun. As a result, JAB1 selectively potentiates transactivation by only
JUN or JUND. The JAB1 gene encodes a protein of 334 amino acids with a
relative molecular mass of 37.5 kD. The N-terminal region of JAB1 shows
57% identity to the products of the open reading frame F37A4.5 of C.
elegans and the S. pombe pad1+ gene, which was identified genetically as
a coactivator of a subset of AP1 target genes. The JAB1 and pad1+
proteins are functionally interchangeable. They define a new group of
coactivators that increase the specificity of target gene activation by
AP1 proteins. In vitro, JAB1 specifically stabilizes complexes of JUN or
JUND with AP1 sites and does not affect binding of either JUNB or v-jun.
Amino acids 31 to 57 of JUN, which are absent in v-jun, contain the
JAB1-interaction surface. JAB1 interacts with JUN and stimulates its
activity in mammalian cells. The 1.5-kb JAB1 transcript is widely
expressed. Immunofluorescence analysis indicated that JAB1 is a nuclear
protein. Although JAB1 does not form a heterodimer with JUN or JUND, its
effect on their DNA binding and transactivation abilities is analogous
to the effect of the Extradenticle coactivator on homeodomain proteins
of the Bithorax complex in Drosophila.

GENE FAMILY

Asano et al. (1997) identified JAB1 as a member of the MOV34 (PSMD7;
157970) family. They referred to JAB1 as the 38-kD MOV34 homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

Bianchi et al. (2000) found that JAB1 interacts with the cytoplasmic
domain of the beta-2 subunit of the alpha-L/beta-2 integrin LFA1
(155370/600065). Bianchi et al. (2000) found that JAB1 is present both
in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm of cells and that a fraction of JAB1
colocalizes with LFA1 at the cell membrane. LFA1 engagement is followed
by an increase of the nuclear pool of JAB1, paralleled by enhanced
binding of c-Jun-containing AP1 complexes to their DNA consensus site
and increased transactivation of an AP1-dependent promoter. Bianchi et
al. (2000) suggested that signaling through the LFA1 integrin may affect
JUN-driven transcription by regulating JAB1 nuclear localization. This
represented a new pathway for integrin-dependent modulation of gene
expression.

Using full-length macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF; 153620)
as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library, Kleemann et
al. (2000) captured JAB1 as an interacting partner of MIF. By
coimmunoprecipitation and pull-down experiments, Kleemann et al. (2000)
confirmed the specific MIF-JAB1 association. Confocal microscopic
analysis demonstrated that the MIF-JAB1 complex is localized in the
cytosol near the peripheral plasma membrane, suggesting a potential
connection between MIF and the integrin signaling pathways. Luciferase
reporter and gel shift analyses showed that endogenous and exogenous MIF
inhibited JAB1-induced AP1 transcriptional activity but did not
interfere with nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; 164011) activity. Likewise,
recombinant MIF inhibited JAB1-stimulated and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF; 191160)-induced JNK (601158) activity. MIF also induced p27
(CDKN1B; 600778) expression and mirrored CDKN1B-mediated growth arrest
through inhibition of JAB1-dependent degradation of CDKN1B. Mutational
analysis indicated that a 16-residue MIF peptide spanning amino acids 50
through 65, including cys60, strongly competed with wildtype MIF for
JAB1 binding. Kleemann et al. (2000) suggested that signaling through
MIF-JAB1 is independent of a potential MIF receptor and noted that JAB1
is the only protein demonstrated to interact with MIF.

Gemmill et al. (2002) isolated the Drosophila homolog of TRC8 (603046)
and studied its function by genetic manipulations and a yeast 2-hybrid
screen. Human and Drosophila TRC8 proteins localize to the endoplasmic
reticulum. Loss of either Drosophila Trc8 or Vhl (608537) resulted in an
identical ventral midline defect. Direct interaction between Trc8 and
Vhl in drosophila was confirmed by GST-pull-down and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Gemmill et al. (2002) found that in
Drosophila, overexpression of Trc8 inhibited growth consistent with its
presumed role as a tumor suppressor gene. Human JAB1 localization was
dependent on VHL mutant status. Thus, the VHL, TRC8, and JAB1 proteins
appear to be linked both physically and functionally, and all 3 may
participate in the development of kidney cancer.

COP9 signalosome cleaves the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8 (603171) from
the CUL1 (603134) subunit of SCF ubiquitin ligases. Cope et al. (2002)
found that the JAB1/MPN domain metalloenzyme (JAMM) motif in the
JAB1/COPS5 subunit underlies the COP9 signalosome's NEDD8 isopeptidase
activity. The JAMM motif consists of a his-X-his-X(10)-asp motif (where
X indicates any residue) accompanied by an upstream glutamate. The JAMM
motif is found in proteins from archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes,
including the RPN11 subunit of the 26S proteasome. Metal chelators and
point mutations within the JAMM motif abolished COP9
signalosome-dependent cleavage of NEDD8 from CUL1, yet had little effect
on COP9 signalosome complex assembly. Cope et al. (2002) proposed that
JAMM isopeptidases play important roles in a variety of physiologic
pathways.

The marked box domain and adjacent region of the E2F1 gene (189971) are
critical for the specificity of E2F1 apoptosis induction. Using the
marked box domain of E2F1 in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human thymus
cDNA library, Hallstrom and Nevins (2006) identified JAB1 as an E2F1
binding partner. JAB1 and E2F1 coexpression in rat embryonic fibroblasts
synergistically induced apoptosis, coincident with the induction of p53
(191170) protein accumulation. In contrast, JAB1 did not synergize with
E2F1 to promote cell cycle entry. Cells depleted of JAB1 were deficient
for both E2F1-induced apoptosis and induction of p53 accumulation.
Hallstrom and Nevins (2006) concluded that JAB1 is an essential cofactor
for the apoptotic function of E2F1.

MAPPING

Hartz (2004) mapped the COPS5 gene to chromosome 8q13.2 based on an
alignment of the COPS5 sequence (GenBank GENBANK U65928) with the
genomic sequence.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tomoda et al. (2004) found that Jab1 null mouse embryos died soon after
implantation. Mutant embryonic cells, which lacked other Cop9
signalosome components, expressed higher levels of p27, p53 (191170),
and cyclin E (123837), resulting in impaired proliferation and
accelerated apoptosis. Jab1 heterozygous mice were healthy and fertile
but smaller than their wildtype littermates. Heterozygous mouse
embryonic fibroblasts proliferated poorly, showed an inefficient
downregulation of p27 during G1, and were delayed in the progression
from G0 to S phase compared with wildtype cells. The levels of cyclin E
and deneddylated Cul1 were unchanged and p53 was not induced in
heterozygous mutant cells. Tomoda et al. (2004) concluded that JAB1
controls cell cycle progression and cell survival by regulating multiple
signaling pathways.

REFERENCE 1. Asano, K.; Vornlocher, H.-P.; Richter-Cook, N. J.; Merrick, W.
C.; Hinnebusch, A. G.; Hershey, J. W. B.: Structure of cDNAs encoding
human eukaryotic initiation factor 3 subunits: possible roles in RNA
binding and macromolecular assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 27042-27052,
1997.

2. Bianchi, E.; Denti, S.; Granata, A.; Bossi, G.; Geginat, J.; Villa,
A.; Rogge, L.; Pardi, R.: Integrin LFA-1 interacts with the transcriptional
co-activator JAB1 to modulate AP-1 activity. Nature 404: 617-621,
2000.

3. Claret, F.-X.; Hibi, M.; Dhut, S.; Toda, T.; Karin, M.: A new
group of conserved coactivators that increase the specificity of AP-1
transcription factors. Nature 383: 453-457, 1996.

4. Cope, G. A.; Suh, G. S. B.; Aravind, L.; Schwarz, S. E.; Zipursky,
S. L.; Koonin, E. V.; Deshaies, R. J.: Role of predicted metalloprotease
motif of Jab1/Csn5 in cleavage of Nedd8 from Cul1. Science 298:
608-611, 2002.

5. Gemmill, R. M.; Bemis, L. T.; Lee, J. P.; Sozen, M. A.; Baron,
A.; Zeng, C.; Erickson, P. F.; Hooper, J. E.; Drabkin, H. A.: The
TRC8 hereditary kidney cancer gene suppresses growth and functions
with VHL in a common pathway. Oncogene 21: 3507-3516, 2002.

6. Hallstrom, T. C.; Nevins, J. R.: Jab1 is a specificity factor
for E2F1-induced apoptosis. Genes Dev. 20: 613-623, 2006.

7. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md  12/29/2004.

8. Kleemann, R.; Hausser, A.; Geiger, G.; Mischke, R.; Burger-Kentischer,
A.; Flieger, O.; Johannes, F.-J.; Roger, T.; Calandra, T.; Kapurniotu,
A.; Grell, M.; Finkelmeier, D.; Brunner, H.; Bernhagen, J.: Intracellular
action of the cytokine MIF to modulate AP-1 activity and the cell
cycle through Jab1. Nature 408: 211-216, 2000.

9. Tomoda, K.; Yoneda-Kato, N.; Fukumoto, A.; Yamanaka, S.; Kato,
J.: Multiple functions of Jab1 are required for early embryonic development
and growth potential in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 43013-43018, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/19/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/7/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 4/18/2000

EDITED mgross: 07/18/2012
carol: 5/16/2007
wwang: 4/3/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
mgross: 1/10/2005
terry: 1/6/2005
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
alopez: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
tkritzer: 9/9/2002
mgross: 11/7/2000
alopez: 6/19/2000
carol: 5/2/2000
alopez: 4/19/2000
alopez: 4/18/2000

602170	TITLE *602170 MYELOID DIFFERENTIATION PRIMARY RESPONSE GENE 88; MYD88
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MyD88 is a key downstream adapter for most Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
and interleukin-1 receptors (IL1Rs) (summary by Von Bernuth et al.,
2008).

CLONING

The myeloid differentiation (MyD) marker MyD88 was first characterized
during a study of the early genetic responses of murine myeloid cells to
various differentiation and growth inhibitory stimuli (Lord et al.,
1990). Myeloid differentiation primary response genes are activated in
M1 myeloleukemic cells in response to interleukin-6 (IL6; 147620), which
induces both growth arrest and terminal differentiation. Hardiman et al.
(1997) described the cloning of the mouse MyD88 gene. The first exon
encodes a complete 'death domain' similar to the intracellular segment
of TNF receptor-1 (191190). Zoo-blot analysis demonstrated that it is an
evolutionarily conserved gene. Northern blot analysis revealed
widespread expression of the gene in many adult mouse tissues, and
RT-PCR detected MyD88 mRNA in T- and B-cell lines and differentiating
embryonic stem cells. The broad expression pattern demonstrated that
mouse Myd88 expression is not restricted to cells of myeloid lineage as
was originally believed.

Bonnert et al. (1997) cloned a human MYD88 cDNA that encodes a 296-amino
acid polypeptide with a predicted mass of 33 kD. MYD88 shares 81% amino
acid identity with murine MyD88. The 150-amino acid C-terminal region
has significant homology to the type I interleukin-1 receptor (147810)
cytoplasmic domain. Northern blot analysis revealed that human MYD88 is
expressed as 2 MYD88 hybridizing 1.6- and 3-kb mRNAs in a variety of
tissues and cell lines.

Using immunofluorescence analysis, Kagan and Medzhitov (2006) found that
human MYD88 localized to discrete foci scattered throughout the cytosol
of transfected mouse embryonic fibroblasts and macrophages.

GENE FUNCTION

Bonnert et al. (1997) found that overexpression of MYD88 caused an
increase in the level of transcription from the interleukin-8 (146930)
promoter.

Muzio et al. (1997) reported that the C-terminal domain of MYD88 has
significant sequence similarity to the cytoplasmic domain of IL1RAP
(602626). They showed that ectopic expression of MYD88 strongly induced
NFKB (e.g., 164011) activity in a concentration-dependent manner. In
addition, the C-terminal region of MYD88 acted as a dominant-negative
inhibitor of IL1R1 (147810)/IL1RAP-induced NFKB activity. MYD88 formed
an immunoprecipitable complex with IL1RAP and with IRAK2 (603304).

Medzhitov et al. (1998) demonstrated that signaling by the human TOLL
receptor (see TLR4; 603030) employs an adaptor protein, MyD88, and
induces activation of NFKB via the IRAK (IRAK1; 300283) kinase and the
TRAF6 (602355) protein. The Toll-mediated signaling cascade using the
NFKB pathway is essential for immune responses in adult Drosophila, and
a human homolog of the Drosophila Toll protein induces various immune
response genes via this pathway. These findings implicate MyD88 as a
general adaptor/regulator molecule for the Toll/IL1R family of receptors
for innate immunity.

Hayashi et al. (2001) showed that expression of TLR5 (603031) induces
NFKB (see 164011) activation and TNFA (191160) production.
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) known to stimulate other
TLR family members failed to stimulate TLR5; however, luciferase
reporter assays indicated TLR5 activation in gram-positive and -negative
bacterial culture supernatants. By fractionation of Listeria culture
supernatants followed by SDS-PAGE, Hayashi et al. (2001) identified
flagellin as the TLR5 ligand. Flagellin, a principal component of
bacterial flagella, is a virulence factor recognized by the innate
immune system in plants, insects, and mammals. Expression of flagellin
in nonflagellated bacteria resulted in TLR5 activation, and deletion of
flagellin from flagellated bacteria abrogated TLR5 activation. Hayashi
et al. (2001) demonstrated that injection of flagellin induces the
production of IL6 (147620) in wildtype mice, but not in those lacking
the MyD88 adaptor protein, required for TLR signaling. Hayashi et al.
(2001) concluded that TLR5 is a pattern-recognition receptor and that
its PAMP is flagellin, a protein with conserved N and C termini in a
broad group of motile pathogens.

Burns et al. (2003) noted that a MYD88 splice variant encodes a protein,
MYD88s, lacking the 58-amino acid intermediary domain between the death
domain and the C-terminal TIR domain. MYD88s is detected only after
continuous stimulation with bacterial products, such as
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), or proinflammatory cytokines. Expression of
MYD88s blocks LPS- or IL1-induced NFKB activation, even though, like the
full-length protein, MYD88s binds both IL1R and IRAK1. By Western blot
analysis of a reconstituted MYD88 -/- cell line, Burns et al. (2003)
showed that MYD88, but not MYD88s, triggered IRAK1 phosphorylation and
NFKB activation in an IRAK4 (606883)-dependent manner. MYD88s did not
bind IRAK4 and blocked its recruitment to IL1Rs. Burns et al. (2003)
concluded that MYD88s acts as a negative regulator of IL1R/TLR/MYD88
signals, leading to a controlled negative regulation of innate immune
responses.

Diebold et al. (2004) confirmed that mouse plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(PDCs) expressing B220 (PTPRC; 151460) but not Cd11b (ITGAM; 120980)
were resistant to suppression of Ifna (147660) production mediated by
influenza virus NS1 protein, suggesting that PDCs use a
dsRNA-independent pathway for recognizing influenza. Chloroquine
inhibited influenza-induced Ifna production, indicating that recognition
of the virus occurs in the endosomal compartment. Ifna production in
response to live or inactivated influenza virus or to viral genomic or
host ssRNA required the presence of Myd88 and Tlr7 (300365), but not
other TLRs.

Kagan and Medzhitov (2006) found that human TIRAP (606252), a TLR
adaptor protein, recruited human MYD88 to the plasma membrane of
transfected mouse fibroblasts and macrophages. They proposed that TIRAP
functions primarily to recruit MYD88 to activated TLR4 to initiate
signal transduction.

Chen et al. (2007) found that the acute neutrophilic inflammatory
response to cell injury requires the signaling protein Myd88. Analysis
of the contribution of Myd88-dependent receptors to this response
revealed only a minor reduction in mice doubly deficient in Toll-like
receptor-2 (Tlr2; 603028) and Tlr4 (603030) and normal responses in mice
lacking Tlr1 (601194), Tlr3 (603029), Tlr6 (605403), Tlr7 (300365), Tlr9
(605474), or Tlr11 (606270) or the IL18 receptor (IL18R; 604494).
However, mice lacking IL1R (147810) showed a markedly reduced
neutrophilic inflammatory response to dead cells and tissue injury in
vivo as well as greatly decreased collateral damage from inflammation.
This inflammatory response required IL1-alpha (147760), and IL1R
function was required on non-bone-marrow-derived cells. Notably, the
acute monocyte response to cell death, which is thought to be important
for tissue repair, was much less dependent on the IL1R-Myd88 pathway.
Also, this pathway was not required for the neutrophil response to a
microbial stimulus. These findings suggested that inhibiting the
IL1R-MYD88 pathway in vivo could block the damage from acute
inflammation that occurs in response to sterile cell death, and do so in
a way that might not compromise tissue repair or host defense against
pathogens.

Cirl et al. (2008) showed that virulent bacteria, such as uropathogenic
E. coli and Brucella melitensis, secreted inhibitory homologs of TIR
domain-containing proteins (TCPs). These TCPs promoted intracellular
bacterial survival and kidney pathology after instillation of organisms
in mouse bladder. Bacterial TCPs impeded TLR signaling through MYD88 and
impaired innate host defense. Molecular epidemiologic analysis of
clinical isolates from patients with urinary tract infections further
supported the proposal that bacterial TCPs represent a class of
virulence factors.

Alu RNA accumulation due to DICER1 (606241) deficiency in retinal
pigmented epithelium (RPE) is implicated in geographic atrophy, an
advanced form of age-related macular degeneration (AMD; see 603075).
Using mouse and human RPE cells and mice lacking various genes, Tarallo
et al. (2012) showed that a DICER1 deficit or Alu RNA exposure activated
the NLRP3 (606416) inflammasome, triggering TLR-independent MYD88
signaling via IL18 (600953) in the RPE. Inhibition of inflammasome
components, MYD88, or IL18 prevented RPE degeneration induced by DICER1
loss or Alu RNA exposure. Because RPE in human geographic atrophy
contained elevated NLRP3, PYCARD, and IL18, Tarallo et al. (2012)
suggested targeting this pathway for prevention and/or treatment of
geographic atrophy.

Zhu et al. (2012) showed that the direct, immediate, and disruptive
effects of IL1-beta (IL1B; 147720) on endothelial stability in a human
in vitro cell model are NF-kappa-B (see 164011)-independent and are
instead the result of signaling through the small GTPase
ADP-ribosylation factor-6 (ARF6; 600464) and its activator ARF
nucleotide-binding site opener (ARNO; 602488). Moreover, Zhu et al.
(2012) showed that ARNO binds directly to the adaptor protein MYD88, and
thus proposed MYD88-ARNO-ARF6 as a proximal IL1-beta signaling pathway
distinct from that mediated by NF-kappa-B. Finally, Zhu et al. (2012)
showed that SecinH3 (182115), an inhibitor of ARF guanine nucleotide
exchange factors such as ARNO, enhances vascular stability and
significantly improves outcomes in animal models of inflammatory
arthritis and acute inflammation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hardiman et al. (1997) described the gene structure of the mouse MyD88
gene. The complete coding sequence spans 5 exons.

Bonnert et al. (1997) found that the human MYD88 gene is encoded by 5
exons.

MAPPING

By interspecific backcross mapping, Hardiman et al. (1997) localized the
mouse MyD88 gene to chromosome 9; the human homolog was mapped to
3p22-p21.3 by PCR analysis of a chromosome 3 somatic cell hybrid mapping
panel. Bonnert et al. (1997) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to
map the human MYD88 gene to 3p22-3p21.3.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lin et al. (2010) reported the crystal structure of the MyD88-IRAK4
(606883)-IRAK2 (603304) death domain complex, which revealed a
left-handed helical oligomer that consists of 6 MyD88, 4 IRAK4, and 4
IRAK2 death domains. Assembly of this helical signaling tower is
hierarchical, in which MyD88 recruits IRAK4 and the MyD88-IRAK4 complex
recruits the IRAK4 substrates IRAK2 or the related IRAK1. Formation of
these myddosome complexes brings the kinase domains of IRAKs into
proximity for phosphorylation and activation. Composite binding sites
are required for recruitment of the individual death domains in the
complex, which are confirmed by mutagenesis and previously identified
signaling mutations. Specificities of myddosome formation are dictated
by both molecular complementation and correspondence of surface
electrostatics.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Von Bernuth et al. (2008) identified 3 different mutations in the MYD88
gene in children with MYD88 deficiency (612260) that resulted in
susceptibility to pyogenic bacterial infections. Four children from 3
kindreds were homozygous for in-frame deletion of glu52 (E52del;
602170.0001). Two sibs were homozygous for an arg196-to-cys (R196C;
602170.0002) mutation, and 1 child from another kindred was compound
heterozygous for the R196C mutation and a leu93-to-pro (L93P;
602170.0003) mutation. Two sibs who died in infancy were presumably
homozygous for the same E52del mutation found in their surviving
brother. The mutations were not found in healthy controls, and all
affected conserved residues. Fibroblast from patients representing the 3
combinations of mutant MYD88 alleles showed normal MYD88 mRNA levels.
Western blot analysis revealed low MYD88 protein levels with the
homozygous E52del mutation and the compound heterozygous L93P/R196C
mutation and normal MYD88 protein levels with the R196C homozygous
mutation. Functional analysis using patient fibroblasts and expression
of wildtype or mutant alleles in cell lines confirmed that all 3 MYD88
mutations resulted in loss of function and led to complete MYD88
deficiency. Von Bernuth et al. (2008) concluded that, like IRAK4
deficiency (607676), MYD88 deficiency abolishes most cytokine responses
to TLR stimulation. Von Bernuth et al. (2008) noted that the immunologic
phenotype of the 9 children they reported with MYD88 deficiency was
similar to that of Myd88-deficient mice, but the infectious phenotype
was different. The MYD88-deficient patients were susceptible to
Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Streptococcus
pneumoniae, but were normally resistant to most other infectious agents.
In contrast, Myd88-deficient mice had been shown to be susceptible to
almost all pathogens tested.

For a discussion of somatic MYD88 mutation in IgM monoclonal gammopathy
of undetermined significance (MGUS) and Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia,
see 602170.0004.

ANIMAL MODEL

Adachi et al. (1998) observed that mice with a targeted disruption of
the Myd88 gene were unable to respond to IL1 (e.g., 147760), as
determined by defective T-cell proliferation and the production of
cytokines. Likewise, Myd88-deficient mice were unable to produce
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) and mediate natural killer cell activity
in response to IL18 (600953). NFKB activation in response to IL1 or IL18
was also impaired. These results indicated that MYD88 is a critical
component in the IL1R and IL18R (604494) signaling cascades. Kawai et
al. (1999) extended these studies to show that responses to
lipopolysaccharide, mediated by TLR4 and CD14 (158120), were lost or
delayed in Myd88-deficient mice, establishing that MYD88 is part of the
TLR signaling cascade as well, acting just upstream of IRAK.

Takeuchi et al. (2000) showed that Tlr2 (603028)- and, particularly,
Myd88-deficient mice are highly susceptible, in terms of growth in blood
and kidney and decreased survival, to infection with Staphylococcus
aureus compared to wildtype mice. In vitro, Tlr2-deficient macrophages
produced reduced TNF and interleukin-6 (IL6; 147620) in response to S.
aureus compared to wildtype or Tlr4-deficient macrophages, whereas
Myd88-deficient macrophages produced no detectable TNF or IL6. The
authors concluded that TLR2 and MYD88 are critical in the defense
against gram-positive bacteria.

Skerrett et al. (2004) found that Myd88-deficient mice were highly
susceptible to aerosol infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, but not to
aerosol infection with S. aureus. They concluded that Myd88-dependent
signaling is essential for innate immunity to P. aeruginosa and is
dispensable for resistance to pulmonary S. aureus infection.

Using nonlethal microbial stimuli on Il12b (161561)-deficient mice,
Jankovic et al. (2002) showed that although Th1-type cytokine production
was diminished in the absence of Il12b, the pathogen-specific Cd4
(186940)-positive T cells that emerged nevertheless displayed an
Ifng-dominated lymphokine profile and failed to default to a Th2
phenotype. In mice lacking both Il12b and Il10 (124092), these Th1 cells
were protective. In contrast, in mice lacking Myd88, not only was a
normal Th2-type response to Schistosoma mansoni antigens developed, but,
in response to Toxoplasma gondii antigens, no Ifng was detected and the
mice defaulted to a Th2-type response. Jankovic et al. (2002) proposed
that microbial-induced Th1 polarization is determined during the initial
encounter of pathogens with pattern recognition receptors (e.g., TLRs)
on antigen-presenting cells. They concluded that IL12, however, does not
determine Th1 versus Th2 phenotype.

LaRosa et al. (2008) generated bone marrow chimeras in which T cells,
but not cells involved in innate immune responses, lacked Myd88. These
chimeric mice showed increased susceptibility to T. gondii disease,
developing fatal encephalitis within 30 days. They displayed reduced
Ifng production, and the increased susceptibility was independent of
Il1r and Il18r signaling. LaRosa et al. (2008) proposed that, in
addition to innate immunity, MYD88 expression is necessary in T cells
for prolonged resistance to pathogens.

Bjorkbacka et al. (2004) examined atherosclerotic lesion development in
uninfected Apoe (APOE; 107741) single-null mice and Apoe -/- Myd88 -/-
double-null mice, and found that the Myd88-deficient mice showed a
marked reduction in early atherosclerosis. Inactivation of the Myd88
pathway led to a reduction in atherosclerosis through a decrease in
macrophage recruitment to the artery wall that was associated with
reduced chemokine levels. The findings linked elevated serum lipid
levels to a proinflammatory signaling cascade that is also engaged by
microbial pathogens.

To examine whether Toll-like receptor signaling regulates phagocytosis,
Blander and Medzhitov (2004) compared macrophages from wildtype, Myd88
null, and Tlr2-Tlr4 (603030) double-null mice. Myd null and Tlr2-Tlr4
double-null macrophages were unresponsive to inactivated E. coli.
Blander and Medzhitov (2004) found that activation of the Toll-like
receptor signaling pathway by bacteria, but not apoptotic cells,
regulated phagocytosis at multiple steps including internalization and
phagosome maturation. Phagocytosis of bacteria was impaired in the
absence of Toll-like receptor signaling. Two modes of phagosome
maturation were observed, constitutive and inducible; their differential
engagement depended on the ability of the cargo to trigger Toll-like
receptor signaling.

Fremond et al. (2004) noted that previous investigations had suggested a
minor and redundant role for TLR2, TLR4, and TLR6 (605403) in the early
host response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) infection, but a more
important role in control of chronic infection. Using Myd88 -/- mice,
Fremond et al. (2004) investigated the role of MYD88, which most TLRs,
except TLR3 (603029), use as an intracellular adaptor, in resistance to
Mtb. Macrophages from Myd88 -/- mice had normal upregulation of
costimulatory molecules but reduced cytokine production in response to
Mtb infection. Myd88 -/- mice succumbed to a low-dose aerosol Mtb
infection in approximately 4 weeks, whereas Tnf -/- mice died within 3
weeks, and wildtype mice survived. Death was accompanied by
significantly reduced body weight, increased lung weight, and 2 logs
higher bacillary burden. Like Tnf -/- mice, Myd88 -/- mice developed
massive necrosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells, primarily
neutrophils and macrophages, in lungs. Although BCG vaccination failed
to elicit a delayed-type hypersensitivity response in Myd88 -/- mice, it
did induce antigen-specific Ifng production in splenocytes and also
protected the mice from acute Mtb infection. The Myd88 -/- mice could
not, however, durably control the infection. Fremond et al. (2004)
concluded that the MYD88-mediated signaling pathway is critically
involved in the development of innate, but not adaptive, immunity in
response to Mtb infection.

Using mice lacking Myd88 or various members of the IL1R/TLR superfamily,
Bellocchio et al. (2004) found that the Myd88-dependent pathway was
required for resistance to Candida albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus.
Myd88 signaling could occur through distinct TLRs depending on the
fungal pathogen and the route of infection, and individual TLRs
activated specialized antifungal effector functions on neutrophils.
Myd88-dependent signaling in dendritic cells was crucial for priming the
antifungal Th1 response. Bellocchio et al. (2004) concluded that innate
and adaptive immunity to C. albicans and A. fumigatus requires the
coordinated action of distinct members of the IL1R/TLR superfamily
acting through MYD88.

To evaluate the role of TLRs in B-cell activation and antibody
production, Pasare and Medzhitov (2005) transferred purified B cells
from wildtype, Myd88-deficient, Tlr4-deficient, and Cd40
(109535)-deficient mice into B cell-deficient mu-MT mice, which have a
mutation in the Ighm gene (147020). They found that primary B-cell
activation, including induction of IgM, IgG1, and IgG2 responses, but
not IgE or, probably, IgA responses, required TLRs in addition to helper
T cells. In contrast, Cd40 was required for isotype switching.

Hyaluronan, an extracellular matrix glycosaminoglycan with a repeating
disaccharide structure, is produced after tissue injury, and impaired
clearance results in unremitting inflammation. Jiang et al. (2005) noted
that CD44 (107269) is essential for regulating turnover of hyaluronan,
but it is not required for expression of chemokines by macrophages after
lung injury. Using Tlr-deficient mouse macrophages, they found that
hyaluronan fragments stimulated Mip2 (CXCL2; 139110), Mip1a (CCL3;
182283), and Kc (CXCL1; 155730) in a Tlr2- and Tlr4-dependent manner
that also required Myd88. Mice deficient in Tlr2, Tlr4, or Myd88 showed
impaired transepithelial migration of inflammatory cells, but decreased
survival and enhanced epithelial cell apoptosis after lung injury. Lung
epithelial cell overexpression of high molecular mass hyaluronan
protected against acute lung injury and apoptosis, in part, through
TLR-dependent basal activation of NFKB. Jiang et al. (2005) concluded
that interaction of TLR2 and TLR4 with hyaluronan provides signals that
initiate inflammatory responses, maintain epithelial cell integrity, and
promote recovery from acute lung injury.

Mice genetically deficient in both Myd88 and Trif (607601) have a
complete lack of known Toll-like receptor signaling, thus allowing
assessment of Toll-like receptor dependence of antibody responses. Gavin
et al. (2006) used these double knockouts to investigate the role of
Toll-like receptor signaling in antibody responses to immunization and
the augmenting roles of 4 typical adjuvants (alum, Freund complete
adjuvant, Freund incomplete adjuvant, and monophosphoryl-lipid
A/trehalose dicorynomycolate adjuvant) to that response. Regardless of
adjuvant, these mice exhibited robust antibody responses. Gavin et al.
(2006) concluded that Toll-like receptor signaling does not account for
the action of classical adjuvants and does not fully explain the action
of strong adjuvant containing a Toll-like receptor ligand.

Brown et al. (2007) found that Myd88 -/- mice and Ptgs2 -/- mice
exhibited a profound inhibition of endothelial proliferation and
cellular organization within rectal crypts after injury. The effects of
injury in both mutant mouse strains could be rescued by exogenous
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), suggesting that Myd88 signaling is upstream of
Ptgs2 and PGE2. In wildtype mice, the combination of injury and Myd88
signaling led to repositioning of a subset of Ptgs2-expressing stromal
cells from the mesenchyme surrounding the middle and upper crypts to an
area surrounding the crypt base adjacent to colonic epithelial
progenitor cells. Brown et al. (2007) concluded that the MYD88 and
prostaglandin signaling pathways interact to preserve epithelial
proliferation during injury, and that proper cellular mobilization
within the crypt niche is critical to repair after injury.

Apc (611731) Min/+ mice spontaneously develop intestinal tumors and, on
average, die within 6 months of age. Rakoff-Nahoum and Medzhitov (2007)
showed that deletion of Myd88 in Min/+ mice reduced morbidity and
mortality, as well as the size and numbers of intestinal polyps,
compared with sex- and age-matched controls. They concluded that
MYD88-dependent signaling controls the expression of several key
modifier genes of intestinal tumorigenesis and that MYD88 has a critical
role in both spontaneous and carcinogen-induced tumor development.

Wen et al. (2008) showed that specific pathogen-free NOD mice lacking
Myd88, an adaptor for multiple innate immune receptors that recognize
microbial stimuli, do not develop type 1 diabetes (222100). The effect
is dependent on commensal microbes because germ-free Myd88-negative NOD
mice develop robust diabetes, whereas colonization of these germ-free
Myd88-negative NOD mice with a defined microbial consortium
(representing bacterial phyla normally present in human gut) attenuates
type 1 diabetes. Wen et al. (2008) also found that Myd88 deficiency
changes the composition of the distal gut microbiota, and that exposure
to the microbiota of specific pathogen-free Myd88-negative NOD donors
attenuates type 1 diabetes in germ-free NOD recipients. Wen et al.
(2008) concluded that, taken together, their findings indicated that
interaction of the intestinal microbes with the innate immune system is
a critical epigenetic factor modifying type 1 diabetes predisposition.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYD88 DEFICIENCY
MYD88, 3-BP DEL, 160GAG

Von Bernuth et al. (2008) identified a homozygous in-frame 3-bp (GAG)
deletion in exon 1 of the MYD88 gene, resulting in deletion of glu52
(E52del), in 4 children with functional MYD88 deficiency (612260). A
French patient with the E52del mutation died in infancy. Two sibs of a
Spanish Gypsy patient with the mutation also died in infancy and were
presumed to have the mutation. The surviving patients were 3.5 to 7
years old. All patients shared a history of susceptibility to pyogenic
bacterial infections caused by S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, or S.
pneumoniae. Functional analysis confirmed that the E52del mutation
resulted in loss of function.

.0002
MYD88 DEFICIENCY
MYD88, ARG196CYS

Von Bernuth et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 586C-T transition in
exon 3 of the MYD88 gene, resulting in an arg196-to-cys (R196C)
substitution, in 2 sibs from Portugal with functional MYD88 deficiency
(612260). These patients were 9 and 16 years old. Von Bernuth et al.
(2008) also identified an unrelated, 3-year-old patient from Turkey who
was compound heterozygous for the R196C mutation and a 278T-C transition
in exon 1 that resulted in a leu93-to-pro (L93P; 602170.0003)
substitution. All 3 patients shared a history of susceptibility to
pyogenic bacterial infections caused by S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, or S.
pneumoniae. Functional analysis confirmed that both mutations resulted
in loss of function.

.0003
MYD88 DEFICIENCY
MYD88, LEU93PRO

See 602170.0002 and Von Bernuth et al. (2008).

.0004
MACROGLOBULINEMIA, WALDENSTROM, SOMATIC
MYD88, LEU265PRO (dbSNP rs38182641)

Ngo et al. (2011) described the dependence of activated B cell-like
(ABC) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCLs) on MYD88 and the discovery
of highly recurrent oncogenic mutations affecting MYD88 in ABC DLBCL
tumors. RNA interference screening revealed that MYD88 and the
associated kinases IRAK1 (300283) and IRAK4 (606883) are essential for
ABC DLBCL survival. High-throughput RNA resequencing uncovered MYD88
mutations in ABC DLBCL lines. Notably, 29% of ABC DLBCL tumors harbored
the same amino acid substitution, L265P, in the MYD88 Toll/IL1 receptor
(TIR) domain at an evolutionarily invariant residue in its hydrophobic
core. This mutation was rare or absent in other DLBCL subtypes and
Burkitt lymphoma (113970), but was observed in 9% of mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphomas. At a lower frequency, additional mutations
were observed in the MYD88 TIR domain, occurring in both the ABC and
germinal center B cell-like (GCB) DLBCL subtypes. Survival of ABC DLBCL
cells bearing the L265P mutation was sustained by the mutant but not the
wildtype MYD88 isoform, demonstrating that L265P is a gain-of-function
driver mutation. The L265P mutant promoted cell survival by
spontaneously assembling a protein complex containing IRAK1 and IRAK4,
leading to IRAK4 kinase activity, IRAK1 phosphorylation, NF-kappa-B (see
164011) signaling, JAK kinase (see 147795) activation of STAT3 (102582),
and secretion of IL6 (147620), IL10 (124092), and interferon-beta
(147640). Hence, Ngo et al. (2011) concluded that the MYD88 signaling
pathway is integral to the pathogenesis of ABC DLBCL, supporting the
development of inhibitors of IRAK4 kinase and other components of this
pathway for the treatment of tumors bearing oncogenic MYD88 mutations.

Treon et al. (2012) performed whole-genome sequencing of bone marrow
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) cells in 30 patients with Waldenstrom
macroglobulinemia (153600), with paired normal-tissue and tumor-tissue
sequencing in 10 patients. Sanger sequencing was used to validate the
findings from an expanded cohort of patients with LPL, those with other
B-cell disorders that have some of the same features as LPL, and healthy
donors. Among the patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, Treon et
al. (2012) identified a somatic mutation, L265P (dbSNP rs38182641), in
samples from all 10 patients with paired tissue samples and in 17 of 20
samples from patients with unpaired samples. This T-to-C transition
predicted an amino acid change that triggers IRAK-mediated NF-kappa-B
signaling. Sanger sequencing identified MYD88 L265P in tumor samples
from 49 of 54 patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia and in 3 of 3
patients with non-IgM-secreting lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL) (91% of
all patients with LPL). MYD88 L265P was absent in paired normal-tissue
samples from patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia or non-IgM LPL
and in B cells from healthy donors and was absent or rarely expressed in
samples from patients with multiple myeloma, marginal-zone lymphoma, or
IgM monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance. Inhibition of MYD88
signaling reduced I-kappa-B-alpha (164008) and NF-kappa-B p65 (164014)
phosphorylation, as well as NF-kappa-B nuclear staining, in Waldenstrom
macroglobulinemia cells expressing MYD88 L265P. Similar results were
obtained when cells expressing MYD88 L265P were incubated with an
IRAK1/4 kinase inhibitor. Somatic variants in ARID1A (603024) in 5 of 30
patients (17%), leading to a premature stop or frameshift, were also
identified and were associated with an increased disease burden. In
addition, 2 of 3 patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia who had
wildtype MYD88 had somatic variants in MLL2 (602113). Treon et al.
(2012) concluded that MYD88 L265P is a commonly recurring mutation in
patients with Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia that can be useful in
differentiating Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia and non-IgM LPL from
B-cell disorders that have phenotypic overlap.

Landgren and Staudt (2012) used Sanger sequencing to assess the status
of MYD88 L265P expression in patients with IgM monoclonal gammopathy of
undetermined significance (MGUS) and found expression of this variant in
5 of 9 patients. All of these patients had both clonal plasma cells and
clonal lymphocytes in bone marrow (lymphoplasmacytic precursor
neoplasm), suggesting to Landgren and Staudt (2012) that this mutation
is a precursor to Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia rather than
transformation from IgM MGUS to Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia. Treon et
al. (2012) commented that, to overcome the limitations of Sanger
sequencing, they developed an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction
(AS-PCR) assay to detect the MYD88 L265P mutation with a threshold
detection limit of 0.1% (approximately 100-fold better than that of
Sanger sequencing). They found that 88 of 96 patients with Waldenstrom
macroglobulinemia (92%) and 5 of 11 patients with IgM MGUS (45%), as
defined by consensus criteria, were positive for MYD88 L265P expression
by either conventional or quantitative AS-PCR assays. Treon et al.
(2012) concluded that IgM MGUS is heterogeneous and that MYD88 L265P is
probably a driver mutation toward Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.

REFERENCE 1. Adachi, O.; Kawai, T.; Takeda, K.; Matsumoto, M.; Tsutsui, H.;
Sakagami, M.; Nakanishi, K.; Akira, S.: Targeted disruption of the
MyD88 gene results in loss of IL-1- and IL-18-mediated function. Immunity 9:
143-150, 1998.

2. Bellocchio, S.; Montagnoli, C.; Bozza, S.; Gaziano, R.; Rossi,
G.; Mambula, S. S.; Vecchi, A.; Mantovani, A.; Levitz, S. M.; Romani,
L.: The contribution of the Toll-like/IL-1 receptor superfamily to
innate and adaptive immunity to fungal pathogens in vivo. J. Immun. 172:
3059-3069, 2004.

3. Bjorkbacka, H.; Kunjathoor, V. V.; Moore, K. J.; Koehn, S.; Ordija,
C. M.; Lee, M. A.; Means, T.; Halmen, K.; Luster, A. D.; Golenbock,
D. T.; Freeman, M. W.: Reduced atherosclerosis in MyD88-null mice
links elevated serum cholesterol levels to activation of innate immunity
signaling pathways. Nature Med. 10: 416-421, 2004.

4. Blander, J. M.; Medzhitov, R.: Regulation of phagosome maturation
by signals from Toll-like receptors. Science 304: 1014-1018, 2004.

5. Bonnert, T. P.; Garka, K. E.; Parnet, P.; Sonoda, G.; Testa, J.
R.; Sims, J. E.: The cloning and characterization of human MyD88:
a member of an IL-1 receptor related family. FEBS Lett. 402: 81-84,
1997.

6. Brown, S. L.; Riehl, T. E.; Walker, M. R.; Geske, M. J.; Doherty,
J. M.; Stenson, W. F.; Stappenbeck, T. S.: Myd88-dependent positioning
of Ptgs2-expressing stromal cells maintains colonic epithelial proliferation
during injury. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 258-269, 2007.

7. Burns, K.; Janssens, S.; Brissoni, B.; Olivos, N.; Beyaert, R.;
Tschopp, J.: Inhibition of interleukin 1 receptor/Toll-like receptor
signaling through the alternatively spliced, short form of MyD88 is
due to its failure to recruit IRAK-4. J. Exp. Med. 197: 263-268,
2003.

8. Chen, C.-J.; Kono, H.; Golenbock, D.; Reed, G.; Akira, G.; Rock,
K. L.: Identification of a key pathway required for the sterile inflammatory
response triggered by dying cells. Nature Med. 13: 851-856, 2007.

9. Cirl, C.; Wieser, A.; Yadav, M.; Duerr, S.; Schubert, S.; Fischer,
H.; Stappert, D.; Wantia, N.; Rodriguez, N.; Wagner, H.; Svanborg,
C.; Miethke, T.: Subversion of Toll-like receptor signaling by a
unique family of bacterial Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing
proteins. Nature Med. 14: 399-406, 2008.

10. Diebold, S. S.; Kaisho, T.; Hemmi, H.; Akira, S.; Reis e Sousa,
C.: Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR7-mediated recognition
of single-stranded RNA. Science 303: 1529-1531, 2004.

11. Fremond, C. M.; Yeremeev, V.; Nicolle, D. M.; Jacobs, M.; Quesniaux,
V. F.; Ryffel, B.: Fatal Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection despite
adaptive immune response in the absence of MyD88. J. Clin. Invest. 114:
1790-1799, 2004.

12. Gavin, A. L.; Hoebe, K.; Duong, B.; Ota, T.; Martin, C.; Beutler,
B.; Nemazee, D.: Adjuvant-enhanced antibody responses in the absence
of Toll-like receptor signaling. Science 314: 1936-1938, 2006.

13. Hardiman, G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Garcia, D. K.; Naylor, S. L.; Kastelein, R. A.; Bazan, J. F.: Genetic
structure and chromosomal mapping of MyD88. Genomics 45: 332-339,
1997.

14. Hayashi, F.; Smith, K. D.; Ozinsky, A.,; Hawn, T. R.; Yi, E. C.;
Goodlett, D. R.; Eng, J. K.; Akira, S.; Underhill, D. M.; Aderem,
A.: The innate immune response to bacterial flagellin is mediated
by Toll-like receptor 5. Nature 410: 1099-1103, 2001.

15. Jankovic, D.; Kullberg, M. C.; Hieny, S.; Caspar, P.; Collazo,
C. M.; Sher, A.: In the absence of IL-12, CD4+ T cell responses to
intracellular pathogens fail to default to a Th2 pattern and are host
protective in an IL-10-/- setting. Immunity 16: 429-439, 2002.

16. Jiang, D.; Liang, J.; Fan, J.; Yu, S.; Chen, S.; Luo, Y.; Prestwich,
G. D.; Mascarenhas, M. M.; Garg, H. G.; Quinn, D. A.; Homer, R. J.;
Goldstein, D. R.; Bucala, R.; Lee, P. J.; Medzhitov, R.; Noble, P.
W.: Regulation of lung injury and repair by Toll-like receptors and
hyaluronan. Nature Med. 11: 1173-1179, 2005.

17. Kagan, J. C.; Medzhitov, R.: Phosphoinositide-mediated adaptor
recruitment controls Toll-like receptor signaling. Cell 125: 943-955,
2006.

18. Kawai, T.; Adachi, O.; Ogawa, T.; Takeda, K.; Akira, S.: Unresponsiveness
of MyD88-deficient mice to endotoxin. Immunity 11: 115-122, 1999.

19. Landgren, O.; Staudt, L.: MYD88 L265P somatic mutation in IgM
MGUS. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 367: 2255-2256, 2012.

20. LaRosa, D. F.; Stumhofer, J. S.; Gelman, A. E.; Rahman, A. H.;
Taylor, D. K.; Hunter, C. A.; Turka, L. A.: T cell expression of
MyD88 is required for resistance to Toxoplasma gondii. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 105: 3855-3860, 2008.

21. Lin, S.-C.; Lo, Y.-C.; Wu, H.: Helical assembly in the MyD88-IRAK4-IRAK2
complex in TLR/IL-1R signalling. Nature 465: 885-890, 2010.

22. Lord, K. A.; Hoffman-Liebermann, B.; Liebermann, D. A.: Complexity
of the immediate early response of myeloid cells to terminal differentiation
and growth arrest includes ICAM-1, Jun-B and histone variants. Oncogene 5:
387-396, 1990.

23. Medzhitov, R.; Preston-Hurlburt, P.; Kopp, E.; Stadien, A.; Chen,
C.; Ghosh, S.; Janeway, C. A., Jr.: MyD88 is an adaptor protein in
the hToll/Il-1 receptor family signaling pathways. Molec. Cell 2:
253-258, 1998.

24. Muzio, M.; Ni, J.; Feng, P.; Dixit, V. M.: IRAK (Pelle) family
member IRAK-2 and MyD88 as proximal mediators of IL-1 signaling. Science 278:
1612-1615, 1997.

25. Ngo, V. N.; Young, R. M.; Schmitz, R.; Jhavar, S.; Xiao, W.; Lim,
K.-H.; Kohlhammer, H.; Xu, W.; Yang, Y.; Zhao, H.; Shaffer, A. L.;
Romesser, P.; and 19 others: Oncogenically active MYD88 mutations
in human lymphoma. Nature 470: 115-119, 2011.

26. Pasare, C.; Medzhitov, R.: Control of B-cell responses by Toll-like
receptors. Nature 438: 364-368, 2005.

27. Rakoff-Nahoum, S.; Medzhitov, R.: Regulation of spontaneous intestinal
tumorigenesis through the adaptor protein MyD88. Science 317: 124-127,
2007.

28. Skerrett, S. J.; Liggitt, H. D.; Hajjar, A. M.; Wilson, C. B.
: Cutting edge: myeloid differentiation factor 88 is essential for
pulmonary host defense against Pseudomonas aeruginosa but not Staphylococcus
aureus. J. Immun. 172: 3377-3381, 2004.

29. Takeuchi, O.; Hoshino, K.; Akira, S.: Cutting edge: TLR2-deficient
and MyD88-deficient mice are highly susceptible to Staphylococcus
aureus infection. J. Immun. 165: 5392-5396, 2000.

30. Tarallo, V.; Hirano, Y.; Gelfand, B. D.; Dridi, S.; Kerur, N.;
Kim, Y.; Cho, W. G.; Kaneko, H.; Fowler, B. J.; Bogdanovich, S.; Albuquerque,
R. J. C.; Hauswirth, W. W.; and 17 others: DICER1 loss and Alu
RNA induce age-related macular degeneration via the NLRP3 inflammasome
and MyD88. Cell 149: 847-859, 2012.

31. Treon, S. P.; Xu, L.; Hunter, Z. R.: Reply to Landgren and Staudt.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 367: 2256-2257, 2012.

32. Treon, S. P.; Xu, L.; Yang, G.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, X.; Cao, Y.; Sheehy,
P.; Manning, R. J.; Patterson, C. J.; Tripsas, C.; Arcaini, L.; Pinkus,
G. S.; Rodig, S. J.; Sohani, A. R.; Harris, N. L.; Laramie, J. M.;
Skifter, D. A.; Lincoln, S. E.; Hunter, Z. R.: MYD88 L265P somatic
mutation in Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. New Eng. J. Med. 367:
826-833, 2012.

33. von Bernuth, H.; Picard, C.; Jin, Z.; Pankla, R.; Xiao, H.; Ku,
C.-L.; Chrabieh, M.; Ben Mustapha, I.; Ghandil, P.; Camcioglu, Y.;
Vasconcelos, J.; Sirvent, N.; and 26 others: Pyogenic bacterial
infections in humans with MyD88 deficiency. Science 321: 691-696,
2008.

34. Wen, L.; Ley, R. E.; Volchkov, P. Y.; Stranges, P. B.; Avanesyan,
L.; Stonebraker, A. C.; Hu, C.; Wong, F. S.; Szot, G. L.; Bluestone,
J. A.; Gordon, J. I.; Chervonsky, A. V.: Innate immunity and intestinal
microbiota in the development of type 1 diabetes. Nature 455: 1109-1113,
2008.

35. Zhu, W.; London, N. R.; Gibson, C. C.; Davis, C. T.; Tong, Z.;
Sorenson, L. K.; Shi, D. S.; Guo, J.; Smith, M. C. P.; Grossmann,
A. H.; Thomas, K. R.; Li, D. Y.: Interleukin receptor activates a
MYD88-ARNO-ARF6 cascade to disrupt vascular stability. Nature 492:
252-255, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 02/18/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/23/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/13/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/13/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/29/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/30/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/16/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/25/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/17/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/30/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/6/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/9/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/10/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/4/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/12/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/9/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/29/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/15/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/25/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/6/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/4/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/3/1999
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 11/20/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/11/1997

EDITED alopez: 02/18/2013
alopez: 2/6/2013
terry: 1/29/2013
mgross: 11/21/2012
terry: 10/23/2012
alopez: 9/10/2012
terry: 9/6/2012
alopez: 3/8/2012
alopez: 6/22/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
alopez: 7/2/2010
terry: 7/1/2010
wwang: 4/28/2010
mgross: 4/13/2010
mgross: 3/24/2009
terry: 3/24/2009
alopez: 12/9/2008
terry: 11/26/2008
mgross: 11/17/2008
terry: 11/13/2008
mgross: 8/29/2008
terry: 8/28/2008
mgross: 6/6/2008
terry: 4/30/2008
mgross: 4/16/2008
alopez: 3/3/2008
terry: 2/25/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
mgross: 7/18/2007
terry: 7/17/2007
mgross: 4/12/2007
terry: 3/30/2007
alopez: 2/8/2007
terry: 2/6/2007
mgross: 2/9/2006
mgross: 1/10/2006
mgross: 1/4/2006
mgross: 11/8/2005
terry: 10/26/2005
mgross: 1/12/2005
alopez: 6/9/2004
terry: 6/9/2004
alopez: 4/2/2004
mgross: 3/29/2004
carol: 3/15/2004
carol: 9/17/2003
mgross: 5/7/2002
terry: 11/14/2001
alopez: 4/25/2001
cwells: 2/6/2001
mgross: 12/4/2000
terry: 12/4/2000
carol: 2/3/1999
psherman: 11/20/1998
dholmes: 3/23/1998
dholmes: 3/18/1998
mark: 12/19/1997
mark: 12/11/1997

607927	TITLE *607927 ANKYRIN REPEATS- AND FYVE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; ANKFY1
;;ANKYRIN REPEATS HOOKED TO A ZINC FINGER MOTIF; ANKHZN;;
KIAA1255
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANKFY1 contains several protein-interacting domains and shares
significant identity with a number of S. cerevisiae proteins involved in
vesicular trafficking (Kuriyama et al., 2000).

CLONING

Ito et al. (1999) cloned mouse Ankfy1, which they designated Ankhzn. The
deduced 1,184-amino acid protein has an apparent molecular mass of 130
kD. Ankhzn contains an N-terminal coiled-coil domain, a BTB/POZ domain,
17 ankyrin repeats, and a C-terminal zinc finger motif. The ankyrin
repeats are separated into a group of 4 repeats in the N-terminal half
and a group of 13 repeats in the C-terminal half. Ito et al. (1999)
determined that there is a soluble form of Ankhzn and a form that
associates with endosomes.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned ANKFY1, which they designated
KIAA1255. The deduced protein shares 88% identity with mouse Ankhzn.
RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in whole adult brain and
intermediate expression in all other tissues and specific brain regions
examined, including fetal brain.

By searching databases for sequences sharing homology with mouse Ankhzn,
followed by PCR, Kuriyama et al. (2000) cloned ANKHZN from a fetal brain
cDNA library. The deduced 1,166 amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 128 kD. ANKHZN shares 85% identity with mouse
Ankhzn, and the 2 proteins have the same domain structure. Kuriyama et
al. (2000) noted that the C-terminal zinc finger (FYVE) domain, which
contains 8 potential Zn(2+)-coordinating cysteine residues that bind 2
Zn(2+) ions, is well conserved among proteins related to intracellular
trafficking. Northern blot analysis detected a 7-kb transcript in both
human and mouse brain. RT-PCR detected expression in all tissues
examined. Subcellular fractionation of human kidney recovered ANKHZN in
both the soluble and membrane fractions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kuriyama et al. (2000) determined that the ANKFY1 gene contains 25
exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the ANKFY1
gene to chromosome 17. By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Kuriyama
et al. (2000) mapped the ANKFY1 gene to chromosome 17p13. Southern blot
analysis indicated that ANKFY1 is a single-copy gene.

REFERENCE 1. Ito, K.; Ishii, N.; Miyashita, A.; Tominaga, K.; Kuriyama, H.;
Maruyama, H.; Shirai, M.; Naito, M.; Arakawa, M.; Kuwano, R.: Molecular
cloning of a novel 130-kDa cytoplasmic protein, Ankhzn, containing
ankyrin repeats hooked to a zinc finger motif. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 257: 206-213, 1999.

2. Kuriyama, H.; Asakawa, S.; Minoshima, S.; Maruyama, H.; Ishii,
N.; Ito, K.; Gejyo, F.; Arakawa, M.; Shimizu, N.; Kuwano, R.: Characterization
and chromosomal mapping of a novel human gene, ANKHZN. Gene 253:
151-160, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human
genes. XV. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain
which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 337-345, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/27/2003

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2003

602137	TITLE *602137 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1 ALPHA SUBCOMPLEX, 2; NDUFA2
;;B8 PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NDUFA2 gene encodes one of the accessory subunits of complex I, the
first and largest complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (Hoefs
et al., 2008).

For a discussion of complex I, see 516000.

CLONING

Dunbar et al. (1997) reported the genomic cloning and fluorescence in
situ hybridization mapping of 5 nuclear-encoded human complex I genes.

Ton et al. (1997) isolated human heart cDNAs encoding the CI-B8, CI-SGDH
(603841), CI-B14 (602138), CI-B12 (603839), and CI-KFYI (603844)
subunits of the HP fraction. Human and bovine B8 protein shared 94%
sequence identity.

Loeffen et al. (1998) noted that complex I can be fragmented into 3
different fractions. The flavoprotein fraction contains the NDUFV1
(161015), NDUFV2 (600532), and NDUFV3 (602184) subunits and the
iron-sulfur protein (IP) fraction contains at least 7 subunits,
NDUFS1-NDUFS6 (see, e.g., 157655) and NDUFA5 (601677). The remaining
subunits, including NDUFA2, are part of the hydrophobic protein (HP)
fraction, which is involved in proton translocation. Loeffen et al.
(1998) reported cDNA sequences of 8 nuclear-encoded subunits located
within the hydrophobic protein fraction of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase.

MAPPING

Dunbar et al. (1997) mapped NDUFA2 to chromosome 5q31. Emahazion and
Brookes (1998) showed that of the 5 complex I genes mapped by Dunbar et
al. (1997), only the mapping of NDUFA2 was correct. (See NDUFA6
(602138), NDUFA7 (602139), NDUFB8 (602140), and NDUFS8 (602141).)

By intron-based radiation hybrid mapping, Emahazion and Brookes (1998)
mapped the NDUFA2 gene to chromosome 5q31.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a boy with Leigh syndrome (256000) due to mitochondrial complex I
deficiency (252010), Hoefs et al. (2008) identified a homozygous splice
site mutation in the NDUFA2 gene (602137.0001).

NOMENCLATURE

Mammalian complex I has been studied extensively in Bos taurus. The
names of some the bovine complex I subunits designate the single-letter
code for the 4 N-terminal amino acids (e.g., SGDH). The names of
subunits B8-B22 designate their molecular weights (Walker et al., 1992).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFA2, IVS2DS, G-A, +5

In a Turkish boy with Leigh syndrome (256000) due to mitochondrial
complex I deficiency (252010), born of first-cousin parents, Hoefs et
al. (2008) identified a homozygous G-to-A transition in intron 2 of the
NDUFA2 gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 2 and generation of a
prematurely truncated protein, which was confirmed by PCR analysis. He
had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and developmental delay from birth, and
brain MRI showed cerebral atrophy and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.
After a varicella infection, he developed severe acidosis, seizures, and
coma, and died of cardiovascular arrest at age 11 months. MRI just
before death showed demyelinization of corticospinal tracts and subacute
necrotizing encephalomyelopathy consistent with Leigh syndrome. The
fibroblast and muscle complex I enzymatic activities were 36% and 20% of
control values, respectively. Further studies showed that the NDUFA2
mutation resulted in disturbed assembly and stability of complex I and
decreased complex I activity. In patient fibroblasts, the defect could
be corrected with a baculoviral vector.

REFERENCE 1. Dunbar, D. R.; Shibasaki, Y.; Dobbie, L.; Andersson, B.; Brookes,
A. J.: In situ hybridisation mapping of genomic clones for five human
respiratory chain complex I genes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 21-24,
1997.

2. Emahazion, T.; Brookes, A. J.: Mapping of the NDUFA2, NDUFA6,
NDUFA7, NDUFB8, and NDUFS8 electron transport chain genes by intron
based radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 114 only,
1998.

3. Hoefs, S. J. G.; Dieteren, C. E. J.; Distelmaier, F.; Janssen,
R. J. R. J.; Epplen, A.; Swarts, H. G. P.; Forkink, M.; Rodenburg,
R. J.; Nijtmans, L. G.; Willems, P. H.; Smeitink, J. A. M.; van den
Heuvel, L. P.: NDUFA2 complex I mutation leads to Leigh disease. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 82: 1306-1315, 2008.

4. Loeffen, J. L. C. M.; Triepels, R. H.; van den Heuvel, L. P.; Schuelke,
M.; Buskens, C. A. F.; Smeets, R. J. P.; Trijbels, J. M. F.; Smeitink,
J. A. M.: cDNA of eight nuclear encoded subunits of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase: human complex I cDNA characterization completed. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 415-422, 1998.

5. Ton, C.; Hwang, D. M.; Dempsey, A. A.; Liew, C.-C.: Identification
and primary structure of five human NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase
subunits. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 241: 589-594, 1997.

6. Walker, J. E.; Arizmendi, J. M.; Dupuis, A.; Fearnley, I. M.; Finel,
M.; Medd, S. M.; Pilkington, S. J.; Runswick, M. J.; Skehel, J. M.
: Sequences of 20 subunits of NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase from
bovine heart mitochondria. J. Molec. Biol. 226: 1051-1072, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/10/2008
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/25/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/1/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/2/1997

EDITED wwang: 09/16/2008
wwang: 9/16/2008
ckniffin: 9/10/2008
terry: 3/6/2001
terry: 12/13/1999
alopez: 5/25/1999
carol: 12/3/1998
terry: 12/2/1998
carol: 12/1/1998
carol: 11/12/1998
carol: 8/19/1998
alopez: 12/15/1997
dholmes: 12/4/1997

611122	TITLE *611122 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 28; ANKRD28
;;PHOSPHATASE INTERACTOR TARGETING K PROTEIN; PITK;;
KIAA0379
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned ANKRD28, which they designated
KIAA0379. The deduced 882-amino acid protein shares 30.8% identity with
ANKRD3 (605706). RT-PCR analysis detected ubiquitous expression in all
human tissues tested.

By searching for PP1 (see 176875)-binding proteins in rabbit skeletal
muscle, followed by database analysis, Kwiek et al. (2006) identified
ANKRD28, which they called PITK. ANKRD28 contains putative PP1-binding
motifs at either terminus and 28 successive ankyrin repeats. Western
blot analysis of multiple mouse tissues revealed expression of ANKRD28
at similar levels in all tissues tested. In COS-7 cells,
immunofluorescence microscopy localized ANKRD28 to subnuclear bodies
with exclusion from nucleoli.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro studies, Kwiek et al. (2006) showed that recombinant ANKRD28
selectively inhibited the phosphorylase activity of PP1C in a
dose-dependent manner. Phosphorylation of ser1013 and ser1017, which lie
within the putative PP1-binding motif, negatively regulated ANKRD28
binding to PP1C. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that ANKRD28 bound
to hnRNP-K (600712). ANKRD28 selectively regulated phosphorylation of
hnRNP-K at ser284, an effect that was enhanced in vivo by an
S1013A/S1017A double mutant, suggesting that ANKRD28 targets PP1 in a
regulated manner to dephosphorylate hnRNP-K selectively at ser284.
Microarray analysis found that expression of ANKRD28 resulted in altered
expression of 47 genes, including marked induction of MEK5 (MAP2K5;
602520). Expression of only 2 of these genes was altered by the
S1013A/S1017A double mutant, indicating the importance of
phosphorylation in ANKRD28 function. In addition, the effects of ANKRD28
and S1013A/S1017A double-mutant ANKRD28 could be modulated by
coexpression of hnRNP-K.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the ANKRD28
gene to chromosome 3. Kwiek et al. (2006) noted that the ANKRD28 gene
maps to chromosome 3p25.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kwiek, N. C.; Thacker, D. F.; Datto, M. B.; Megosh, H. B.; Haystead,
T. A. J.: PITK, a PP1 targeting subunit that modulates the phosphorylation
of the transcriptional regulator hnRNP K. Cell. Signal. 18: 1769-1778,
2006.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/19/2007

EDITED carol: 01/02/2008
wwang: 6/20/2007

606609	TITLE *606609 3-PRIME @REPAIR EXONUCLEASE 1; TREX1
;;DNase III
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The multistep processes of DNA replication, repair, and recombination
require the excision of nucleotides from DNA 3-prime termini. Enzymes
containing 3-prime-to-5-prime exonuclease activity remove mismatched,
modified, fragmented, and normal nucleotides to generate the appropriate
3-prime termini for subsequent steps in the DNA metabolic pathways
(Mazur and Perrino, 1999).

CLONING

By micropeptide sequence analysis of the 30-kD bovine Trex1 protein, PCR
with degenerate primers, and EST database searching, Mazur and Perrino
(1999) obtained cDNAs encoding mouse and human TREX1 and TREX2 (300370).
Sequence analysis predicted that the 304-amino acid TREX1 protein is 44%
identical to TREX2 (Mazur and Perrino (2001) corrected the TREX1
sequence to 314 amino acids). TREX1 contains 3 conserved exonuclease
motifs, with an HxAxxD sequence in the third motif. Functional analysis
confirmed that the 3-prime-to-5-prime exonuclease activity of the
recombinant protein is comparable to that of the native protein and
prefers mismatched 3-prime termini. Mazur and Perrino (1999) concluded
that the TREX proteins are small, independent 3-prime excision enzymes,
whereas the multifunctional p53 (191170) and WRN (RECQL2; 604611)
proteins, which also have 3-prime-to-5-prime exonuclease activity, are
much larger.

Using rabbit Trex1 to search an EST database, Hoss et al. (1999) also
isolated human TREX1, which they termed DNase III. Northern blot
analysis revealed expression of a 1.15-kb TREX1 transcript in all
tissues tested.

Mazur and Perrino (2001) used 5-prime RACE to identify the flanking
region of TREX1. Genomic sequence analysis suggested that TREX1 open
reading frames are produced by a variety of mechanisms, including
alternate promoter usage, alternative splicing, and varied sites for
3-prime cleavage. RT-PCR analysis detected ubiquitous expression of
TREX1.

GENE STRUCTURE

The TREX1 gene contains a single exon (Hoss et al., 1999; Mazur and
Perrino, 2001).

MAPPING

Hoss et al. (1999) and Mazur and Perrino (2001) identified clones
containing the TREX1 gene that map to chromosome 3p21.3-p21.2.

GENE FUNCTION

SET (600960) and NM23H1 (NME1; 156490) reside in an endoplasmic
reticulum-associated complex, the SET complex, that translocates to the
nucleus in response to superoxide generation by granzyme A (GZMA;
140050). Chowdhury et al. (2006) identified TREX1 as a component of the
SET complex. TREX1 bound SET and colocalized and translocated with the
SET complex. On its own, TREX1 did not damage intact DNA, but it acted
in concert with NM23H1 to destroy DNA during granzyme A-mediated cell
death. After NM23H1 nicked 1 strand, TREX1 removed bases from the free
3-prime end to enhance the damage and prevent DNA end reannealing and
repair.

Using mass spectrometry and Western blot analysis, Stetson et al. (2008)
identified mouse Trex1 as a protein involved in recognition of
interferon stimulatory DNA (ISD) BrdU-labeled intracellular
oligonucleotides. Microarray analysis showed that Trex1 was upregulated
in response to ISD stimulation. However, Trex1 -/- cells retained an
intact ISD response, ruling out Trex1 as the ISD sensor. In contrast
with Trex1 -/- mice, which succumb to lethal autoimmunity (see ANIMAL
MODEL), Trex1 -/- mice lacking Irf3 (603734), Ifnar1 (107450), or Rag2
(179616) survived and regained normal body weight through amelioration
of disease at discrete phases, indicating that TREX1 substrates are
ligands of the ISD pathway. Single-stranded DNA derived from endogenous
retroelements accumulated in Trex1 -/- cells, and Trex1 metabolized
reverse-transcribed DNA. Stetson et al. (2008) concluded that TREX1 is
an essential negative regulator of the ISD response and represents a
mechanism to prevent autoimmunity caused by endogenous retroelements.

Using mutation analysis with recombinant human TREX1, Fye et al. (2011)
found that arg174 and lys175 within the flexible loop and arg128 in the
catalytic core contributed to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and
double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) degradation. TREX1 degraded
endonuclease-treated hamster liver nuclei, suggesting that TREX1
contributes to apoptosis-associated DNA degradation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome 1

In affected members of 10 families with Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome
(AGS1; 225750), Crow et al. (2006) identified 5 different mutations in
the TREX1 gene in homozygous or compound heterozygous state (see, e.g.,
606609.0001-606609.0004). One of the mutations, R114H (606609.0001), was
identified in 7 European pedigrees. Crow et al. (2006) identified a
homozygous mutation in the TREX1 gene (606609.0002) in a patient
originally diagnosed with Cree encephalitis, indicating that Cree
encephalitis is essentially the same disorder as AGS1.

Rice et al. (2007) described a de novo heterozygous TREX1 mutation,
affecting a critical catalytic residue in TREX1 (D200N; 606609.0006),
that resulted in typical Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, thus defining a
dominant form of the disorder.

Haaxma et al. (2010) reported a second patient with Aicardi-Goutieres
syndrome and a de novo heterozygous TREX1 mutation (D18N; 606609.0007).
The D18N mutation had previously been identified in heterozygosity by
Lee-Kirsch et al. (2007) in a family with chilblain lupus.

- Susceptibility to Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome shows overlap with systemic erythematosus
(SLE; 152700) at both clinical and pathologic levels. Lee-Kirsch et al.
(2007) analyzed the TREX1 gene in 417 patients with SLE and 1,712
controls and identified heterozygosity for a 3-prime UTR variant and 11
nonsynonymous changes in 12 patients (see, e.g., 606609.0001). They
found only 2 nonsynonymous changes in 2 controls (p = 1.7 X 10(-7),
relative risk = 25.3). In vitro studies of 2 frameshift mutations
revealed that both caused altered subcellular distribution.

- Chilblain Lupus

Rice et al. (2007) reported a heterozygous TREX1 mutation (606609.0005)
causing familial chilblain lupus (CHBL; 610448), a rare cutaneous form
of SLE.

In affected members of the large 5-generation German family with
chilblain lupus in which the disease was mapped to chromosome 3p21-p14
by Lee-Kirsch et al. (2006), Lee-Kirsch et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a missense mutation (D18N; 606609.0007) in the TREX1
gene.

- Retinal Vasculopathy with Cerebral Leukodystrophy

In 9 families with autosomal dominant retinal vasculopathy with cerebral
leukodystrophy (192315), Richards et al. (2007) identified 5 different
heterozygous frameshift mutations at the C terminus of the TREX1 gene
(see, e.g., 606609.0008 and 606609.0009). In expression studies, the
truncated proteins retained exonuclease activity but lost normal
perinuclear localization.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

The TREX1 D200N and D18N dominant heterozygous mutations are associated
with AGS1 and CHBL, respectively. Using exonuclease enzyme analysis,
Lehtinen et al. (2008) showed that TREX1 heterodimers containing
wildtype TREX1 and either D200N or D18N mutant proteins were completely
deficient in degrading dsDNA and degraded ssDNA at an approximately
2-fold lower rate than wildtype TREX1. In addition, D200N- and
D18N-containing homo- and heterodimers inhibited the dsDNA degradation
activity of wildtype TREX1, providing an explanation for the dominant
phenotype of the mutant alleles. In contrast, the R114H mutation, which
causes AGS1 when present as a homozygous mutation and SLE when present
as a heterozygous mutation, had dysfunctional dsDNA and ssDNA
degradation activities as a homodimer, but it was functional as a
heterodimer. The R114H homodimer lacked inhibitory activity against
wildtype TREX1, supporting the recessive genetics of the R114H mutation
in AGS1. Lehtinen et al. (2008) concluded that the dysfunctional dsDNA
activities of the disease-related TREX1 mutants could account for
persistent dsDNA from dying cells leading to an aberrant autoimmune
response in these disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

Morita et al. (2004) found that Trex1 -/- mice developed inflammatory
myocarditis, suggesting a role for this enzyme in immune regulation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 1
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
TREX1, ARG114HIS

In affected members of 7 families of European origin with
Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome-1 (225750), Crow et al. (2006) identified a
341G-A transition in the TREX1 gene, resulting in an arg114-to-his
(R114H) substitution at a residue predicted to be involved in protein
dimerization. Five of the families were homozygous for the mutation and
2 were compound heterozygous with another TREX1 mutation (606609.0003).
Patient-derived fibroblasts showed no detectable TREX1 3-prime
exonuclease activity.

Lee Kirsch et al. (2007) analyzed the TREX1 gene in 417 patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus (152700) and identified heterozygosity for
the R114H mutation in a European female patient who had nephritis,
arthritis, and antinuclear and anti-dsDNA antibodies.

In an extensive study of the clinical and molecular phenotypes of
Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, Rice et al. (2007) found biallelic mutations
in TREX1 in 31 of 127 families with the clinical diagnosis of the
disorder. Eighteen families, 14 of which were of northern European
origin, were homozygous (15) or compound heterozygous (3) for the 341G-A
transition (R114H). Notably, all R114H homozygotes were also homozygous
for the T allele of a SNP at position 531. This allele exhibited highly
significant (P less than 0.001) overrepresentation in patients compared
with controls (with a T allele population frequency of 0.4), suggesting
that R114H might be an ancient founder mutation.

.0002
AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 1
TREX1, ARG164TER

In a patient with Cree encephalitis, also known as AGS1 (225750), born
of consanguineous parents, Crow et al. (2006) identified a homozygous
490C-T transition in the TREX1 gene, resulting in an arg164-to-ter
(R164X) substitution. A lymphoblastoid cell line derived from the
patient showed no detectable 3-prime exonuclease activity. The findings
confirmed that Cree encephalitis and AGS1 are essentially the same
disorder.

.0003
AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 1
TREX1, 3-BP INS, 600GAT

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with AGS1 (225750), Crow et
al. (2006) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
TREX1 gene: a 3-bp insertion (600insGAT), resulting in duplication of an
aspartate residue involved in divalent cation binding within the
catalytic site, and R114H (606609.0001).

.0004
AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 1
TREX1, VAL201ASP

In a patient with AGS1 (225750), born of consanguineous Turkish parents,
Crow et al. (2006) identified a homozygous 602T-A transversion in the
TREX1 gene, resulting in a val201-to-asp (V201D) substitution in the
catalytic site of the protein. Patient-derived fibroblasts showed no
detectable TREX1 3-prime exonuclease activity.

.0005
CHILBLAIN LUPUS
TREX1, 1-BP DUP, 375T

In a nonconsanguineous Bangladeshi family, Rice et al. (2007) found
association between chilblain lupus (610448) and a heterozygous mutation
in the TREX1 gene, the duplication of a single base (375dupT) that
resulted in a truncated protein missing the last 188 amino acids. The
mutation was present in 3 affected sibs; it was found also in a fourth
sib with a subclinical phenotype.

.0006
AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
TREX1, ASP200ASN

In a child with a classic history of Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome
(225750), born to nonconsanguineous Scottish parents, Rice et al. (2007)
found heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the TREX1 gene: a 598G-A
transition that resulted in a substitution of asparagine for aspartic
acid at codon 200 (D200N). Both parents had a homozygous wildtype
genotype at this position, suggesting a de novo occurrence.
Differentiation of the maternal and paternal alleles was possible
because of a frequently observed C-to-T SNP at position 531, which
allowed the authors to demonstrate that the mutation has arisen on the
maternal allele. A standard exonuclease assay indicated close-to-normal
TREX1 enzymatic activity. Rice et al. (2007) hypothesized that the
aspartic acid at position 200 of TREX1 represents one of 4 residues
essential for coordinating 2 magnesium ions involved in DNA binding and
catalysis, and that the D200N mutation represents a gain-of-function
mutation conferring altered substrate specificity, DNA binding, or
protein-protein interaction which would not be detected in a standard
TREX1 exonuclease assay.

Fye et al. (2011) stated that asp18 and asp200 are the 2 aspartates that
coordinate the divalent metal ion Mg(2+) at the TREX1 active site and
contribute to DNA binding and catalysis. They found that homodimers of
recombinant human TREX1 containing D200N or D18N (606609.0007) mutations
had negligible nuclease activity against ssDNA and dsDNA compared with
wildtype. Heterodimers of wildtype TREX1 with D18N or D200N TREX1
mutants had more modestly reduced ssDNA nuclease activity, but
profoundly reduced dsDNA nuclease activity, compared with wildtype
homodimers. Fye et al. (2011) concluded that the dominant phenotypes of
asp18 and asp200 mutations relate predominantly to impaired dsDNA
degradation and indicate that TREX1 dsDNA degradation activity is
fundamental to the prevention of autoimmunity.

.0007
CHILBLAIN LUPUS
AICARDI-GOUTIERES SYNDROME 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
TREX1, ASP18ASN

In affected members of the large 5-generation German family with
chilblain lupus (610448) previously described by Lee-Kirsch et al.
(2006), Lee-Kirsch et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 52G-A
transversion in exon 1 of the TREX1 gene, resulting in an asp18-to-asn
(D18N) substitution at a highly conserved residue critical for catalytic
activity. The mutation was not found in unaffected family members or in
400 control chromosomes. Recombinant mutant TREX1 homodimers were
enzymatically inactive, whereas mutant/wildtype heterodimers had
approximately 40% of the activity of wildtype dimers, indicating that
D18N is a loss-of-function allele that does not exhibit a
dominant-negative effect. Compared to control cells, patient-derived
lymphoblastoid cells were substantially less sensitive to cell death
after treatment with granzyme A (GZMA; 140050) but not granzyme B (GZMB;
123910), indicating that D18N specifically interferes with GZMA-mediated
cell death in the caspase-independent form of apoptosis.

In a 16-year-old girl with relatively mild Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome
(AGS1; 225750), who was negative for mutation in other known AGS genes,
Haaxma et al. (2010) identified a de novo heterozygous D18N missense
mutation in the TREX1 gene. The mutation was not found in either parent
or in 200 control chromosomes. The patient also displayed features of
mitochondrial disease, with cytochrome oxidase-negative and ragged-red
fibers seen on histologic examination of the quadriceps muscle;
biochemical measurements showed decreased overall energy production (ATP
and CrP) in the presence of normal activities of individual respiratory
chain complexes, again compatible with mitochondrial dysfunction.
However, heteroduplex analysis of the entire mitochondrial DNA did not
show any mutations. This patient also had peripheral neuropathy with
prominent axonal loss and disturbances of myelination without strict
demyelination.

Fye et al. (2011) stated that asp18 and asp200 are the 2 aspartates that
coordinate the divalent metal ion Mg(2+) at the TREX1 active site and
contribute to DNA binding and catalysis. They found that homodimers of
recombinant human TREX1 containing D200N (60609.0006) or D18N mutations
had negligible nuclease activity against ssDNA and dsDNA compared with
wildtype. Heterodimers of wildtype TREX1 with D18N or D200N TREX1
mutants had more modestly reduced ssDNA nuclease activity, but
profoundly reduced dsDNA nuclease activity, compared with wildtype
homodimers. Fye et al. (2011) concluded that the dominant phenotypes of
asp18 and asp200 mutations relates predominantly to impaired dsDNA
degradation and indicates that TREX1 dsDNA degradation activity is
fundamental to the prevention of autoimmunity.

.0008
VASCULOPATHY, RETINAL, WITH CEREBRAL LEUKODYSTROPHY
TREX1, 1-BP INS, 3688G

In 5 families with autosomal dominant retinal vasculopathy with cerebral
leukodystrophy (192315), including 2 North American families previously
reported by Grand et al. (1988) and 1 Dutch pedigree originally
described by Storimans et al. (1991), Richards et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a 1-bp insertion (3688G) at the C terminus of the
TREX1 gene, resulting in a frameshift at val235 (V235fs). Haplotype
analysis suggested that these families were not related. The mutation
was not found in 192 Caucasian, 192 Chinese, or 300 Dutch control
alleles. In expression studies, the truncated protein retained
exonuclease activity but lost normal perinuclear localization.

.0009
VASCULOPATHY, RETINAL, WITH CEREBRAL LEUKODYSTROPHY
TREX1, 4-BP DUP, 3727GTCA

In a North American family of Chinese ancestry with autosomal dominant
retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy (192315), previously
reported by Jen et al. (1997), Richards et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a 4-bp duplication (3727dupGTCA) at the C terminus of
the TREX1 gene, resulting in a frameshift at thr249 (T249fs). The
mutation was not found in 192 Caucasian, 192 Chinese, or 300 Dutch
control alleles. In expression studies, the truncated protein retained
exonuclease activity but lost normal perinuclear localization.

REFERENCE 1. Chowdhury, D.; Beresford, P. J.; Zhu, P.; Zhang, D.; Sung, J.-S.;
Demple, B.; Perrino, F. W.; Lieberman, J.: The exonuclease TREX1
is in the SET complex and acts in concert with NM23-H1 to degrade
DNA during granzyme A-mediated cell death. Molec. Cell 23: 133-142,
2006.

2. Crow, Y. J.; Hayward, B. E.; Parmar, R.; Robins, P.; Leitch, A.;
Ali, M.; Black, D. N.; van Bokhoven, H.; Brunner, H. G.; Hamel, B.
C.; Corry, P. C.; Cowan, F. M.; and 14 others: Mutations in the
gene encoding the 3-prime-5-prime DNA exonuclease TREX1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres
syndrome at the AGS1 locus. Nature Genet. 38: 917-920, 2006.

3. Fye, J. M.; Orebaugh, C. D.; Coffin, S. R.; Hollis, T.; Perrino,
F. W.: Dominant mutations of the TREX1 exonuclease gene in lupus
and Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 32373-32382,
2011.

4. Grand, M. G.; Kaine, J.; Fulling, K.; Atkinson, J.; Dowton, S.
B.; Farber, M.; Craver, J.; Rice, K.: Cerebroretinal vasculopathy. Ophthalmology 95:
649-659, 1988.

5. Haaxma, C. A.; Crow, Y. J.; van Steensel, M. A. M.; Lammens, M.
M. Y.; Rice, G. I.; Verbeek, M. M.; Willemsen, M. A. A. P.: A de
novo p.Asp18Asn mutation in TREX1 in a patient with Aicardi-Goutieres
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2612-2617, 2010.

6. Hoss, M.; Robins, P.; Naven, T. J. P.; Pappin, D. J. C.; Sgouros,
J.; Lindahl, T.: A human DNA editing enzyme homologous to the Escherichia
coli DnaQ/MutD protein. EMBO J. 18: 3868-3875, 1999.

7. Jen, J.; Cohen, A. H.; Yue, Q.; Stout, J. T.; Vinters, H. V.; Nelson,
S.; Baloh, R. W.: Hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy,
and stroke (HERNS). Neurology 49: 1322-1330, 1997.

8. Lee-Kirsch, M. A.; Chowdhury, D.; Harvey, S.; Gong, M.; Senenko,
L.; Engel, K.; Pfeiffer, C.; Hollis, T.; Gahr, M.; Perrino, F. W.;
Lieberman, J.; Hubner, N.: A mutation in TREX1 that impairs susceptibility
to granzyme A-mediated cell death underlies familial chilblain lupus. J.
Molec. Med. 85: 531-537, 2007.

9. Lee-Kirsch, M. A.; Gong, M.; Chowdhury, D.; Senenko, L.; Engel,
K.; Lee, Y.-A.; de Silva, U.; Bailey, S. L.; Witte, T.; Vyse, T. J.;
Kere, J.; Pfeiffer, C.; and 12 others: Mutations in the gene encoding
the 3-prime-5-prime DNA exonuclease TREX1 are associated with systemic
lupus erythematosus. Nature Genet. 39: 1065-1067, 2007.

10. Lee-Kirsch, M. A.; Gong, M.; Schulz, H.; Ruschendorf, F.; Stein,
A.; Pfeiffer, C.; Ballarini, A.; Gahr, M.; Hubner, N.; Linne, M.:
Familial chilblain lupus, a monogenic form of cutaneous lupus erythematosus,
maps to chromosome 3p. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 731-737, 2006.

11. Lehtinen, D. A.; Harvey, S.; Mulcahy, M. J.; Hollis, T.; Perrino,
F. W.: The TREX1 double-stranded DNA degradation activity is defective
in dominant mutations associated with autoimmune disease. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 31649-31656, 2008.

12. Mazur, D. J.; Perrino, F. W.: Identification and expression of
the TREX1 and TREX2 cDNA sequences encoding mammalian 3-prime-to-5-prime
exonucleases. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 19655-19660, 1999.

13. Mazur, D. J.; Perrino, F. W.: Structure and expression of the
TREX1 and TREX2 3-prime-to-5-prime exonuclease genes. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
14718-14727, 2001.

14. Morita, M.; Stamp, G.; Robins, P.; Dulic, A.; Rosewell, I.; Hrivnak,
G.; Daly, G.; Lindahl, T.; Barnes, D. E.: Gene-targeted mice lacking
the Trex1 (DNase III) 3-prime to 5-prime DNA exonuclease develop inflammatory
myocarditis. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 6719-6727, 2004.

15. Rice, G.; Newman, W. G.; Dean, J.; Patrick, T.; Parmar, R.; Flintoff,
K.; Robins, P.; Harvey, S.; Hollis, T.; O'Hara, A.; Herrick, A. L.;
Bowden, A. P.; Perrino, F. W.; Lindahl, T.; Barnes, D. E.; Crow, Y.
J.: Heterozygous mutations in TREX1 cause familial chilblain lupus
and dominant Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
811-815, 2007.

16. Rice, G.; Patrick, T.; Parmar, R.; Taylor, C. F.; Aeby, A.; Aicardi,
J.; Artuch, R.; Montalto, S. A.; Bacino, C. A.; Barroso, B.; Baxter,
P.; Benko, W. S.; and 106 others: Clinical and molecular phenotype
of Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 713-725, 2007.

17. Richards, A.; van den Maagdenberg, A. M. J. M.; Jen, J. C.; Kavanagh,
D.; Bertram, P.; Spitzer, D.; Liszewski, M. K.; Barilla-LaBarca, M.-L.;
Terwindt, G. M.; Kasai, Y.; McLellan, M.; Grand, M. G.; and 25 others
: C-terminal truncations in human 3-prime-5-prime DNA exonuclease
TREX1 cause autosomal dominant retinal vasculopathy with cerebral
leukodystrophy. Nature Genet. 39: 1068-1070, 2007.

18. Stetson, D. B.; Ko, J. S.; Heidmann, T.; Medzhitov, R.: Trex1
prevents cell-intrinsic initiation of autoimmunity. Cell 134: 587-598,
2008.

19. Storimans, C. W.; Van Schooneveld, M. J.; Oosterhuis, J. A.; Bos,
P. J.: A new autosomal dominant vascular retinopathy syndrome. Europ.
J. Ophthal. 1: 73-78, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/21/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/16/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/27/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/20/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/3/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/20/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/30/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/14/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/24/2012
mgross: 5/24/2012
terry: 3/21/2012
carol: 1/11/2012
alopez: 12/17/2010
terry: 12/16/2010
carol: 11/30/2010
wwang: 1/5/2010
ckniffin: 7/14/2009
mgross: 2/27/2009
terry: 2/27/2009
mgross: 12/2/2008
terry: 11/20/2008
wwang: 10/30/2007
alopez: 10/8/2007
terry: 10/3/2007
alopez: 9/20/2007
carol: 8/30/2007
terry: 8/30/2007
carol: 6/1/2007
alopez: 1/28/2002
mgross: 1/14/2002

600848	TITLE *600848 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COREPRESSOR 2; NCOR2
;;SILENCING MEDIATOR FOR RETINOID AND THYROID HORMONE RECEPTORS; SMRT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NCOR2 is a transcriptional corepressor that maintains the 'off state' of
nonliganded nuclear receptors. Its interaction with nuclear receptors is
mediated by 2 C-terminal receptor-interacting domains (RIDs). NCOR2
facilitates transcriptional repression by serving as a scaffold protein
to recruit histone deacetylase complexes and chromatin-remodeling
factors (summary by Pei et al., 2011).

CLONING

Transcriptional silencing mediated by nuclear receptors is important in
development, differentiation, and oncogenesis. Chen and Evans (1995)
identified a receptor-interacting factor, NCOR2, which they designated
SMRT, as a silencing mediator (corepressor) for retinoid receptors (see
180240) and thyroid hormone receptors (see 190120). They cloned SMRT
from a HeLa cell cDNA library. The deduced 1,495-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 168 kD. It has a proline-rich N-terminal
domain, followed by ERDR and SG regions and a C-terminal domain that
shares significant similarity with mouse Rip13 (NCOR1; 600849). Chen and
Evans (1995) also identified a splice variant of SMRT that encodes a
protein lacking a 46-amino acid sequence in the C-terminal domain.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous SMRT expression.
Immunofluorescence analysis indicated that SMRT is a nuclear protein.
Horlein et al. (1995) proposed that SMRT and NCOR (NCOR1; 600849) belong
to a family of corepressors that they termed TRACs (thyroid hormone- and
retinoic acid receptor-associated corepressors).

Using mouse Smrt and successive 5-prime proximal probes, Ordentlich et
al. (1999) cloned full-length human SMRT from a pituitary cDNA library.
The deduced protein contains 2,517 amino acid. The N terminus contains 2
repression domains separated by a SANT domain and is highly homologous
to the N terminus of NCOR1. Northern blot analysis detected a SMRT
transcript of about 10 kb in all mouse tissues examined, with highest
expression in brain, lung, and spleen. A minor transcript of 8.5 kb was
also detected in most tissues. Ordentlich et al. (1999) also cloned a
splice variant of Smrt from mouse brain that encodes a protein lacking
amino acids 36 through 254 of full-length Ncor2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Binding of ligand to nuclear hormone receptors induces a conformation
that attracts coactivator proteins containing a leu-x-x-leu-leu motif,
the so-called NR box. Hu and Lazar (1999) showed that NCOR1 and SMRT
contain sequences that are similar to the NR box and are repeated in
each of 2 nuclear hormone receptor interaction domains. Hu and Lazar
(1999) called this box (L/I-x-x-I/V-I) the CoRNR (corepressor/nuclear
receptor; 'corner') box. The corner box is required for nuclear hormone
receptor interaction, and corner box peptides specifically block
corepressor interaction in vitro and repression in vivo. Sequences
flanking the corner box determine nuclear hormone receptor specificity.
Thus, Hu and Lazar (1999) concluded that the key feature of hormone
action, differential recognition of unliganded and liganded nuclear
hormone receptors by coactivators and corepressors, is due to very
subtle differences between CoRNR and NR boxes.

- Crystal Structure

Watson et al. (2012) reported the structure of a complex between an HDAC
(HDAC3; 605166) and a corepressor, NCOR2. The structure revealed 2
remarkable features. First, the SMRT-deacetylase activation domain (DAD)
undergoes a large structural rearrangement on forming the complex.
Second, there is an essential inositol tetraphosphate molecule,
D-myo-inositol-(1,4,5,6)-tetrakisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5,6)P4), acting as
an 'intermolecular glue' between the 2 proteins. Assembly of the complex
is clearly dependent on the Ins(1,4,5,6)P4, which may act as a
regulator, potentially explaining why inositol phosphates and their
kinases have been found to act as transcriptional regulators. This
mechanism for the activation of HDAC3 appears to be conserved in class I
HDACs from yeast to humans, and the authors suggested it opens the way
to novel therapeutic opportunities.

GENE FUNCTION

Chen and Evans (1995) found that association of SMRT with receptors,
both in solution and bound to DNA response elements, was destabilized by
ligand. The interaction with mutant receptors correlated with their
transcriptional silencing activities. The repressor function of thyroid
hormone receptor and retinoic acid receptor appeared to involve direct
interaction with SMRT, possibly in a way that stabilized or promoted
their interaction with the transcription factor TFIIB (189963). Chen and
Evans (1995) showed that ligand caused dissociation of SMRT from the
receptor, triggering the activation process.

Fischle et al. (2002) showed that the catalytic domain of HDAC4 (605314)
interacts with HDAC3 (605166) via the transcriptional corepressor NCOR2.
All experimental conditions leading to the suppression of HDAC4 binding
to NCOR2 and to HDAC3 resulted in loss of enzymatic activity associated
with HDAC4. These observations indicated that class II HDACs regulate
transcription by bridging the enzymatically active NCOR2-HDAC3 complex
and select transcription factors.

Hoberg et al. (2004) presented evidence that IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664)
phosphorylates chromatin-bound SMRT, stimulating its removal from
chromatin and allowing recruitment of NFKB (see 164011) to promoters and
transcription of NFKB-dependent genes.

Jepsen et al. (2007) reported a critical role for SMRT in forebrain
development and in maintenance of the neural stem cell state. Analysis
of a series of markers in SMRT gene-deleted mice revealed the functional
requirement of SMRT in the actions of both retinoic acid-dependent and
Notch (see 190198)-dependent forebrain development. In isolated cortical
progenitor cells, SMRT was critical for preventing retinoic acid
receptor (see 180220)-dependent induction of differentiation along a
neuronal pathway in the absence of any ligand. Jepsen et al. (2007)
demonstrated that SMRT represses expression of the jumonji
domain-containing gene JMJD3 (611577), a direct retinoic acid receptor
target that functions as a histone H3 trimethyl K27 demethylase and
which is capable of activating specific components of the neurogenic
program.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jiang et al. (2001) determined that the NCOR2 gene contains 45 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Ordentlich et al. (1999) mapped the NCOR2 gene to chromosome
12q24.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pei et al. (2011) generated knockin mice expressing point mutations in
both RIDs of Smrt, which disrupted its interaction with nuclear
receptors. On a pure C57BL/6J background, these mice, which Pei et al.
(2011) called Smrt(mRID) mice, died shortly after birth from acute
respiratory distress syndrome due to abnormal terminal differentiation
of type I pneumocytes. Maternal delivery of antithyroid drugs, but not
antagonists of other nuclear receptors, rescued lethality in Smrt(mRID)
pups. Mice treated with antithyroid drugs during the time of terminal
lung differentiation were born alive, showed no evidence of respiratory
distress, and survived to adulthood. Microarray analysis revealed that
Klf2 (602016) expression was downregulated in Smrt(mRID) mice. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of MLE-12 mouse lung carcinoma cells showed
that both Smrt and thyroid hormone receptor bound a conserved enhancer
region downstream of the mouse Klf2 gene. Overexpression of Klf2 in
MLE-12 cells upregulated expression of type I pneumocyte markers, and
targeted disruption of Klf2 in mouse lung recapitulated the phenotype of
Smrt(mRID) mice. Pei et al. (2011) concluded that regulation of KLF2
expression by SMRT is required for terminal lung development.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, J. D.; Evans, R. M.: A transcriptional co-repressor that
interacts with nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 377: 454-457, 1995.

2. Fischle, W.; Dequiedt, F.; Hendzel, M. J.; Guenther, M. G.; Lazar,
M. A.; Voelter, W.; Verdin, E.: Enzymatic activity associated with
class II HDACs is dependent on a multiprotein complex containing HDAC3
and SMRT/N-CoR. Molec. Cell 9: 45-57, 2002.

3. Hoberg, J. E.; Yeung, F.; Mayo, M. W.: SMRT derepression by the
I-kappa-B kinase alpha: a prerequisite to NF-kappa-B transcription
and survival. Molec. Cell 16: 245-255, 2004.

4. Horlein, A. J.; Naar, A. M.; Heinzel, T.; Torchia, J.; Gloss, B.;
Kurokawa, R.; Ryan, A.; Kamel, Y.; Soderstrom, M.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: Ligand-independent repression by the thyroid hormone receptor
mediated by a nuclear receptor co-repressor. Nature 377: 397-403,
1995.

5. Hu, X.; Lazar, M. A.: The CoRNR motif controls the recruitment
of corepressors by nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 402: 93-96,
1999.

6. Jepsen, K.; Solum, D.; Zhou, T.; McEvilly, R. J.; Kim, H.-J.; Glass,
C. K.; Hermanson, O.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: SMRT-mediated repression
of an H3K27 demethylase in progression from neural stem to neuron. Nature 450:
415-419, 2007.

7. Jiang, Q.; Galiegue-Zouitina, S.; Roumier, C.; Hildebrand, M. P.;
Thomas, S.; Coignet, L. J.: Genomic organization and refined mapping
of the human nuclear corepressor 2 (NCOR2)/ silencing mediator of
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) gene on chromosome 12q24.3. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 92: 217-220, 2001.

8. Ordentlich, P.; Downes, M.; Xie, W.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N. B.;
Evans, R. M.: Unique forms of human and mouse nuclear receptor corepressor
SMRT. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2639-2644, 1999.

9. Pei, L.; Leblanc, M.; Barish, G.; Atkins, A.; Nofsinger, R.; Whyte,
J.; Gold, D.; He, M.; Kawamura, K.; Li, H.-R.; Downes, M.; Yu, R.
T.; Powell, H. C.; Lingrel, J. B.; Evans, R. M.: Thyroid hormone
receptor repression is linked to type I pneumocyte-associated respiratory
distress syndrome. Nature Med. 17: 1466-1472, 2011.

10. Watson, P. J.; Fairall, L.; Santos, G. M.; Schwabe, J. W. R.:
Structure of HDAC3 bound to co-repressor and inositol tetraphosphate. Nature 481:
335-340, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/8/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/15/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/7/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/20/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/6/1995

EDITED alopez: 02/13/2012
terry: 2/8/2012
carol: 1/20/2012
mgross: 12/22/2011
terry: 12/21/2011
alopez: 5/9/2008
terry: 4/22/2008
mgross: 6/8/2006
terry: 5/3/2006
mgross: 5/15/2002
mcapotos: 8/7/2001
alopez: 2/10/2000
mgross: 12/20/1999
mgross: 4/27/1999
mgross: 4/21/1999
terry: 4/20/1999
mark: 10/6/1995

126065	TITLE *126065 CYTOCHROME P450, FAMILY 24, SUBFAMILY A, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP24A1
;;CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XXIV; CYP24;;
1,25-@DIHYDROXYVITAMIN D3 24-HYDROXYLASE;;
VITAMIN D 24-HYDROXYLASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3, the physiologically active form of vitamin D3,
exerts its functions through a receptor (VDR; 601769)-mediated
mechanism. In addition to its fundamental role in calcium metabolism,
1,25-(OH)2D3 acts on a variety of tissues. One of its most important
functions is its differentiating activity. The best-characterized
incidence of this activity is induction of differentiation of
promyelocytes into monocytes/macrophages. 1,25-(OH)2D3 is biologically
inactivated through a series of reactions beginning with
24-hydroxylation. 1,25-(OH)2D3 induces the 24-hydroxylase, whereas
hypocalcemia, through increased parathyroid hormone, suppresses this
enzyme. Chen et al. (1993) isolated the cDNA encoding the human
24-hydroxylase, sequenced it, and demonstrated that it is active when
expressed in genetic expression systems.

Vitamin D 24-hydroxylase is a mitochondrial enzyme responsible for
inactivating vitamin D metabolites through the C-24 oxidation pathway.
Ohyama et al. (1991) isolated a cDNA encoding 25-hydroxyvitamin
D(3)24-hydroxylase from a rat kidney cDNA library by use of specific
antibodies to the enzyme. The amino acid sequence showed less than 30%
similarity to those of previously reported cytochrome P450s.

Labuda et al. (1993) cloned part of the CYP24 gene: 776 bp of the coding
and 720 bp of the 3-prime untranslated region interrupted by an intron.
In the coding region, they found 79.8% similarity in DNA and 87.5%
similarity in deduced amino acid sequence between human and rat, with no
similarity in the 3-prime untranslated region.

Independently, Hahn et al. (1993) isolated a human kidney cDNA clone for
vitamin D 24-hydroxylase.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chen and DeLuca (1995) determined that the promoter region of CYP24
contains a TATA box, a CAAT box, GC boxes, 2 vitamin D-responsive
elements (VDREs), and AP1 (165160)- and AP2 (107580)-binding sites.
Functional characterization of the VDREs indicated that both are
required for optimal induction of CYP24 expression by
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3.

MAPPING

By Southern blot hybridization of DNA from human-hamster somatic cell
hybrids and by in situ immunofluorescence hybridization, Labuda et al.
(1993) mapped the CYP24 gene to 20q13.1. Hahn et al. (1993) mapped the
CYP24 gene to 20q13.2-q13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

By study of an interspecific backcross, Malas et al. (1994) demonstrated
that the mouse homolog is located on chromosome 2 in a region of
conserved synteny with human chromosome 20.

GENE FUNCTION

Using DNA microarray and quantitative PCR analyses, Liu et al. (2006)
found that activation of TLR2 (603028) and TLR1 (601194) by a
mycobacterial ligand upregulated expression of VDR and CYP27B1 (609506),
the vitamin D 1-hydroxylase that catalyzes the conversion of vitamin D
to its active form, in monocytes and macrophages, but not dendritic
cells. Intracellular flow cytometric and quantitative PCR analyses
showed that treatment of monocytes with vitamin D upregulated expression
of CYP24 and cathelicidin (CAMP; 600474), an antimicrobial peptide, but
not DEFB4 (602215). Confocal microscopy demonstrated colocalization of
CAMP with bacteria-containing vacuoles of vitamin D-treated monocytes,
and vitamin D treatment of M. tuberculosis-infected macrophages reduced
the number of viable bacilli. Ligand stimulation of TLR2 and TLR1
upregulated CYP24 and CAMP in the presence of human serum, but not
bovine serum, and CAMP upregulation was more efficient in Caucasian than
in African American serum, in which vitamin D levels were significantly
lower. Vitamin D supplementation of African American serum reversed the
CAMP induction defect. Liu et al. (2006) proposed that vitamin D
supplementation in African and Asian populations, which may have a
reduced ability to synthesize vitamin D from ultraviolet light in
sunlight, might be an effective and inexpensive intervention to enhance
innate immunity against microbial infection and neoplastic disease.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), Albertson et al.
(2000) resolved 2 regions of amplification within an approximately 2-Mb
region of recurrent aberration at 20q13.2 in breast cancer (114480). The
putative oncogene ZNF217 (602967) mapped to one peak, and CYP24, whose
overexpression is likely to lead to abrogation of growth control
mediated by vitamin D, mapped to the other. Fine mapping demonstrated
that ZNF217 lies proximal to CYP24. As transcription of CYP24 is closely
coupled to the level and activity of VDR, Albertson et al. (2000)
measured both CYP24 and VDR transcript levels using quantitative PCR in
breast tumors. Expression of CYP24, normalized with respect to VDR,
correlated with copy number of CYP24 in the tumors, further supporting
an oncogenic role for CYP24.

In 7 patients from 8 unrelated families with infantile hypercalcemia
(143880), Schlingmann et al. (2011) identified homozygosity or compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the CYP24A1 gene (see, e.g.,
126065.0001-126065.0007). In 1 patient, a heterozygous complex deletion
in CYP24A1 was identified, but no other mutation was detected by
sequence analysis. Overexpression of the mutant CYP24A1 enzymes in a
eukaryotic cell line revealed complete or near-complete loss of function
for all identified mutations.

In molecular-modeling simulations, Ji and Shen (2011) found that among
the 4 missense mutations reported by Schlingmann et al. (2011), only
L409S (126065.0006) weakens the binding of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 to
24-hydroxylase. Noting that the catabolism of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
by 24-hydroxylase is heme-dependent, Ji and Shen (2011) analyzed the
influence of these mutations on heme binding and found that the other 3
mutations, R159Q (126065.0004), R396W (126065.0005), and E322K
(126065.0007), all change interactions between the heme molecule and
24-hydroxylase.

In a 47-year-old man who had an episode of nephrolithiasis at 19 years
of age and was subsequently asymptomatic until hypercalcemia was
discovered on routine testing at 39 years of age, Streeten et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the CYP24A1 gene
(E143del; 126065.0002). Streeten et al. (2011) noted that this mutation
had been identified by Schlingmann et al. (2011) in patients with
infantile hypercalcemia. Noting that vitamin D prophylaxis was a factor
in the development of symptomatic hypercalcemia in the children reported
by Schlingmann et al. (2011), Schlingmann et al. (2011) suggested that
information on lifestyle, nutrition, and vitamin supplementation in the
patient described by Streeten et al. (2011) might identify a potential
trigger for clinical symptoms in adulthood.

OTHER FEATURES

Ogunkolade et al. (2006) hypothesized that chewing betel nut, an
addictive habit common throughout South Asian communities, contributes
to hypovitaminosis D by modulating the enzymes regulating circulating
activated vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D) concentration. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cell 24-hydoxylase (CYP24A1) mRNA correlated
positively and serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D negatively with betel quids
per day. Betel chewing is a more powerful independent determinant of
increased 24-hydoxylase expression and of decreased serum calcitriol
than serum 25-dihydroxyvitamin D, supporting the hypothesis that this
habit could aggravate the effects of vitamin D deficiency.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kasuga et al. (2002) found that transgenic rats constitutively
expressing CYP24 showed significantly low levels of plasma
24,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. They also developed albuminuria and
hyperlipidemia shortly after weaning. Plasma lipid profiles revealed
that all lipoprotein fractions were elevated. Transgenic rats showed
atherosclerotic lesions in the aorta, which progressed with high-fat and
high-cholesterol feeding.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, 2-BP DEL, 1425TC

In an infant girl born of consanguineous Turkish parents, who developed
infantile hypercalcemia (143880) while receiving a 500 IU daily dose of
vitamin D, Schlingmann et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a 2-bp
deletion (1425delTC) in the CYP24A1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and
predicted to cause premature termination of the protein. The mutation
was not found in at least 204 control alleles, and transfection studies
demonstrated complete loss of CYP24A1 catabolic activity with the mutant
compared to wildtype.

.0002
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, 3-BP DEL, 427GAA

In monozygotic twin brothers from a German family, who developed
infantile hypercalcemia (143880) while receiving a 500 IU daily dose of
vitamin D, Schlingmann et al. (2011) identified compound heterozygosity
for a 3-bp deletion (427delGAA) in the CYP24A1 gene, resulting in the
in-frame deletion of a glutamic acid residue at codon 143 (E143del), and
a 451G-T transversion, resulting in a gln151-to-ter (E151X; 126065.0003)
substitution. In a Turkish infant who also developed hypercalcemia on
500 IU per day of vitamin D, Schlingmann et al. (2011) identified
compound heterozygosity for the 3-bp deletion and a 476G-A transition in
the CYP24A1 gene, resulting in an arg159-to-gln (R159Q; 126065.0004)
substitution. The mutations were not found in at least 204 control
alleles, and transfection studies demonstrated ablation of CYP24A1
catabolic activity with either the 3-bp deletion or the R159Q mutation
compared to wildtype.

In a 47-year-old man who had an episode of nephrolithiasis at 19 years
of age and was subsequently asymptomatic until hypercalcemia was
discovered on routine testing at 39 years of age (see 143880), Streeten
et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for the E143del mutation in
CYP24A1. The patient had a suppressed parathyroid hormone level,
elevated levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, and
low levels of 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. His adult son with
normocalciuria was heterozygous for the E143del mutation.

.0003
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, GLU151TER

See 126065.0002 and Schlingmann et al. (2011).

.0004
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, ARG159GLN

See 126065.0002 and Schlingmann et al. (2011).

In molecular-modeling simulations, Ji and Shen (2011) found that the
R159Q mutation changes interactions between the heme molecule and
24-hydroxylase, due to destruction of hydrogen bonds between the heme
propionate group and arginine.

.0005
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, ARG396TRP (dbSNP rs114368325)

In a German patient who developed infantile hypercalcemia (143880)
following a 600,000 IU oral dose of vitamin D, Schlingmann et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 1186C-T transition in the CYP24A1 gene,
resulting in an arg396-to-trp (R396W) substitution. In 2 Russian
brothers who developed infantile hypercalcemia while taking 500 IU of
vitamin D per day, the R396W mutation was found in compound
heterozygosity with a 1226T-C transition in the CYP24A1 gene, resulting
in a leu409-to-ser (L409S; 126065.0006) substitution; and in 2 unrelated
patients from Germany who developed hypercalcemia of infancy after 2 and
3 oral boluses of 600,000 IU of vitamin D, respectively, previously
reported by Misselwitz and Hesse (1986), Schlingmann et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for the R396W mutation and a 964G-A
transition in CYP24A1, resulting in a glu322-to-lys (E322K; 126065.0007)
substitution. The E322K mutation was not found in at least 204 control
alleles; the R396W and L409S mutations, which had previously been
annotated as putative polymorphisms in the dbSNP database, were tested
in a sample of 1,024 control alleles, and L409S was not detected, but
R396W was identified in 4 of the control alleles. Transfection studies
demonstrated that R396W and E322K mutations resulted in complete loss of
CYP24A1 catabolic activity, whereas the L409S mutation retained small
but measurable levels of activity.

In molecular-modeling simulations, Ji and Shen (2011) found that the
R396W mutation changes interactions between the heme molecule and
24-hydroxylase, due to destruction of hydrogen bonds between the heme
propionate group and arginine.

.0006
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, LEU409SER (dbSNP rs6068812)

See 126065.0005 and Schlingmann et al. (2011).

In molecular-modeling simulations, Ji and Shen (2011) found that the
L409S mutation weakens the binding of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 to
24-hydroxylase.

.0007
HYPERCALCEMIA, INFANTILE
CYP24A1, GLU322LYS

See 126065.0005 and Schlingmann et al. (2011).

In molecular-modeling simulations, Ji and Shen (2011) found that the
E322K mutation changes interactions between the heme molecule and
24-hydroxylase. Schlingmann et al. (2011) stated that the E322K mutation
abolishes important hydrogen bonding between the I-helix and the
B-prime/C loop backbone, affecting their relative orientation and that
of the B-prime helix and thereby preventing correct protein folding and
stability.

REFERENCE 1. Albertson, D. G.; Ylstra, B.; Segraves, R.; Collins, C.; Dairkee,
S. H.; Kowbel, D.; Kuo, W.- L.; Gray, J. W.; Pinkel, D.: Quantitative
mapping of amplicon structure by array CGH identifies CYP24 as a candidate
oncogene. Nature Genet. 25: 144-146, 2000.

2. Chen, K.-S.; DeLuca, H. F.: Cloning of the human 1-alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D-3 24-hydroxylase gene promoter and identification of two vitamin
D-responsive elements. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1263: 1-9, 1995.

3. Chen, K.-S.; Prahl, J. M.; DeLuca, H. F.: Isolation and expression
of human 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 24-hydroxylase cDNA. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 90: 4543-4547, 1993.

4. Hahn, C. N.; Baker, E.; Laslo, P.; May, B. K.; Omdahl, J. L.; Sutherland,
G. R.: Localization of the human vitamin D 24-hydroxylase gene (CYP24)
to chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 62: 192-193,
1993.

5. Ji, H.-F.; Shen, L.: CYP24A1 mutations in idiopathic infantile
hypercalcemia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 365: 1741 only, 2011.

6. Kasuga, H.; Hosogane, N.; Matsuoka, K.; Mori, I.; Sakura, Y.; Shimakawa,
K.; Shinki, T.; Suda, T.; Taketomi, S.: Characterization of transgenic
rats constitutively expressing vitamin D-24-hydroxylase gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 297: 1332-1338, 2002.

7. Labuda, M.; Lemieux, N.; Tihy, F.; Prinster, C.; Glorieux, F. H.
: Human 25-hydroxyvitamin D 24-hydroxylase cytochrome P450 subunit
maps to a different chromosomal location than that of pseudovitamin
D-deficient rickets. J. Bone Miner. Res. 8: 1397-1406, 1993.

8. Liu, P. T.; Stenger, S.; Li, H.; Wenzel, L.; Tan, B. H.; Krutzik,
S. R.; Ochoa, M. T.; Schauber, J.; Wu, K.; Meinken, C.; Kamen, D.
L.; Wagner, M.; and 10 others: Toll-like receptor triggering of
a vitamin D-mediated human antimicrobial response. Science 311:
1770-1773, 2006.

9. Malas, S.; Peters, J.; Abbott, C.: The genes for endothelin 3,
vitamin D 24-hydroxylase, and melanocortin 3 receptor map to distal
mouse chromosome 2, in the region of conserved synteny with human
chromosome 20. Mammalian Genome 5: 577-579, 1994.

10. Misselwitz, J.; Hesse, V.: Hypercalcemia following prophylactic
vitamin D administration. Kinderarztl. Prax. 54: 431-438, 1986.

11. Ogunkolade, W. B.; Boucher, B. J.; Busitn, S. A.; Burrin, J. M.;
Noonan, K.; Mannan, N.; Hitman, G. A.: Vitamin D metabolism in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells is influenced by chewing 'betel nut' (Areca
catechu) and vitamin D status. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 2612-2617,
2006.

12. Ohyama, Y.; Noshiro, M.; Okuda, K.: Cloning and expression of
cDNA encoding 25-hydroxyvitamin D(3) 24-hydroxylase. FEBS Lett. 278:
195-198, 1991.

13. Schlingmann, K. P.; Jones, G.; Konrad, M.: Reply to Streeten
et al. and Ji and Shen. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 365: 1742-1743,
2011.

14. Schlingmann, K. P.; Kaufmann, M.; Weber, S.; Irwin, A.; Goos,
C.; John, U.; Misselwitz, J.; Klaus, G.; Kuwertz-Broking, E.; Fehrenbach,
H.; Wingen, A. M.; Guran, T.; Hoenderop, J. G.; Bindels, R. J.; Prosser,
D. E.; Jones, G.; Konrad, M.: Mutations in CYP24A1 and idiopathic
infantile hypercalcemia. New Eng. J. Med. 365: 410-421, 2011.

15. Streeten, E. A.; Zarbalian, K.; Damcott, C. M.: CYP24A1 mutations
in idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 365:
1741-1742, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/9/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/5/2011
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/18/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/12/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/26/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/24/1993

EDITED carol: 11/09/2011
terry: 11/9/2011
terry: 10/27/2011
wwang: 8/8/2011
terry: 8/5/2011
alopez: 7/18/2007
mgross: 4/12/2006
carol: 3/6/2003
mgross: 1/7/2003
terry: 1/6/2003
alopez: 5/26/2000
carol: 9/27/1999
carol: 6/24/1993

614584	TITLE *614584 PROLYL 4-HYDROXYLASE, TRANSMEMBRANE; P4HTM
;;PROLINE HYDROXYLASE 4; PH4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

P4HTM belongs to a family of enzymes that downregulate expression of
hypoxia-induced transcription factors (HIFs; see 603348) under normoxic
conditions. These enzymes hydroxylate specific proline residues within
HIF oxygen-dependent degradation domains, inducing their
proteasome-dependent degradation (Oehme et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for sequences similar to the collagen prolyl
4-hydroxylase P4HA1 (176710), followed by RT-PCR of human brain mRNA,
Oehme et al. (2002) cloned P4HTM, which they called PH4. The deduced
502-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 56.7 kD. The
N-terminal half of PH4 has a transmembrane domain and an EF-hand motif,
and the C-terminal half has a putative catalytic domain containing iron-
and oxoglutarate-binding motifs. Quantitative RT-PCR detected variable
PH4 expression in the 17 human tissues examined, with highest expression
in brain, followed by adrenal gland and kidney. Lowest expression was
detected in prostate. Epitope-tagged PH4 colocalized with an endoplasmic
reticulum tracer in transfected COS-7 cells.

Koivunen et al. (2007) found that the full-length 502-amino acid P4HTM
protein contains a putative endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention signal
and 2 potential N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected
P4HTM transcripts of 2.7, 2.3, and 1.8 kb in several human tissues. The
1.8-kb transcript was the main form in all tissues except brain. PCR
analysis detected P4HTM in human epiphyseal cartilage and fibroblasts
and in all tumor samples tested. N-end sequencing revealed that
endogenous and recombinant P4HTM proteins were expressed as full-length
forms and N-terminally truncated forms that began with asp88. Gel
filtration and Western blot analysis detected both full-length and
N-terminally truncated P4HTM in fractions corresponding to molecular
masses of about 105 to 120 kD and 85 to 90 kD, respectively.
Immunoelectron microscopy revealed that the catalytic domain of P4HTM
was expressed on the luminal face of ER membranes. Database analysis
revealed orthologs of P4HTM in vertebrates only.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transfected COS-7 cells, Oehme et al. (2002) showed that human
PH4, like EGLN3 (606426), reduced the transactivation activities of
mouse Hif1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348) and Hif2-alpha (EPAS1; 603349) on a
reporter construct containing tandem hypoxia-responsive elements. Loss
of Hif2-alpha activity correlated with loss of Hif2-alpha protein. Oehme
et al. (2002) hypothesized that PH4 has a role in cellular oxygen
sensing.

By Western blot analysis, Koivunen et al. (2007) found that hypoxia
induced expression of P4HTM in several human cell lines and in adult
human fibroblasts. Overexpression of P4HTM reduced the cellular content
of the isolated transfected HIF1-alpha and HIF2-alpha oxygen-dependent
degradation domains. In contrast, small interfering RNA-mediated
silencing of P4HTM increased full-length HIF1-alpha content. Purified
recombinant P4HTM hydroxylated prolines in HIF1-alpha at 2 sites, with
preference for the more C-terminal site. P4HTM also catalyzed an
uncoupled decarboxylation of 2-oxoglutarate, but it did not hydroxylate
procollagen polypeptides in vitro.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the P4HTM gene to chromosome 3p21.31 based on an
alignment of the P4HTM sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000269) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/19/2012.

2. Koivunen, P.; Tiainen, P.; Hyvarinen, J.; Williams, K. E.; Sormunen,
R.; Klaus, S. J.; Kivirikko, K. I.; Myllyharju, J.: An endoplasmic
reticulum transmembrane prolyl 4-hydroxylase is induced by hypoxia
and acts on hypoxia-inducible factor alpha. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
30544-30552, 2007.

3. Oehme, F.; Ellinghaus, P.; Kolkhof, P.; Smith, T. J.; Ramakrishnan,
S.; Hutter, J.; Schramm, M.; Flamme, I.: Overexpression of PH-4,
a novel putative proline 4-hydroxylase, modulates activity of hypoxia-inducible
transcription factors. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 296: 343-349,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/19/2012

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2012

609959	TITLE *609959 MYELOID-ASSOCIATED DIFFERENTIATION MARKER; MYADM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display analysis, Pettersson et al. (2000) identified
mouse myeloid-associated differentiation marker (Myadm) based upon its
varied expression during differentiation of an Il3 (147740)-dependent
myeloid progenitor cell line established from mouse bone marrow. The
deduced protein contains 8 potential transmembrane domains and several
potential phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis on hematopoietic
cell lines revealed restricted expression of Myadm to cells belonging to
the myeloid lineage. Expression was also seen in mature granulocytes and
macrophages. Tissue analysis showed high expression of Myadm in lung and
more moderate expression in bone marrow and brain. RT-PCR experiments
demonstrated expression of Myadm in multipotent cells
(c-kit+Sca-1+Lin-), erythroid progenitors, and early lymphoid
progenitors.

By database searching with mouse Myadm as query, Cui et al. (2002)
identified human MYADM and cloned a full-length MYADM sequence from a
human bone marrow cDNA library. The deduced 298-amino acid protein has a
predicted molecular mass of 32 kD. It contains 7 predicted transmembrane
domains and shows sequence homology with the T-cell differentiation
protein MAL (188860) and plasmolipin (PLMP; 600340). MYADM shares 75.8%
overall sequence identity with mouse Myadm, with highest levels of
conservation seen in the predicted transmembrane regions. Northern blot
analysis detected 3.3- and 2.2-kb MYADM transcripts. Expression of the
longer transcript was seen in all tissues tested except thymus;
expression of the shorter transcript was seen in heart, placenta, lung,
pancreas, testis, and peripheral blood leukocytes and was undetectable
in all other tissues. Semiquantitative PCR assays showed that expression
of MYADM was not only significantly higher in peripheral blood
leukocytes than in bone marrow cells, but was also upregulated in NB4
cells (derived from a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia) that
were treated with the differentiation inducer all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA).

GENE FUNCTION

Using antisense Myadm oligonucleotides, Pettersson et al. (2000) showed
that downregulation of mouse Myadm expression in pluripotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells inhibited colony formation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cui et al. (2002) determined that the MYADM gene contains 3 exons and
spans 7.1 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Cui et al. (2002) mapped the MYADM gene to
chromosome 19q13.33-q13.4.

REFERENCE 1. Cui, W.; Yu, L.; He, H.; Chu, Y.; Gao, J.; Wan, B.; Tang, L.; Zhao,
S.: Cloning of human myeloid-associated differentiation marker (MYADM)
gene whose expression was up-regulated in NB4 cells induced by all-trans
retinoic acid. Molec. Biol. Rep. 28: 123-138, 2002.

2. Pettersson, M.; Dannaeus, K.; Nilsson, K.; Jonsson, J.-I.: Isolation
of MYADM, a novel hematopoietic-associated marker gene expressed in
multipotent progenitor cells and up-regulated during myeloid differentiation. J.
Leuko. Biol. 67: 423-431, 2000.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 3/15/2006

EDITED carol: 03/15/2006

609342	TITLE *609342 GASTRIC INTRINSIC FACTOR; GIF
;;IF;;
TRANSCOBALAMIN III; TCN3;;
TCN III
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hewitt et al. (1991) isolated a human gastric intrinsic factor cDNA
clone using a rat cDNA clone as a probe. Comparison of the predicted
amino acid sequences showed 80% identity between human and rat GIF.

MAPPING

By analysis of a panel of human/mouse somatic cell hybrids, Hewitt et
al. (1991) mapped the GIF gene to human chromosome 11. Southern analysis
of genomic DNA indicated the presence of a single human IF gene.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and mouse/hamster somatic cell
hybrid analysis, Fernandes et al. (1998) mapped the Gif gene to mouse
chromosome 19. The high degree of homology of synteny between human
11q13 and mouse chromosome 19 suggests that the human GIF gene is
located at 11q13.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Andersen et al. (2010) presented the crystal structure of the complex
between GIF-cobalamin and the cubilin (CUBN; 602997)-GIF-cubilin-binding
region determined at 3.3-angstrom resolution. The structure provided
insight into how several CUB (complement C1r/C1s, Uegf, Bmp1) domains
collectively function as modular ligand-binding regions, and how 2
distant CUB domains embrace the cubilin molecule by binding the 2 GIF
domains in a calcium-dependent manner. This dual-point model provides a
probable explanation of how cubilin indirectly induces ligand-receptor
coupling. Finally, the comparison of calcium-binding CUB domains and the
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR; 606945)-type A modules suggested
that the electrostatic pairing of a basic ligand arginine/lysine residue
with calcium-coordinating acidic aspartates/glutamates is a common theme
of calcium-dependent ligand-receptor interactions.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Gordon et al. (2004) sequenced all the exons of the GIF gene in 5
patients with intrinsic factor deficiency (IFD; 261000) and in the
parents of 4 of the patients. A single-nucleotide substitution at
position 2 of codon 5 (68A-G) in 1 or both copies of the GIF gene was
identified in all of the subjects, with additional changes observed in 2
patients. When COS-7 cells were transfected with plasmids containing
either the normal or the mutant cDNA, the secreted GIF proteins had a
similar rate of secretion and sensitivity to pepsin degradation. Three
subjects were homozygous for the missense mutation, changing codon 5
from CAG (glutamine) to CGG (arginine) (Q5R; 609342.0001). Three
subjects were homozygous for the mutation and 2 subjects were
heterozygous, 1 of whom was apparently a compound heterozygote at
positions 1 and 2 of the fifth codon. The other patient heterozygous for
position 2 had 1 heterozygous unaffected parent. Most parents were
heterozygous for this base exchange, confirming the pattern of autosomal
recessive inheritance for congenital IF deficiency. cDNA encoding GIF
was mutated at basepair g.68A-G. The apparent size, secretion rate, and
sensitivity to pepsin hydrolysis of the expressed IF were similar to
native intrinsic factor. The allelic frequency of 68A-G was 0.067 and
0.038 in 2 control populations from Germany and Spain, respectively.
Gordon et al. (2004) concluded that the Q5R variant was not the cause of
the phenotype but was associated with congenital IF deficiency in such a
way as to serve as a marker for inheritance of this disorder.

In an 11-year-old girl with severe anemia and cobalamin (Cbl)
deficiency, Yassin et al. (2004) identified a 4-base deletion in the
coding region of the GIF gene (609342.0002). The bone marrow showed
frank megaloblastic morphology, and the Schilling test indicated a
failure to absorb Cbl that was corrected by coadministration of
intrinsic factor. Pentagastrin administration induced acid secretion,
but the gastric juice lacked intrinsic factor as determined by Cbl
binding and other tests.

In 7 families previously diagnosed with Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome
(261100) due to inconclusive results on radiocobalamin absorption tests,
but who were negative for mutations in the cubilin (CUBN; 602997) or the
AMN (605799) gene, Tanner et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for 6
different mutations in the GIF gene (609342.0002-609342.0007). Tanner et
al. (2005) proposed that rather than radiocobalamin absorption tests,
mutation analysis of the CUBN, AMN, and GIF genes may be the diagnostic
method of choice for cobalamin absorption disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY, CONGENITAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
GIF, GLN5ARG

Gordon et al. (2004) studied 5 patients with congenital intrinsic factor
deficiency (261000) and in all found the identical variant, 68A-G, in
codon 5 of the GIF gene, changing the mature protein from glutamine to
arginine at residue 5. Three subjects were homozygous for this base
exchange and 2 were heterozygous. Since the apparent size, secretion
rate, and sensitivity to pepsin hydrolysis of the intrinsic factor
produced by mutation of the GIF gene and transfection into COS-7 cells
were similar to native GIF, Gordon et al. (2004) concluded that the
sequence aberration was not the cause of the phenotype but could serve
as a marker for inheritance of the disorder. In 2 control populations,
German and Spanish, the frequency of the change from A to G at
nucleotide 68 was 0.067 and 0.038, respectively.

Tanner et al. (2005) analyzed exon 1 of the GIF gene in a set of 176
unrelated controls and found 140 homozygotes for the 68A allele, 6
homozygotes for the 68G allele, and 30 heterozygotes, resulting in an
observed allele frequency of 0.119 for the 68G allele. They suggested
that homozygosity for the 68G polymorphism has no clinical significance
in IFD.

.0002
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GIF, 4-BP DEL, 183GAAT

In an 11-year-old girl with severe anemia and cobalamin deficiency
(261000), Yassin et al. (2004) identified a 4-bp deletion
(c183_186delGAAT) spanning positions 104 to 107 in exon 2 of the GIF
gene as the basis of inherited intrinsic factor deficiency.

In an affected member of an African (Guinea-Bissau) family with
hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency, Tanner et al. (2005) identified
homozygosity for the 183delGAAT mutation, resulting in a frameshift at
codon 61 predicted to lead to loss of function. The parents were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0003
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GIF, IVS1DS, G-A, +1

In 2 affected members of a French family with hereditary intrinsic
factor deficiency (261000), Tanner et al. (2005) identified homozygosity
for a G-to-A transition at +1 in the donor splice site of intron 1 of
the GIF gene, predicted to lead to a loss of function. The parents were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0004
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GIF, IVS1AS, G-A, -1

In 7 affected members of 2 Kuwaiti families with hereditary intrinsic
factor deficiency (261000), Tanner et al. (2005) identified homozygosity
for a G-A transition at -1 in the acceptor splice site of intron 1 of
the GIF gene that destroyed the consensus sequence and was predicted to
lead to loss of function. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0005
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GIF, SER46LEU

In 4 affected members of a Turkish family with hereditary intrinsic
factor deficiency (261000), Tanner et al. (2005) identified homozygosity
for a 137C-T transition in exon 2 of the GIF gene, replacing the
conserved serine residue 46 with a leucine (S46L). The parents were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0006
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GIF, 1-BP DEL 161A

In an affected member of a Turkish family with hereditary intrinsic
factor deficiency (261000), Tanner et al. (2005) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp deletion (161delA) in exon 2 of the GIF gene, resulting in a
frameshift at codon 54 predicted to lead to loss of function. The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0007
INTRINSIC FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GIF, 1-BP INS, 1175T

In an affected member of a Turkish family with hereditary intrinsic
factor deficiency (261000), Tanner et al. (2005) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp insertion (1175insT) in exon 8 of the GIF gene, resulting in
a frameshift at codon 393 predicted to lead to loss of function. The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Andersen, C. B. F.; Madsen, M.; Storm, T.; Moestrup, S. K.; Andersen,
G. R.: Structural basis for receptor recognition of vitamin-B12-intrinsic
factor complexes. Nature 464: 445-448, 2010.

2. Fernandes, M.; Poirier, C.; Lespinasse, F.; Carle, G. F.: The
mouse homologs of human GIF, DDB1, and CFL1 genes are located on chromosome
19. Mammalian Genome 9: 339-342, 1998.

3. Gordon, M. M.; Brada, N.; Remacha, A.; Badell, I.; del Rio, E.;
Baiget, M.; Santer, R.; Quadros, E. V.; Rothenberg, S. P.; Alpers,
D. H.: A genetic polymorphism in the coding region of the gastric
intrinsic factor gene (GIF) is associated with congenital intrinsic
factor deficiency. Hum. Mutat. 23: 85-91, 2004.

4. Hewitt, J. E.; Gordon, M. M.; Taggart, R. T.; Mohandas, T. K.;
Alpers, D. H.: Human gastric intrinsic factor: characterization of
cDNA and genomic clones and localization to human chromosome 11. Genomics 10:
432-440, 1991.

5. Tanner, S. M.; Li, Z.; Perko, J. D.; Oner, C.; Cetin, M.; Altay,
C.; Yurtsever, Z.; David, K. L.; Vaivre, L.; Ismail, E. A.; Granbeck,
R.; de la Chapelle, A.: Hereditary juvenile cobalamin deficiency
caused by mutations in the intrinsic factor gene. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 4130-4133, 2005.

6. Yassin, F.; Rothenberg, S. P.; Rao, S.; Gordon, M. M.; Alpers,
D. H.; Quadros, E. V.: Identification of a 4-base deletion in the
gene in inherited intrinsic factor deficiency. Blood 103: 1515-1517,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/29/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/28/2005

EDITED alopez: 04/20/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
carol: 3/4/2008
alopez: 3/29/2006
ckniffin: 10/19/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 5/5/2005
terry: 4/29/2005
carol: 4/29/2005

600753	TITLE *600753 GOLGI APPARATUS PROTEIN 1; GLG1
;;GOLGI SIALOGLYCOPROTEIN MG-160;;
E-SELECTIN LIGAND 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; ESL1
DESCRIPTION MG-160, originally isolated from rat brain, is a conserved membrane
sialoglycoprotein residing in the medial cisternae of the Golgi
apparatus of most cells (Gonatas et al., 1989). MG-160 appears early in
the developing chick embryo and persists in most cells throughout
embryonic development and in the adult animal (Mourelatos et al., 1995).
The early appearance and ubiquitous presence of MG-160 suggests that the
protein plays an important role in the biogenesis and function of the
Golgi apparatus. MG-160 binds basic fibroblast growth factor (FGFB;
134920) and displays 90% identity of amino acids with CFR, a
cysteine-rich receptor for several fibroblast growth factors that was
isolated from chick embryos. Unlike the fibroblast growth factor
receptors involved in signal transduction, MG-160 and its chick homolog,
CFR, do not display the extracellular Ig-like repeats and the
intracytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains. In addition to CFR, MG-160 is
highly homologous to ESL-1, a ligand for E-selectin (SELE; 131210).

Mourelatos et al. (1996) isolated and characterized human GLG1 cDNAs.
The full-length cDNA encodes a predicted 1,179-amino acid protein that
has a signal peptide, a proline- and glutamine-rich region, a
cysteine-rich domain containing 5 potential asparagine-linked
glycosylation sites, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain, and a short
carboxy-terminal tail. The proline- and glutamine-rich segment contains
a polyglutamine stretch which is encoded by an uninterrupted exonic
sequence of CAG-CAA repeats. Human GLG1 shows between 88% and 95%
overall amino acid identity with rat Glg1, mouse Esl1, and chicken CRF.
The authors detected 3 transcripts of 10, 5, and 3.8 kb in several human
fetal and adult tissues by Northern blot analysis.

Mourelatos et al. (1995) localized the human GLG1 gene for MG-160 to
16q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. If MG-160, as has been
postulated, mediates the secretion of fibroblast growth factors, the
chromosomal localization of the gene may facilitate understanding of the
role of the gene in human disease.

By Southern blot analysis of an interspecific backcross panel, Willmroth
and Beaudet (1999) mapped Esl1, the mouse homolog of the GLG1 gene, to
chromosome 8, in a region showing homology of synteny to human 16q. The
mouse gene contains 27 exons and extends over 75 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Gonatas, J. O.; Mezitis, S. G. E.; Stieber, A.; Fleischer, B.;
Gonatas, N. K.: MG-160. A novel sialoglycoprotein of the medical
cisternae of the Golgi apparatus. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 646-653, 1989.

2. Mourelatos, Z.; Gonatas, J. O.; Cinato, E.; Gonatas, N. K.: Cloning
and sequence analysis of the human MG160, a fibroblast growth factor
and E-selectin binding membrane sialoglycoprotein of the Golgi apparatus. DNA
Cell Biol. 15: 1121-1128, 1996.

3. Mourelatos, Z.; Gonatas, J. O.; Nycum, L. M.; Gonatas, N. K.; Biegel,
J. A.: Assignment of the GLG1 gene for MG-160, a fibroblast growth
factor and E-selectin binding membrane sialoglycoprotein of the Golgi
apparatus, to chromosome 16q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 28:
354-355, 1995.

4. Willmroth, F.; Beaudet, A. L.: Structure of the murine E-selectin
ligand 1 (ESL-1) gene and assignment to chromosome 8. Mammalian Genome 10:
1085-1088, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 07/06/2000
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 6/8/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/28/1995

EDITED mgross: 07/06/2000
psherman: 6/8/1999
jamie: 5/8/1997
mark: 8/28/1995

610589	TITLE *610589 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 11A; ARHGAP11A
;;KIAA0013
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
leukemia cell line cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned ARHGAP11A,
which they designated KIAA0013. The cDNA contains a repetitive element
at its 3-prime end, and the deduced 1,023-amino acid protein has a
rhoGAP domain and a putative tyrosine phosphorylation site. Northern
blot analysis detected highest expression in thymus, intermediate
expression in placenta, kidney, testis, and colon, weak expression in
heart, brain, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, pancreas, spleen, ovary,
small intestine, and peripheral blood leukocytes, and none in prostate.

Nomura et al. (1994) presented sequence features, including
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity and regions of similarity to other known
genes, of genes identified by Nomura et al. (1994).

MAPPING

By PCR of a panel of human-rodent hybrid cell lines, Nomura et al.
(1994) mapped the ARHGAP11A gene to chromosome 15.

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly sampled cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1 (Supplement). DNA Res. 1 (Suppl.): 47-56, 1994.

2. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly samples cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 27-35, 1994. Note: Erratum: DNA Res. 2: 210 only,
1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2006

EDITED alopez: 04/30/2013
alopez: 6/27/2007
wwang: 11/21/2006

614092	TITLE *614092 RAB-INTERACTING LYSOSOMAL PROTEIN-LIKE 1; RILPL1
;;RILP-LIKE PROTEIN 1; RLP1;;
GAPDH COMPETITOR OF SIAH PROTEIN ENHANCES LIFE; GOSPEL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to RILP (607848),
Wang et al. (2004) identified RILPL1 and RILPL2 (614093), which they
called RLP1 and RLP2, respectively. The deduced 403-amino acid RLP1
protein shares highest identity with RILP in 2 domains that Wang et al.
(2004) called RILP homology domain-1 (RH1) and RH2. Overall, RLP1 shares
32% and 22% amino acid identity with RLP2 and RILP, respectively.
Proteins containing RH domains were detected in several multicellular
organisms, but not in unicellular organisms. PCR analysis of human
tissues detected RLP1 expression in heart, brain, placenta, lung,
skeletal muscle, and pancreas, but not in liver or kidney.
Epitope-tagged RLP1 was expressed in the cytoplasm of transfected normal
rat kidney cells.

GENE FUNCTION

N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) stimulation of rodent cerebellar granule
neurons elicits nitric oxide generation, followed by S-nitrosylation of
Gapdh (138400), binding between Gapdh and Siah (see 602212),
Siah-mediated nuclear translocation of Gapdh, and neurotoxicity. Sen et
al. (2009) found that rat Rilpl1, which they called Gospel, bound the
N-terminal region of Gapdh and competed with Siah for Gapdh binding,
thereby preventing Gapdh nuclear translocation. S-nitrosylation of
Gospel was required for binding to Gapdh, as a Gospel mutant unable to
be S-nitrosylated was not neuroprotective. Overexpression of Gospel
reduced nuclear accumulation of Gapdh in HEK293 and mouse cortical
neuron cultures and reduced NMDA-glutamate neuronal excitotoxicity.
Conversely, depletion of Gospel by RNA interference enhanced Gapdh
nuclear accumulation and cell death in primary neuron cultures.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sen et al. (2009) determined that the RILPL1 gene contains at least 7
exons.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the RILPL1 gene to chromosome 12q24.31 based on an
alignment of the RILPL1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK096697) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Sen et al. (2009) stated that the mouse Rilpl1 gene maps to a region of
chromosome 5 that is syntenic with human chromosome 12q24.31.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/11/2011.

2. Sen, N.; Hara, M. R.; Ahmad, A. S.; Cascio, M. B.; Kamiya, A.;
Ehmsen, J. T.; Agrawal, N.; Hester, L.; Dore, S.; Snyder, S. H.; Sawa,
A.: GOSPEL: a neuroprotective protein that binds to GAPDH upon S-nitrosylation. Neuron 63:
81-91, 2009. Note: Erratum: Neuron 63: 709 only, 2009.

3. Wang, T.; Wong, K. K.; Hong, W.: A unique region of RILP distinguishes
it from its related proteins in its regulation of lysosomal morphology
and interaction with Rab7 and Rab34. Molec. Biol. Cell 15: 815-826,
2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/15/2011

EDITED terry: 07/27/2012
mgross: 7/15/2011

123940	TITLE *123940 KERATIN 4; KRT4
;;K4;;
CYTOKERATIN 4; CYK4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Intermediate filaments are protein polymers which, together with actin
filaments and microtubules, form the cytoskeleton of cells. In
epithelial cells the intermediate filaments are made up of keratins, a
large family of related polypeptides whose patterns of expression vary
with cell type as well as with stage of epithelial differentiation. The
more than 20 different keratins encoded by at least as many
differentially expressed genes in humans (see review by Fuchs, 1988) can
be subdivided into 2 classes: type I keratins (K10-K19) are small
(40-56.5 kD) and relatively acidic (pI = 4.5-5.5), whereas type II
keratins (K1-K9) are larger (53-68 kD) and more basic (pI = 5.5-7.5).
Filament formation usually requires expression of keratins in pairs
consisting of 1 type I and 1 type II polypeptide. The specific keratins
expressed characterize the type of epithelial differentiation. For
example, K5 (148040) and K14 (148066) are synthesized in the basal cell
layer of all stratified squamous epithelia, while, in the course of
stratification, terminally differentiating epidermal cells express K1
(139350) and K10 (148080), and suprabasal cells (i.e., maturing cells of
nonkeratinizing squamous epithelia) express K4 and K13 (148065). Using
SDS-PAGE, Mischke et al. (1990) identified 2 electrophoretic variants of
the human keratin K4 that are expressed in squamous nonkeratinizing
epithelia lining the upper digestive tract. Based on a large population
sample, they concluded that 2 codominant alleles, a and b, are in
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and studies in 2 families confirmed the
mendelian nature of the variation. They referred to polymorphism also of
the K1 and K10 keratins of human epidermis (Mischke and Wild, 1987).

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe in the analysis of human-hamster cell hybrid DNAs,
Romano et al. (1987, 1988) mapped the cytokeratin-4 gene to chromosome
12. Barletta et al. (1989, 1990) used in situ hybridization to
demonstrate that the cytokeratin-4 gene localizes to human chromosome
12p11.2-q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 Scottish kindreds with white sponge nevus
(193900), Rugg et al. (1995) identified heterozygosity for a mutation in
the 1A domain of the KRT4 gene (123940.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WHITE SPONGE NEVUS
KRT4, 3-BP DEL, ASN8

In affected members of 2 Scottish kindreds with white sponge nevus
(193900), Rugg et al. (1995) used RT-PCR followed by direct sequencing
of K4 to demonstrate heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the 1A
domain. This deletion occurred in a (CAA)3 repeat and resulted in
deletion of amino acid asparagine-8 in the highly conserved helix
initiation motif. This residue is conserved between all type I, type II,
and type III intermediate filament proteins and is therefore predicted
to be highly important to keratin filament assembly and/or integrity.
Affected members of the 2 kindreds were found to share a common
haplotype with 2 polymorphic flanking markers known to be physically
very close to K4 and so these families were probably related. A full
report of these findings appeared in Rugg et al. (1995); the authors
noted that this mutation in KRT4 is identical to a mutation in KRT6,
identified as the cause of pachyonychia congenita (148041.0001). Due to
common codon usage, several type II keratins possess the ACC
trinucleotide repeat and thus this may represent a mutational 'hotspot'
in these genes.

.0002
WHITE SPONGE NEVUS
KRT4, 3-BP INS, GLN153

Terrinoni et al. (2000) reported a heterozygous 3-bp insertion (ACA) in
the K4 gene in affected members of an Italian family with white sponge
nevus (193900). The insertion occurred between basepairs 458 and 459 and
resulted in the insertion of a glutamine residue between the second and
third amino acids of the helix initiation motif of the 1A alpha-helical
domain. The phenotype was considered mild, as only part of the buccal
and labial mucosa was involved.

.0003
WHITE SPONGE NEVUS
KRT4, GLU449LYS

In a Taiwanese patient with white sponge nevus (193900), Chao et al.
(2003) found a heterozygous 1345G-A transition in the KRT4 gene,
resulting in a glu449-to-lys (E449K) amino acid change in the 2B domain
of the K4 polypeptide.

REFERENCE 1. Barletta, C.; Batticane, N.; Ragusa, R. M.; Leube, R.; Peschle,
C.; Romano, V.: Subchromosomal localization of two human cytokeratin
genes (KRT4 and KRT15) by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 54: 148-150, 1990.

2. Barletta, C.; Batticane, N.; Ragusa, R. M.; Leube, R. E.; Franke,
W. W.; Peschle, C.; Romano, V.: Sub-chromosomal localization of human
cytokeratin 4, 15, and 19 genes. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
958 only, 1989.

3. Chao, S.-C.; Tsai, Y.-M.; Yang, M.-H.; Lee, J. Y.-Y.: A novel
mutation in the keratin 4 gene causing white sponge naevus. Brit.
J. Derm. 148: 1125-1128, 2003.

4. Fuchs, E.: Keratins as biochemical markers of epithelial differentiation. Trends
Genet. 4: 277-281, 1988.

5. Mischke, D.; Wild, G.: Polymorphic keratins in human epidermis. J.
Invest. Derm. 88: 191-197, 1987.

6. Mischke, D.; Wille, G.; Wild, A. G.: Allele frequencies and segregation
of human polymorphic keratins K4 and K5. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
548-552, 1990.

7. Romano, V.; Bosco, P.; Costa, G.; Leube, R.; Franke, W. W.; Rocchi,
M.; Romeo, G.: Chromosomal assignment of cytokeratin genes. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 683 only, 1987.

8. Romano, V.; Bosco, P.; Rocchi, M.; Costa, G.; Leube, R. E.; Franke,
W. W.; Romeo, G.: Chromosomal assignments of human type I and type
II cytokeratin genes to different chromosomes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 48:
148-151, 1988.

9. Rugg, E. L.; McLean, W. H. I.; Allison, W. E.; Lunny, D. P.; Lane,
E. B.; Macleod, R. I.; Felix, D. H.; Munro, C. S.: White sponge nevus
(WSN) is caused by mutations in mucosal keratin K4. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: A47 only, 1995.

10. Rugg, E. L.; McLean, W. H. I.; Allison, W. E.; Lunny, D. P.; Macleod,
R. I.; Felix, D. H.; Lane, E. B.; Munro, C. S.: A mutation in the
mucosal keratin K4 is associated with oral white sponge nevus. Nature
Genet. 11: 450-452, 1995.

11. Terrinoni, A.; Candi, E.; Oddi, S.; Gobello, T.; Camaione, D.
B.; Mazzanti, C.; Zambruno, G.; Knight, R.; Melino, G.: A glutamine
insertion in the 1A alpha helical domain of the keratin 4 gene in
a familial case of white sponge nevus. J. Invest. Derm. 114: 388-391,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Gary A. Bellus - updated: 9/4/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/25/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/17/1988

EDITED carol: 06/17/2010
alopez: 9/4/2003
alopez: 4/25/2000
mark: 12/20/1995
terry: 12/15/1995
mark: 10/16/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/28/1992
carol: 2/27/1991
carol: 2/26/1991
carol: 2/20/1991

194548	TITLE *194548 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 74; ZNF74
DESCRIPTION See 194543. Aubry et al. (1993) found that the ZNF74 gene was
hemizygously deleted in 23 out of 24 DiGeorge syndrome (188400) patients
tested. ZNF74 mRNA transcripts were detected in human and mouse embryos
but not in adult tissues. Sequence analysis of a corresponding cDNA
demonstrated an open reading frame encoding 12 zinc finger motifs of the
Kruppel/TFIIIA type, as well as N-terminal and C-terminal non-zinc
finger domains. Changes in dosage of this putative transcription factor
occurring with deletion of ZNF74 may be involved in DiGeorge
developmental anomalies.

REFERENCE 1. Aubry, M.; Demczuk, S.; Desmaze, C.; Aikem, M.; Aurias, A.; Julien,
J.-P.; Rouleau, G. A.: Isolation of a zinc finger gene consistently
deleted in DiGeorge syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1583-1587, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/20/1992

EDITED dkim: 06/26/1998
mimadm: 6/7/1995
carol: 10/18/1993
carol: 7/20/1992

611629	TITLE *611629 NEURON NAVIGATOR 3; NAV3
;;PORE MEMBRANE- AND/OR FILAMENT-INTERACTING-LIKE PROTEIN 1; POMFIL1;;
KIAA0938
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) obtained a partial NAV3 clone, which they
designated KIAA0938. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in adult
and fetal brain and in adult ovary, lung, and testis. Weaker expression
was detected in adult heart and spleen and in fetal liver, and little to
no expression was detected adult skeletal muscle, liver, pancreas, and
kidney. NAV3 was expressed moderately in all specific brain regions
examined, with highest level in amygdala.

By screening a fetal brain cDNA library, Coy et al. (2002) cloned NAV3,
which they called POMFIL1. The deduced 1,902-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 205.3 kD. POMFIL1 contains 3 N-terminal
hydrophobic domains, several phosphorylation and N-glycosylation sites,
3 ATP/GTP-binding A motifs (P loops), and coiled-coil structures. The C
terminus of POMFIL1 is highly conserved with the C termini of POMFIL2
(NAV2; 607026) and POMFIL3 (NAV1; 611629) and shares significant
homology with Unc53, a C. elegans protein involved in axon guidance.
Northern blot analysis detected a 9-kb POMFIL1 transcript in adult and
fetal brain, but not in other tissues examined. Immunohistochemical
analysis and in situ hybridization of adult mouse brain and developing
embryos showed that Pomfil1 was predominantly expressed in the central
and peripheral nervous system. Electron microscopy localized Pomfil1 at
the outer nuclear membrane of neurons, and mutation analysis showed
thatthat the N terminus of Pomfil1 was required for nuclear targeting.

By searching databases for homologs of NAV1 and NAV2, followed by PCR of
a human colon carcinoma cell line cDNA library, Maes et al. (2002)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding NAV3. The deduced 2,280-amino acid
protein has an N-terminal calponin (see 600806) homology domain, several
coiled-coil regions, an actin-binding domain, a GTP/ATP-binding domain,
and an AAA-type ATPase domain. Maes et al. (2002) also identified
several NAV3 variants arising from a complex splicing pattern and the
use of alternative transcription start and stop sites. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 10-kb NAV3 transcript and minor shorter
transcripts predominantly in brain. RT-PCR detected variable expression
of several NAV3 transcripts in brain, placenta, colon, and a colon
carcinoma cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Coy et al. (2002) found that Pomfil1 expression increased 24 hours after
brain injury in mice. Immunohistochemical analysis detected Pomfil1 at
the scar, which consisted mainly of astrocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Maes et al. (2002) determined that the NAV3 transcript contains at least
39 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Coy et al. (2002) mapped the NAV3 gene to
chromosome 12q21. Maes et al. (2002) mapped the NAV3 gene to chromosome
12q21.1 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Coy, J. F.; Wiemann, S.; Bechmann, I.; Bachner, D.; Nitsch, R.;
Kretz, O.; Christiansen, H.; Poustka, A.: Pore membrane and/or filament
interacting like protein 1 (POMFIL1) is predominantly expressed in
the nervous system and encodes different protein isoforms. Gene 290:
73-94, 2002.

2. Maes, T.; Barcelo, A.; Buesa, C.: Neuron navigator: a human gene
family with homology to unc-53, a cell guidance gene from Caenorhabditis
elegans. Genomics 80: 21-30, 2002.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/27/2007

EDITED joanna: 02/06/2008
mgross: 11/28/2007
mgross: 11/27/2007

102578	TITLE *102578 ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA, INDUCER OF; PML
;;MYL
PML/RARA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PML tumor suppressor protein is essential for the formation of a
dynamic macromolecular nuclear structure called the PML-nuclear body
(PML-NB). PML-NBs have also been referred to as nuclear domains-10,
Kremer bodies, and PML oncogenic domains. Unlike more specialized
subnuclear structures, PML-NBs are involved in diverse cellular
functions, including sequestration and release of proteins, mediation of
posttranslational modifications, and promotion of nuclear events in
response to various cellular stresses. The PML gene is involved in the
t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; 612376),
which generates the oncogenic fusion protein PML-retinoic acid
receptor-alpha (RARA; 180240). PML-NBs are disrupted in APL and are thus
implicated in APL pathogenesis (Bernardi and Pandolfi, 2007; Salomoni et
al., 2008).

CLONING

In the process of analyzing the RARA gene in the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2-q12)
translocation specifically associated with APL, de The et al. (1990)
identified a novel gene on chromosome 15 involved with the RARA gene in
formation of a fusion product. This gene, which they called MYL for
'myelocytic leukemia,' was transcribed in the same direction as RARA on
the translocated chromosome. De The et al. (1990) identified a 144-bp
region, flanked by canonical splice acceptor and donor sequences, that
had a high probability of being an exon and showed no significant
similarity to any sequence in a protein data bank, thus suggesting that
MYL is a previously undescribed gene. In a later report, de The et al.
(1991) changed the name of the gene from MYL to PML. They reported,
furthermore, that the gene product contains a novel zinc finger motif
common to several DNA-binding proteins.

Goddard et al. (1991) demonstrated that PML is a putative zinc finger
protein and potential transcription factor that is commonly expressed,
with at least 3 major transcription products.

Goddard et al. (1995) cloned the murine Pml gene. The predicted amino
acid sequence of mouse Pml, a ring-finger protein, shows 80% similarity
to that of the human homolog, with greater than 90% similarity in the
proposed functional domains.

MAPPING

The PML gene maps to chromosome 15q22 (de The et al., 1990).

Goddard et al. (1995) mapped the mouse Pml gene to a region of
chromosome 9 with known homology of synteny to the region of 15q where
PML is located.

GENE FUNCTION

While PML does not colocalize with proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA; 176740) or spliceosomes, Dyck et al. (1994) showed that it is
part of a macromolecular structure, composed of at least 4 nuclear
proteins, that is adhered to the nuclear matrix. This structure shows a
labeling pattern resembling spheres that vary in both size and number
among individual cells of a given cell line. PML-RAR expression appears
to disrupt the integrity of these structures (referred to by Dyck et al.
(1994) as PML oncogenic domains, or PODs) and thus appears to be the
possible cause of their altered morphology. Retinoid treatment leads to
a striking reassembly of the POD, which in turn is linked to
differentiation of the leukemic cells. These results identified a novel
macromolecular nuclear structure and suggested that it may serve as a
target of cellular transformation.

From their analysis of the phosphoamino acids of the PML protein, Chang
et al. (1995) concluded that both tyrosine and serine residues are
phosphorylated. To investigate whether expression of the PML protein is
cell cycle related, HeLa cells synchronized at various phases of the
cell cycle were analyzed by immunofluorescence staining and confocal
microscopy. They found that PML was expressed at a lower level in S, G2,
and M phases and at a significantly higher level in G1 phase. Other
studies showed that PML is a phosphoprotein and is associated with the
nuclear matrix. Chang et al. (1995) noted that PML shares many
properties with tumor suppressors such as RB (614041).

Fusion of PML and TIF1A (603406) to RARA and BRAF (164757),
respectively, results in the production of PML-RAR-alpha and
TIF1-alpha-B-RAF (T18) oncoproteins. Zhong et al. (1999) showed that
PML, TIF1-alpha, and RXR-alpha (180245)/RAR-alpha function together in a
retinoic acid-dependent transcription complex. Zhong et al. (1999) found
that PML acts as a ligand-dependent coactivator of RXR-alpha/RARA-alpha.
PML interacts with TIF1-alpha and CREB-binding protein (CBP; 600140). In
PML -/- cells, the retinoic acid-dependent induction of genes such as
RARB2, and the ability of TIF1-alpha and CBP to act as transcriptional
coactivators on retinoic acid, are impaired. Zhong et al. (1999) showed
that both PML and TIF1-alpha are growth suppressors required for the
growth-inhibitory activity of retinoic acid. T18, similar to
PML-RAR-alpha, disrupts the retinoic acid-dependent activity of this
complex in a dominant-negative manner, resulting in a growth advantage.
PML-RAR-alpha was the first example of an oncoprotein generated by the
fusion of 2 molecules participating in the same pathway, specifically
the fusion of a transcription factor to one of its own cofactors. Since
the PML and RAR-alpha pathways converge at the transcriptional level,
there is no need for a double-dominant-negative product to explain the
pathogenesis of APL.

Pearson et al. (2000) reported that the tumor suppressor PML regulates
the p53 response to oncogenic signals. Pearson et al. (2000) found that
oncogenic RAS (190020) upregulates PML expression, and that
overexpression of PML induces senescence in a p53-dependent manner. p53
is acetylated at lysine-382 upon RAS expression, an event that is
essential for its biologic function. RAS induces relocalization of p53
and the CBP acetyltransferase within the PML nuclear bodies and induces
the formation of a trimeric p53-PML-CBP complex. Lastly, RAS-induced p53
acetylation, p53-CBP complex stabilization, and senescence are lost in
PML -/- fibroblasts. Pearson et al. (2000) concluded that their data
established a link between PML and p53 and indicated that integrity of
the PML bodies is required for p53 acetylation and senescence upon
oncogene expression.

Khan et al. (2001) showed that PML interacts with multiple corepressors
(SKI (164780), NCOR, and Sin3A (607776)) and histone deacetylase-1
(HDAC1; 601241), and that this interaction is required for
transcriptional repression mediated by the tumor suppressor MAD
(600021). PML-RARA has the 2 corepressor-interacting sites and inhibits
MAD-mediated repression, suggesting that aberrant binding of PML-RARA to
the corepressor complexes may lead to abrogation of the corepressor
function. The authors suggested that these mechanisms may contribute to
events leading to leukemogenesis.

Turelli et al. (2001) showed that incoming retroviral preintegration
complexes trigger the exportin (602559)-mediated cytoplasmic export of
the SWI/SNF component INI1 (601607) and of the nuclear body constituent
PML. They further showed that the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
genome associates with these proteins before nuclear migration. In the
presence of arsenic, PML was sequestered in the nucleus, and the
efficiency of HIV-mediated transduction was markedly increased. These
results unveiled an unsuspected cellular response that interferes with
the early steps of HIV replication.

Yang et al. (2002) determined that PML and checkpoint kinase-2 (CHEK2;
604373) mediated p53 (191170)-independent apoptosis following gamma
irradiation of several human cell lines. Endogenous CHEK2 bound PML
within PML nuclear bodies. Following gamma irradiation, CHEK2
phosphorylated PML on ser117, causing dissociation of the 2 proteins.
Apoptosis through this mechanism also required ATM (208900). Yang et al.
(2002) concluded that this pathway to gamma irradiation-induced
apoptosis utilizes ATM, CHEK2, and PML. Overexpression of PML alone
caused apoptosis in U937 myeloid cells.

Lin et al. (2004) demonstrated that cytoplasmic PML is an essential
modulator of TGF-beta signaling. Primary cells from Pml-null mice are
resistant to TGF-beta-dependent growth arrest, induction of cellular
senescence, and apoptosis. These cells also have impaired
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the TGF-beta signaling
proteins Smad2 (601366) and Smad3 (603109), as well as impaired
induction of TGF-beta target genes. Expression of cytoplasmic Pml is
induced by TGF-beta. Furthermore, cytoplasmic Pml physically interacts
with Smad2, Smad3, and SMAD anchor for receptor activation (SARA;
603755), and is required for association of Smad2 and Smad3 with Sara
and for the accumulation of Sara and TGF-beta receptor (see 190181) in
the early endosome. The PML-RAR-alpha oncoprotein of acute promyelocytic
leukemia can antagonize cytoplasmic PML function, and acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells have defects in TGF-beta signaling similar
to those observed in Pml-null cells. Lin et al. (2004) concluded that
their findings identified cytoplasmic PML as a critical TGF-beta
receptor and further implicated deregulated TGF-beta signaling in cancer
pathogenesis.

Trotman et al. (2006) demonstrated that the PML tumor suppressor
prevents cancer by inactivating phosphorylated AKT (164730) inside the
nucleus. They found in a mouse model that Pml loss markedly accelerated
tumor onset, incidence, and progression in Pten (601728) heterozygous
mutants, and led to female sterility with features that recapitulate the
phenotype of Foxo3a knockout mice. Trotman et al. (2006) showed that PML
deficiency on its own leads to tumorigenesis in the prostate, a tissue
that is exquisitely sensitive to phosphorylated AKT levels, and
demonstrated that PML specifically recruits the AKT phosphatase PP2a
(see 603113) as well phosphorylated AKT into PML nuclear bodies.
Notably, Trotman et al. (2006) found that PML-null cells are impaired in
PP2a phosphatase activity towards AKT, and thus accumulate nuclear
phosphorylated AKT. As a consequence, the progressive reduction in PML
dose leads to inactivation of FOXO3A-mediated transcription of
proapoptotic BIM (603827) and the cell cycle inhibitor p27(KIP1)
(600778). Trotman et al. (2006) concluded that their results demonstrate
that PML orchestrates a nuclear tumor suppressor network for
inactivation of nuclear phosphorylated AKT, and thus highlight the
importance of AKT compartmentalization in human cancer pathogenesis and
treatment.

Bernardi et al. (2006) identified PML as a critical inhibitor of
neoangiogenesis (the formation of new blood vessels) in vivo, in both
ischemic and neoplastic conditions, through the control of protein
translation. Bernardi et al. (2006) demonstrated that in hypoxic
conditions PML acts as a negative regulator of the synthesis rate of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348) by repressing MTOR
(601231). PML physically interacts with MTOR and negatively regulates
its association with the small GTPase RHEB (601293) by favoring MTOR
nuclear accumulation. Notably, PML-null cells and tumors display higher
sensitivity both in vitro and in vivo to growth inhibition by rapamycin,
and lack of PML inversely correlates with phosphorylation of ribosomal
protein S6 (180460) and tumor angiogenesis in mouse and human tumors.
Thus, Bernardi et al. (2006) concluded that their findings identified
PML as a novel suppressor of mTOR and neoangiogenesis.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human fetal brain cDNA library, followed
by coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Kunapuli et al. (2006) found that
ZNF198 (ZMYM2; 602221) was covalently modified by SUMO1 (601912).
Confocal microscopy showed that a proportion of ZNF198 colocalized with
SUMO1 and PML in PML nuclear bodies, and coimmunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that all 3 proteins resided in a protein complex. Mutation of
the SUMO1-binding site of ZNF198 resulted in degradation of ZNF198,
nuclear dispersal of PML, and loss of punctate PML nuclear bodies.
Kunapuli et al. (2006) found that the MDA-MB-157 breast cancer cell
line, which has a deletion in chromosome 13q11 encompassing the ZNF198
gene, lacked PML nuclear bodies, although PML protein levels appeared
normal. The fusion protein ZNF198/FGFR1 (136350), which occurs in
atypical myeloproliferative disease (613523) and lacks the SUMO1-binding
site of ZNF198, could dimerize with wildtype ZNF198 and disrupt its
function. Expression of ZNF198/FGFR1 disrupted PML sumoylation and
nuclear body formation and resulted in cytoplasmic localization of
SUMO1. Kunapuli et al. (2006) concluded that sumoylation of ZNF198 is
required for PML nuclear body formation.

Ito et al. (2008) showed that PML is critical in the maintenance of
quiescent leukemia-initiating cells and normal hematopoietic stem cells.
They suggested that targeting PML may be an effective treatment for
prevention of relapse in CML (608232).

Song et al. (2008) found that PTEN was aberrantly localized in APL in
which PML function was disrupted by the PML-RARA fusion oncoprotein.
Treatment with drugs that triggered PML-RARA degradation restored
nuclear PTEN. PML opposed the activity of HAUSP (USP7; 602519) towards
PTEN through a mechanism involving DAXX (603186). Confocal microscopy
and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that HAUSP was overexpressed in
prostate cancer and that levels of HAUSP directly correlated with tumor
aggressiveness and with PTEN nuclear exclusion. Song et al. (2008)
concluded that a PML-HAUSP network controls PTEN deubiquitinylation and
subcellular localization, which is perturbed in human cancers.

Arsenic, an ancient drug used in traditional Chinese medicine, has
attracted worldwide interest because it shows substantial anticancer
activity in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Arsenic
trioxide exerts its therapeutic effect by promoting degradation of
PML-RARA. PML and PML-RARA degradation is triggered by their
sumoylation, but the mechanism by which arsenic trioxide induces this
posttranslational modification was unclear. Zhang et al. (2010) showed
that arsenic binds directly to cysteine residues in zinc fingers located
within the RBCC domain of PML-RARA and PML. Arsenic binding induces PML
oligomerization, which increases its interaction with the small
ubiquitin-like protein modifier (SUMO)-conjugating enzyme UBC9 (601661),
resulting in enhanced sumoylation and degradation. Zhang et al. (2010)
concluded that the identification of PML as a direct target of arsenic
trioxide provides insights into the drug's mechanism of action and its
specificity for APL.

In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Giorgi et al. (2010) found that
extranuclear Pml was specifically enriched at the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and at the mitochondria-associated membranes, signaling domains
involved in ER-to-mitochondria calcium ion transport and in induction of
apoptosis. They found Pml in complexes of large molecular size with the
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R; 147265), protein kinase Akt
(164730), and protein phosphatase 2a (176915). Pml was essential for
Akt- and PP2a-dependent modulation of Ip3r phosphorylation and in turn
for Ip3r-mediated calcium ion release from the endoplasmic reticulum.
Giorgi et al. (2010) concluded that their findings provided a
mechanistic explanation for the pleiotropic role of Pml in apoptosis.

- Reviews of PML Function

Bernardi and Pandolfi (2007) reviewed the structure, dynamics, and
functions of PML-NBs.

Salomoni et al. (2008) reviewed the role of PML in tumor suppression.

- PML/RARA Fusion Protein

For information on the generation of PML/RARA fusion genes through
translocations associated with APL, see CYTOGENETICS.

Grignani et al. (1993) expressed the PML-RARA protein in U937 myeloid
precursor cells and showed that they lost the capacity to differentiate
under the action of stimuli such as vitamin D3 and transforming growth
factor beta-1 (TGFB1; 190180), acquired enhanced sensitivity to retinoic
acid, and exhibited a higher growth rate consequent to diminished
apoptotic cell death. These results provided evidence of biologic
activity of the fusion protein and recapitulated critical features of
the promyelocytic leukemia phenotype.

Lin et al. (1998) reported that the association of PLZF-RAR-alpha (see
176797) and PML-RAR-alpha with the histone deacetylase complex (see
605164) helps to determine both the development of APL and the ability
of patients to respond to retinoids. Consistent with these observations,
inhibitors of histone deacetylase dramatically potentiate
retinoid-induced differentiation of retinoic acid-sensitive, and restore
retinoid responses of retinoic acid-resistant, APL cell lines. Lin et
al. (1998) concluded that oncogenic retinoic acid receptors mediate
leukemogenesis through aberrant chromatin acetylation, and that
pharmacologic manipulation of nuclear receptor cofactors may be a useful
approach in the treatment of human disease.

Grignani et al. (1998) demonstrated that both PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha fusion proteins recruit the nuclear corepressor (NCOR;
see 600849)-histone deacetylase complex through the RAR-alpha CoR box.
PLZF-RAR-alpha contains a second, retinoic acid-resistant binding site
in the PLZF amino-terminal region. High doses of retinoic acid release
histone deacetylase activity from PML-RAR-alpha, but not from
PLZF-RAR-alpha. Mutation of the NCOR binding site abolishes the ability
of PML-RAR-alpha to block differentiation, whereas inhibition of histone
deacetylase activity switches the transcriptional and biologic effects
of PLZF-RAR-alpha from being an inhibitor to an activator of the
retinoic acid signaling pathway. Therefore, Grignani et al. (1998)
concluded that recruitment of histone deacetylase is crucial to the
transforming potential of APL fusion proteins, and the different effects
of retinoic acid on the stability of the PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha corepressor complexes determines the differential
response of APLs to retinoic acid.

RAR and acute myeloid leukemia-1 (AML1; 151385) transcription factors
are found in leukemias as fusion proteins with PML and ETO (CBFA2T1;
133435), respectively. Association of PML-RAR and AML1-ETO with the
NCOR-histone deacetylase complex is required to block hematopoietic
differentiation. Minucci et al. (2000) showed that PML-RAR and AML1-ETO
exist in vivo within high molecular weight nuclear complexes, reflecting
their oligomeric state. Oligomerization requires PML or ETO coiled-coil
regions and is responsible for abnormal recruitment of NCOR,
transcriptional repression, and impaired differentiation of primary
hematopoietic precursors. Fusion of RAR to a heterologous
oligomerization domain recapitulated the properties of PML-RAR,
indicating that oligomerization per se is sufficient to achieve
transforming potential. These results showed that oligomerization of a
transcription factor, imposing an altered interaction with
transcriptional coregulators, represents a novel mechanism of oncogenic
activation.

The recruitment of the nuclear receptor corepressor SMRT (NCOR2; 600848)
and subsequent repression of retinoid target genes is critical for the
oncogenic function of PML-RARA. Lin and Evans (2000) showed that the
ability of PML-RARA to form homodimers is both necessary and sufficient
for its increased binding efficiency to corepressor and its inhibitory
effects on hormonal responses in myeloid differentiation. Furthermore,
the authors found that altered stoichiometric interaction of SMRT with
PML-RARA homodimers may underlie these processes. An RXR mutant lacking
transactivation function AF2 recapitulated many biochemical and
functional properties of PML-RARA. Taken together, these results
indicated that altered dimerization of a transcription factor can be
directly linked to cellular transformation, and they implicated
dimerization interfaces of oncogenes as potential drug targets.

Pandolfi (2001) reviewed the roles of the RARA and PML genes in the
pathogenesis of APL and discussed the multiple oncogenic activities of
PML-RARA.

Di Croce et al. (2002) demonstrated that PML-RARA fusion protein induces
gene hypermethylation and silencing by recruiting DNA methyltransferases
to target promoters and that hypermethylation contributes to its
leukemogenic potential. Retinoic acid treatment induces promoter
demethylation, gene reexpression, and reversion of the transformed
phenotype. Di Croce et al. (2002) concluded that their results establish
a mechanistic link between genetic and epigenetic changes during
transformation and suggest that hypermethylation contributes to the
early steps of carcinogenesis.

The fusion protein PML-RARA initiates APL when expressed in the early
myeloid compartment of transgenic mice. Lane and Ley (2003) found that
PML-RARA was cleaved in several positions by a neutral serine protease
in a human myeloid cell line; purification revealed that the protease
was neutrophil elastase (ELA2; 130130). Immunofluorescence localization
studies suggested that cleavage of PML-RARA must have occurred within
the cell, perhaps within the nucleus. The functional importance of ELA2
for APL development was assessed in Ela2-deficient mice. More than 90%
of bone marrow PML-RARA-cleaving activity was lost in the absence of
Ela2, and Ela2-deficient animals, but not cathepsin G (116830)-deficient
animals, were protected from APL development. The authors determined
that primary mouse and human APL cells also contained ELA2-dependent
PML-RARA-cleaving activity. Lane and Ley (2003) concluded that, since
ELA2 is maximally produced in promyelocytes, it may play a role in APL
pathogenesis by facilitating the leukemogenic potential of PML-RARA.

Villa et al. (2006) found that MBD1 (156535) cooperated with PML-RARA in
transcriptional repression and cellular transformation in human cell
lines. PML-RARA recruited MBD1 to its target promoter through an HDAC3
(605166)-mediated mechanism. Binding of HDAC3 and MBD1 was not confined
to the target promoter, but was instead spread over the locus. Knockdown
of HDAC3 expression by RNA interference in acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells alleviated PML-RARA-induced promoter silencing. Furthermore,
retroviral expression of dominant-negative mutants of MBD1 in human
hematopoietic precursors interfered with PML-RARA-induced repression and
restored cell differentiation. Villa et al. (2006) concluded that
PML-RARA recruits an HDAC3-MBD1 complex to target promoters to establish
and maintain chromatin silencing.

CYTOGENETICS

- PML/RARA Fusion Gene

In the process of analyzing the RARA gene in the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2-q12)
translocation specifically associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), de The et al. (1990) identified a novel gene on chromosome 15
involved with the RARA gene in formation of a fusion product. This gene,
which they called MYL, was transcribed in the same direction as RARA on
the translocated chromosome. In the chimeric gene, the promoter and
first exon of the RARA gene were replaced by part of the MYL gene. De
The et al. (1990) established that the translocation chromosome
generates an MYL-RARA chimeric transcript. The findings strongly
implicated RARA in leukemogenesis. The possibility was raised that the
altered retinoic acid receptor behaves as a dominant-negative mutant
that blocks the expression of retinoic acid target genes involved in
granulocytic differentiation. In a later report, de The et al. (1991)
changed the name of the gene from MYL to PML. The PML-RARA mRNA encoded
a predicted 106-kD chimeric protein containing most of the PML sequences
fused to a large part of the RARA gene, including its DNA- and
hormone-binding domains.

Goddard et al. (1991) determined that the PML breakpoints were clustered
in 2 regions on either side of an alternatively spliced exon. Although
leukemic cells with translocations characteristically expressed only 1
fusion product, both PML-RARA (on the 15q+ derivative chromosome) and
RARA-PML (on the 17q- derivative) were transcribed. The contribution of
PML to the oncogenicity of the fusion products was demonstrated by the
following: no mutations affecting RARA alone were observed in 20 APLs
analyzed; 2 APLs cytogenetically lacking t(15;17) chromosomes were found
to have rearrangements of both PML and RARA; and PML but not RARA was
molecularly rearranged in a variant APL translocation in which
chromosome 15 had been translocated to another chromosome with no
visible involvement of chromosome 17.

Tong et al. (1992) found that in 20 of 22 patients with a detectable MYL
rearrangement the breakpoints were clustered within a 4.4-kb segment,
which they designated MYL(bcr). The 2 remaining patients exhibited a
more 5-prime rearrangement at about 10-kb upstream of the MYL(bcr)
region, indicating the lack of at least one MYL gene exon in the
resulting MYL-RARA fusion gene.

Cleary (1991) pointed out that detection of the PML-RARA fusion links a
specific molecular defect in neoplasia with a characteristic biologic
and clinical response to pharmacologic therapy. It is a useful marker
for the diagnosis of APL and for the identification of patients who may
benefit from retinoid treatment.

PML, the gene involved in the breakpoint on chromosome 15, is a putative
transcription factor: it contains a cysteine-rich motif that resembles a
zinc finger DNA-binding domain common to several classes of
transcriptional factors. Two fusion genes, PML-RARA and RARA-PML, are
formed as a result of the characteristic translocation in APL.
Heterogeneity of the chromosome 15 breakpoints accounts for the diverse
architecture of the PML-RARA mRNAs isolated from different APL patients,
and alternative splicing of PML exons gives rise to multiple isoforms of
the PML-RARA mRNAs even within a single patient. Alcalay et al. (1992)
investigated the organization and expression pattern of the RARA/PML
gene in a series of APL patients. A RARA-PML transcript was present in
most but not all APL patients. Among 70 patients with APL, Diverio et
al. (1992) found an abnormality in intron 2 of the RARA gene in all
cases, with clustering of rearrangements within the 20-kb intronic
region separating exons 2 and 3. A curious difference was found in the
location of breakpoints in males and females: breakpoints at the 5-prime
end of intron 2 of the RARA gene occurred in females and 3-prime
breakpoints predominated in males.

Stock et al. (2000) pointed out that breakpoints in chromosomes 15 and
17 leading to the translocation associated with APL had been described
as located between 15q22 and 15q26, and between 17q11 and 17q25. Most
studies using FISH had indicated the chromosome 15 breakpoint to be in
15q22. Stock et al. (2000) used a combination of G-banding, FISH, and
chromosome microdissection/reverse in situ hybridization to map the
breakpoints precisely to 15q24 and 17q21.1.

Zaccaria et al. (2002) studied a rare example of cryptic translocation
causing APL. Conventional cytogenetics showed a normal karyotype; PCR
showed a typical PML-RARA rearrangement in exon 1. FISH analysis
revealed that a submicroscopic part of chromosome 15 had been inserted
into 17q. Zaccaria et al. (2002) reviewed other cases of cryptic
translocation; their report appeared to be the first in which both pairs
of chromosomes 15 and 17 were cytogenetically normal and a PML-RARA
fusion gene, discovered after FISH analysis, was located on chromosome
17. A poor response to ATRA therapy was postulated to have a
relationship to the atypical translocation.

Abreu e Lima et al. (2005) described a 47-year-old woman with acute
myeloid leukemia who had simultaneous expression of the PML/RARA and the
AML1/ETO (133435) fusion genes. Despite prolonged use of therapeutic
doses of ATRA plus chemotherapy, the patient did not achieve remission,
in contrast to the experience of most patients with such fusion genes.
Conventional cytogenetics in this case showed the presence of only the
t(8;21) translocation. In previous reports of coexpression of these 2
fusion genes there was evidence of the presence of 2 or 3 distinct
leukemic clones harboring either or both chromosomal translocations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Brown et al. (1997) established a transgenic mouse model that documented
the ability of the chimeric PML-RARA gene to initiate leukemogenesis.
The mice developed 2 currently unrelated abnormalities. The first was a
severe papillomatosis of the skin; the second was a disturbance of
hematopoiesis that presented as a partial block of differentiation in
the neutrophil lineage of the transgenic mice and then progressed at low
frequency to overt APL. The leukemia appeared to be a faithful
reproduction of the human disease, including a therapeutic response to
retinoic acid that reflected differentiation of the leukemic cells. Both
the preleukemic state and the overt leukemia could be transplanted into
nontransgenic hosts. Brown et al. (1997) commented that the model should
be useful for exploring the pathogenesis and treatment of APL.

From studies in mice with disruption of the Pml gene, Wang et al. (1998)
demonstrated that normally, PML regulates hemopoietic differentiation
and controls cell growth and tumorigenesis. PML function is essential
for the tumor-growth-suppressive activity of retinoic acid (RA) and for
its ability to induce terminal myeloid differentiation of precursor
cells. PML was needed for the RA-dependent transactivation of the
p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene (116899), which regulates cell cycle progression and
cellular differentiation. These results provided a framework for
understanding the molecular pathogenesis of APL. Whereas APL might
result from the functional interference of PML/RARA with 2 independent
pathways, PML and RXR/RAR, Wang et al. (1998) showed that these proteins
act, at least in part, in the same pathway. Thus, by simultaneously
interacting with RXR and PML, the fusion gene product may inactivate
this pathway at multiple levels, leading to the proliferative advantage
and the block of hemopoietic differentiation that characterize APL.

David et al. (1997) generated an inducible line of transgenic mice in
which the expression of PML-RARA is driven by the metallothionein
promoter. After 5 days zinc stimulation, 27 of 54 mice developed hepatic
preneoplasia and neoplasia including foci of basophilic hepatocytes,
dysplasia, and carcinoma, with a significantly higher incidence of
lesions in females than in males. The rapid onset of liver pathologies
was dependent on overexpression of the transgene, since it was not
detected in noninduced transgenic animals of the same age. The PML-RARA
protein was always present in altered tissues at much higher levels than
in the surrounding normal liver tissues. In addition, overexpression of
PML-RARA resulted in a strong proliferative response in the hepatocytes.
David et al. (1997) concluded that overexpression of PML-RARA
deregulates subproliferation and can induce tumorigenic changes in vivo.

In an animal model of acute promyelocytic leukemia, Padua et al. (2003)
developed a DNA-based vaccine by fusing the human PML-RARA oncogene to
tetanus fragment C (FrC) sequences. Padua et al. (2003) showed for the
first time that a DNA vaccine specifically targeted to an oncoprotein
can have a pronounced effect on survival, both alone and in combination
with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). The survival advantage was
concomitant with time-dependent antibody production and an increase in
interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570). Padua et al. (2003) also showed that
ATRA therapy on its own triggered an immune response in this model. When
DNA vaccination and conventional ATRA therapy were combined, they
induced protective immune responses against leukemia progression in
mice. Padua et al. (2003) concluded that this may provide a new approach
to improve clinical outcome in human leukemia.

REFERENCE 1. Abreu e Lima, R. S.; Baruffi, M. R.; de Lima, A. S. G.; de Oliveira,
F. M.; de Figueiredo-Pontes, L. L.; Tone, L. G.; Rogatto, S. R.; Falcao,
R. P.; Ferrari Chauffaille, M. de L. L.; Rego, E. M.: The co-expression
of PML/RAR-alpha and AML1/ETO fusion genes is associated with ATRA
resistance. Brit. J. Haemat. 128: 405-409, 2005.

2. Alcalay, M.; Zangrilli, D.; Fagioli, M.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Mencarelli,
A.; Lo Coco, F.; Biondi, A.; Grignani, F.; Pelicci, P. G.: Expression
pattern of the RAR-alpha-PML fusion gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4840-4844, 1992.

3. Bernardi, R.; Guernah, I.; Jin, D.; Grisendi, S.; Alimonti, A.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Simon, M. C.; Rafii, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML inhibits HIF-1-alpha translation and neoangiogenesis through
repression of mTOR. Nature 442: 779-785, 2006.

4. Bernardi, R.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Structure, dynamics and functions
of promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear bodies. Nature Rev. Molec. Cell
Biol. 8: 1006-1016, 2007.

5. Brown, D.; Kogan, S.; Lagasse, E.; Weissman, I.; Alcalay, M.; Pelicci,
P. G.; Atwater, S.; Bishop, J. M.: A PMLRAR-alpha transgene initiates
murine acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 2551-2556,
1997.

6. Chang, K.-S.; Fan, Y.-H.; Andreeff, M.; Liu, J.; Mu, Z.-M.: The
PML gene encodes a phosphoprotein associated with the nuclear matrix. Blood 85:
3646-3653, 1995.

7. Cleary, M. L.: Oncogenic conversion of transcription factors by
chromosomal translocations. Cell 66: 619-622, 1991.

8. David, G.; Terris, B.; Marchio, A.; Lavau, C.; Dejean, A.: The
acute promyelocytic leukemia PML-RAR-alpha protein induces hepatic
preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in transgenic mice. Oncogene 14:
1547-1554, 1997.

9. de The, H.; Chomienne, C.; Lanotte, M.; Degos, L.; Dejean, A.:
The t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukaemia fuses
the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene to a novel transcribed locus. Nature 347:
558-561, 1990.

10. de The, H.; Lavau, C.; Marchio, A.; Chomienne, C.; Degos, L.;
Dejean, A.: The PML-RAR-alpha fusion mRNA generated by the t(15;17)
translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia encodes a functionally
altered RAR. Cell 66: 675-684, 1991.

11. Di Croce, L.; Raker, V. A.; Corsaro, M.; Fazi, F.; Fanelli, M.;
Faretta, M.; Fuks, F.; Lo Coco, F.; Kouzarides, T.; Nervi, C.; Minucci,
S.; Pelicci, P. G.: Methyltransferase recruitment and DNA hypermethylation
of target promoters by an oncogenic transcription factor. Science 295:
1079-1082, 2002.

12. Diverio, D.; Lo Coco, F.; D'Adamo, F.; Biondi, A.; Fagioli, M.;
Grignani, F.; Rambaldi, A.; Rossi, V.; Avvisati, G.; Petti, M. C.;
Testi, A. M.; Liso, V.; Specchia, G.; Fioritoni, G.; Recchia, A.;
Frassoni, F.; Ciolli, S.; Pelicci, P. G.: Identification of DNA rearrangements
at the retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RAR-alpha) locus in all patients
with acute promyelocytic leukemia and mapping of APL breakpoints within
the RAR-alpha second intron. Blood 79: 3331-3336, 1992.

13. Dyck, J. A.; Maul, G. G.; Miller, W. H., Jr.; Chen, J. D.; Kakizuka,
A.; Evans, R. M.: A novel macromolecular structure is a target of
the promyelocyte-retinoic acid receptor oncoprotein. Cell 76: 333-343,
1994.

14. Giorgi, C.; Ito, K.; Lin, H.-K.; Santangelo, C.; Wieckowski, M.
R.; Lebiedzinska, M.; Bononi, A.; Bonora, M.; Duszynski, J.; Bernardi,
R.; Rizzuto, R.; Tacchetti, C.; Pinton, P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: PML
regulates apoptosis at endoplasmic reticulum by modulating calcium
release. Science 330: 1247-1251, 2010.

15. Goddard, A. D.; Borrow, J.; Freemont, P. S.; Solomon, E.: Characterization
of a zinc finger gene disrupted by the t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Science 254: 1371-1374, 1991.

16. Goddard, A. D.; Yuan, J. Q.; Fairbairn, L.; Dexter, M.; Borrow,
J.; Kozak, C.; Solomon, E.: Cloning of the murine homolog of the
leukemia-associated PML gene. Mammalian Genome 6: 732-737, 1995.

17. Grignani, F.; De Matteis, S.; Nervi, C.; Tomassoni, L.; Gelmetti,
V.; Cioce, M.; Fanelli, M.; Ruthardt, M.; Ferrara, F. F.; Zamir, I.;
Seiser, C.; Grignani, F.; Lazar, M. A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.
: Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone
deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 391: 815-818, 1998.

18. Grignani, F.; Ferrucci, P. F.; Testa, U.; Talamo, G.; Fagioli,
M.; Alcalay, M.; Mencarelli, A.; Grignani, F.; Peschle, C.; Nicoletti,
I.; Pelicci, P. G.: The acute promyelocytic leukemia-specific PML-RAR-alpha
fusion protein inhibits differentiation and promotes survival of myeloid
precursor cells. Cell 74: 423-431, 1993.

19. Ito, K.; Bernardi, R.; Morotti, A.; Matsuoka, S.; Saglio, G.;
Ikeda, Y.; Rosenblatt, J.; Avigan, D. E.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML targeting eradicates quiescent leukaemia-initiating cells. Nature 453:
1072-1078, 2008.

20. Khan, M. M.; Nomura, T.; Kim, H.; Kaul, S. C.; Wadhwa, R.; Shinagawa,
T.; Ichikawa-Iwata, E.; Zhong, S.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Ishii, S.: Role
of PML and PML-RAR-alpha in Mad-mediated transcriptional repression. Molec.
Cell 7: 1233-1243, 2001.

21. Kunapuli, P.; Kasyapa, C. S.; Chin, S.-F.; Caldas, C.; Cowell,
J. K.: ZNF198, a zinc finger protein rearranged in myeloproliferative
disease, localizes to the PML nuclear bodies and interacts with SUMO-1
and PML. Exp. Cell Res. 312: 3739-3751, 2006.

22. Lane, A. A.; Ley, T. J.: Neutrophil elastase cleaves PML-RAR-alpha
and is important for the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia
in mice. Cell 115: 305-318, 2003.

23. Lin, H.-K.; Bergmann, S.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Cytoplasmic PML function
in TGF-beta signalling. Nature 431: 205-211, 2004.

24. Lin, R. J.; Evans, R. M.: Acquisition of oncogenic potential
by RAR chimeras in acute promyelocytic leukemia through formation
of homodimers. Molec. Cell 5: 821-830, 2000.

25. Lin, R. J.; Nagy, L.; Inoue, S.; Shao, W.; Miller, W. H., Jr.;
Evans, R. M.: Role of the histone deacetylase complex in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia. Nature 391: 811-814, 1998.

26. Minucci, S.; Maccarana, M.; Cioce, M.; De Luca, P.; Gelmetti,
V.; Segalla, S.; Di Croce, L.; Giavara, S.; Matteucci, C.; Gobbi,
A.; Bianchini, A.; Colombo, E.; Schiavoni, I.; Badaracco, G.; Hu,
X.; Lazar, M. A.; Landsberger, N.; Nervi, C.; Pelicci, P. G.: Oligomerization
of RAR and AML1 transcription factors as a novel mechanism of oncogenic
activation. Molec. Cell 5: 811-820, 2000.

27. Padua, R. A.; Larghero, J.; Robin, M.; le Pogam, C.; Schlageter,
M.-H.; Muszlak, S.; Fric, J.; West, R.; Rousselot, P.; Phan, T. H.;
Mudde, L.; Teisserenc, H.; Carpentier, A. F.; Kogan, S.; Degos, L.;
Pla, M.; Bishop, J. M.; Stevenson, F.; Charron, D.; Chomienne, C.
: PML-RARA-targeted DNA vaccine induces protective immunity in a mouse
model of leukemia. Nature Med. 9: 1413-1417, 2003.

28. Pandolfi, P. P.: Oncogenes and tumor suppressors in the molecular
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
769-775, 2001.

29. Pearson, M.; Carbone, R.; Sebastiani, C.; Cioce, M.; Fagioli,
M.; Saito, S.; Higashimoto, Y.; Appella, E.; Minucci, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.; Pelicci, P. G.: PML regulates p53 acetylation and premature
senescence induced by oncogenic Ras. Nature 406: 207-210, 2000.

30. Salomoni, P.; Ferguson, B. J.; Wyllie, A. H.; Rich, T.: New insights
into the role of PML in tumour suppression. Cell Res. 18: 622-640,
2008.

31. Song, M. S.; Salmena, L.; Carracedo, A.; Egia, A.; Lo-Coco, F.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: The deubiquitinylation and
localization of PTEN are regulated by a HAUSP-PML network. Nature 455:
813-817, 2008.

32. Stock, A. D.; Dennis, T. R.; Spallone, P. A.: Precise localization
by microdissection/reverse ISH and FISH of the t(15;17)(q24;q21.1)
chromosomal breakpoints associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 119: 15-17, 2000.

33. Tong, J.-H.; Dong, S.; Geng, J.-P.; Huang, W.; Wang, Z.-Y.; Sun,
G.-L.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.; Larsen, C.-J.; Berger, R.: Molecular
rearrangements of the MYL gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL,
M3) define a breakpoint cluster region as well as some molecular variants. Oncogene 7:
311-316, 1992.

34. Trotman, L. C.; Alimonti, A.; Scaglioni, P. P.; Koutcher, J. A.;
Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Identification of a tumour suppressor
network opposing nuclear Akt function. Nature 441: 523-536, 2006.

35. Turelli, P.; Doucas, V.; Craig, E.; Mangeat, B.; Klages, N.; Evans,
R.; Kalpana, G.; Trono, D.: Cytoplasmic recruitment of INI1 and PML
on incoming HIV preintegration complexes: interference with early
steps of viral replication. Molec. Cell 7: 1245-1254, 2001.

36. Villa, R.; Morey, L.; Raker, V. A.; Buschbeck, M.; Gutierrez,
A.; De Santis, F.; Corsaro, M.; Varas, F.; Bossi, D.; Minucci, S.;
Pelicci, P. G.; Di Croce, L.: The methyl-CpG binding protein MBD1
is required for PML-RAR-alpha function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
1400-1405, 2006.

37. Wang, Z. G.; Delva, L.; Gaboli, M.; Rivi, R.; Giorgio, M.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Grosveld, F.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Role of PML in cell growth and
the retinoic acid pathway. Science 279: 1547-1551, 1998.

38. Yang, S.; Kuo, C.; Bisi, J. E.; Kim, M. K.: PML-dependent apoptosis
after DNA damage is regulated by the checkpoint kinase hCds1/Chk2. Nature
Cell Biol. 4: 865-870, 2002.

39. Zaccaria, A.; Valenti, A.; Toschi, M.; Salvucci, M.; Cipriani,
R.; Ottaviani, E.; Martinelli, G.: Cryptic translocation of PML/RARA
on 17q. A rare event in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer Genet.
Cytogenet. 138: 169-173, 2002.

40. Zhang, X.-W.; Yan, X.-J.; Zhou, Z.-R.; Yang, F.-F.; Wu, Z.-Y.;
Sun, H.-B.; Liang, W.-X.; Song, A.-X.; Lallemand-Breitenbach, V.;
Jeanne, M.; Zhang, Q.-Y.; Yang, H.-Y.; and 9 others: Arsenic trioxide
controls the fate of the PML-RAR-alpha oncoprotein by directly binding
PML. Science 328: 240-243, 2010. Note: Erratum: Science 328: 974
only, 2010.

41. Zhong, S.; Delva, L.; Rachez, C.; Cenciarelli, C.; Gandini, D.;
Zhang, H.; Kalantry, S.; Freedman, L. P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: A RA-dependent,
tumour-growth suppressive transcription complex is the target of the
PML-RAR-alpha and T18 oncoproteins. Nature Genet. 23: 287-295, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/31/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/19/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/14/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 10/13/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/25/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/3/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/19/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/30/1990

EDITED terry: 03/14/2013
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 2/4/2011
terry: 1/31/2011
wwang: 11/22/2010
mgross: 10/19/2010
alopez: 5/26/2010
terry: 5/25/2010
mgross: 11/19/2008
mgross: 10/28/2008
mgross: 10/14/2008
mgross: 10/13/2008
wwang: 7/17/2008
terry: 7/9/2008
alopez: 9/19/2006
terry: 9/8/2006
alopez: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
mgross: 3/29/2006
carol: 4/4/2005
wwang: 3/30/2005
wwang: 3/23/2005
terry: 3/21/2005
tkritzer: 3/17/2005
terry: 1/25/2005
tkritzer: 10/1/2004
terry: 9/29/2004
tkritzer: 1/12/2004
terry: 1/8/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
mgross: 5/12/2003
mgross: 3/18/2003
terry: 3/14/2003
tkritzer: 3/10/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
alopez: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/12/2002
terry: 11/15/2001
mgross: 7/3/2001
cwells: 6/20/2001
cwells: 6/19/2001
alopez: 5/1/2001
alopez: 4/30/2001
alopez: 7/12/2000
mgross: 6/21/2000
alopez: 6/2/2000
terry: 5/29/2000
alopez: 11/3/1999
alopez: 11/2/1999
mgross: 9/23/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
carol: 10/6/1998
terry: 10/1/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
alopez: 3/6/1998
terry: 3/2/1998
alopez: 7/9/1997
carol: 6/20/1997
jenny: 4/21/1997
terry: 4/12/1997
mark: 11/30/1995
mark: 10/5/1995
carol: 8/13/1992
carol: 6/16/1992
carol: 5/28/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

610523	TITLE *610523 CENTROSOMAL PROTEIN, 41-KD; CEP41
;;TESTIS-SPECIFIC PROTEIN A14 TESTIS-SPECIFIC PROTEIN 14, FORMERLY;
TSGA14, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using genomic sequence analysis of a PAC/BAC contig containing the
imprinted MEST (601029) gene, followed by EST database searching, Yamada
et al. (2002) identified cDNAs corresponding to 2 splice variants of
TSGA14 encoding deduced proteins of 373 and 54 amino acids. Northern
blot analysis detected transcripts of the longer isoform in adult testis
(1.4 and 3.7 kb) and in fetal brain, lung, liver, and kidney (3.7 and
2.9 kb). A 1.1-kb transcript of the shorter isoform was weakly expressed
in adult testis and fetal tissues. Using methylation analysis of a CpG
island in TSGA14 intron 1 and analysis of biallelic expression of an
exon 1 SNP in fetal tissues and blood lymphocytes, Yamada et al. (2002)
showed that TSGA14 escapes genomic imprinting. Yamada et al. (2002)
suggested that the 7q32 imprinted region may be small compared to other
imprinted domains.

In zebrafish, Lee et al. (2012) found Cep41 expression in various
ciliary organs, including Kupffer vesicle, ear, heart, brain, and
kidney. Cep41 was also found in the centrioles and cilia of several
ciliated cell lines, including mouse inner medullary collecting duct
cells and human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (2002) determined that the TSGA14 gene contains 11 exons
and spans approximately 50 kb. The short variant is encoded by 3 exons,
the first 2 exons in common with the long variant and a third exon
located in intron 2 of the long variant.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yamada et al. (2002) mapped the TGSA14
gene to chromosome 7q32 at a position 50 kb proximal to the MEST gene in
a head to head orientation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 3 consanguineous families with Joubert
syndrome-15 (JBTS15; 614464), 2 of Egyptian origin and 1 Portuguese, Lee
et al. (2012) identified 3 different homozygous mutations in the CEP41
gene (610523.0001-610523.0003). The first mutation was found by linkage
analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing in 1 of the families.
Heterozygous CEP41 mutations (see, e.g., 610523.0004-610523.0007) were
found in 5 additional patients with Joubert syndrome, and 3 of them were
found to carry heterozygous mutations in other genes associated with
ciliopathies (KIF7; 611254.0007 and CC2D2A; 612013.0007 and
612013.0009). These findings indicated digenic inheritance, and
suggested that CEP41 may act as a modifier in the broader class of
ciliopathies. Primary cultured fibroblasts from patients showed lack of
CEP41 protein. Induction of ciliogenesis in these fibroblast resulted in
cilia with a reduction of staining for GT335, which recognizes the
glutamylated forms of tubulin. Forced expression of CEP41 increased the
percentage of cells with glutamylated cilia. These findings suggested a
potential role of CEP41 in regulating the posttranslational modification
of tubulin by glutamylation. The cilia of zebrafish deficient in Cep41
showed a defect in tubulin structural defects, as well as defects in
motility. Only the axoneme appeared to be affected, with the centriole
being properly modified. Further studies in zebrafish and mouse cells
indicated that Cep41 functions by mediating transport of TTLL6 (610849),
an evolutionarily conserved polyglutamylase enzyme, between the basal
body and cilium. The findings implicated tubulin posttranslational
modification in the pathogenesis of human ciliary dysfunction.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lee et al. (2012) demonstrated that morpholino knockout of Cep41 in
zebrafish resulted in peripheral heart edema and tail defects, along
with ciliopathy-related phenotypes, including hydrocephalus, abnormal
ear otolith formation, and small eyes. Transfection of human CEP41
resulted in partial rescue of the phenotype. Specific knockout of Cep41
in zebrafish myocardium resulted in inversion defects or failure to
develop asymmetry of the ventricle and atrium, suggesting a role in
heart laterality. Homozygous Cep41 mouse mutants showed a wide range of
phenotypes, including malformed hindbrain, exencephaly, brain
hemorrhage, dilated pericardial sac, and lethality. However, some
homozygous mutants showed normal development, suggesting the presence of
extragenic phenotypic modifiers. The cilia of zebrafish deficient in
Cep41 showed a defect in tubulin glutamylation, and electron microscopy
showed structural defects in zebrafish renal cilia, with the A-tubules
of the outer doublet microtubules of the axoneme being collapsed and/or
duplicated. The cilia of the Kupffer vesicle and kidney showed disabled
motility. The data suggested that Cep41 is involved in ciliary
structural formation and motility by having an essential role in tubulin
glutamylation at the cilium.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, IVS1DS, T-G, +2

In 5 affected members of a consanguineous Egyptian family with Joubert
syndrome-15 (JBTS15; 614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified a homozygous
T-to-G transversion in intron 1 of the CEP41 gene (33+2T-G). Studies of
patient cells showed absence of mature CEP41 mRNA, probably a result of
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mutation was found by linkage analysis
followed by candidate gene sequencing. The patients had hypotonia,
ataxia, psychomotor delay with borderline or mild mental retardation,
and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging. One of the patients had a
more severe phenotype, with unilateral retinopathy, coloboma,
nephronophthisis, mild liver abnormalities, postaxial polydactyly, and
ambiguous genitalia, and died at age 7 days. The other 4 patients did
not have liver or renal involvement.

.0002
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, 3-BP DEL, IVS1DS, 97GAG

In 2 sisters, born of consanguineous Egyptian parents, with JBTS15
(614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion
(97+3_5delGAG) predicted to abolish the donor splice site from exon 2.
The mutation was demonstrated to cause skipping of exon 2 and premature
truncation of the protein in exon 3. The girls had hypotonia, ataxia,
mental retardation, oculomotor apraxia, breathing abnormalities, and
molar tooth sign on brain imaging, but no renal or liver involvement.
One had unilateral postaxial polydactyly. A third sib, a boy, who did
not have the molar tooth sign, was found to be heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0003
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, IVS6AS, A-C, -2

In a patient, born of consanguineous Portuguese parents, with JBTS15
(614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified a homozygous A-to-C transversion
(423-2A-C), predicted to abolish the splice acceptor site from exon 7.
The patient had hypotonia, ataxia, mental retardation, retinopathy,
polydactyly, and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging. He did not have
renal or hepatic involvement. He was also found to carry a heterozygous
mutation in the CEP290 gene (610142).

.0004
JOUBERT SYNDROME 12/15, DIGENIC
CEP41, ARG179HIS

In a German patient with digenic inheritance of Joubert syndrome, Lee et
al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 536A-G transition in exon 7 of the
CEP41 gene, resulting in an arg179-to-his (R179H) substitution in a
highly conserved residue consistent with JBTS15 (614464), and a
heterozygous truncating mutation in the KIF7 gene (811delG;
611254.0007), consistent with JBTS12 (see 200990). He had hypotonia,
ataxia, mental retardation, oculomotor apraxia, breathing abnormalities,
and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging, but no liver, renal, or
retinal involvement.

.0005
JOUBERT SYNDROME 9/15, DIGENIC
CEP41, MET36THR

In a Spanish patient with digenic inheritance of Joubert syndrome, Lee
et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 107T-C transition in exon 3 of
the CEP41 gene, resulting in a met36-to-thr (M36T) substitution in a
highly conserved residue consistent with JBTS15 (614464), and a
heterozygous mutation in the CC2D2A gene (R1049X; 612013.0007),
consistent with JBTS9 (612285). She had hypotonia, ataxia, mental
retardation, and the molar tooth sign on brain MRI, but no liver, renal,
or retinal involvement.

.0006
JOUBERT SYNDROME 9/15, DIGENIC
CEP41, ARG360CYS

In a Swiss patient with digenic inheritance of Joubert syndrome, Lee et
al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 1078C-T transition in exon 11 of
the CEP41 gene resulting in an arg360-to-cys (R360C) substitution in a
conserved residue consistent with JBTS15 (614464), and a heterozygous
mutation in the CC2D2A gene (E1447A; 612013.0009), predicted to be a
potentially deleterious sequence variant and consistent with JBTS9
(612285). She had hypotonia, ataxia, mental retardation, oculomotor
apraxia, bilateral preaxial polydactyly, and the molar tooth sign on
brain MRI, but no liver, renal, or retinal involvement.

.0007
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, SER28TER

In an Italian patient with JBTS15 (614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified
a heterozygous 83C-A transversion in exon 2 of the CEP41 gene, resulting
in a ser28-to-ter (S28X) substitution. A second pathogenic mutation was
not identified. The patient had hypotonia, ataxia, mental retardation,
oculomotor apraxia, breathing difficulties, and the molar tooth sign on
brain MRI, but no liver, renal, or retinal involvement.

REFERENCE 1. Lee, J. E.; Silhavy, J. L.; Zaki, M. S.; Schroth, J.; Bielas, S.
L.; Marsh, S. E.; Olvera, J.; Brancati, F.; Iannicelli, M.; Ikegami,
K.; Schlossman, A. M.; Merriman, B.; and 18 others: CEP41 is mutated
in Joubert syndrome and is required for tubulin glutamylation at the
cilium. Nature Genet. 44: 193-199, 2012.

2. Yamada, T.; Kayashima, T.; Yamasaki, K.; Ohta, T.; Yoshiura, K.;
Matsumoto, N.; Fujimoto, S.; Niikawa, N.; Kishino, T.: The gene TSGA14,
adjacent to the imprinted gene MEST, escapes genomic imprinting. Gene 288:
57-63, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/1/2012

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/26/2006

EDITED carol: 02/02/2012
ckniffin: 2/1/2012
mgross: 1/27/2012
carol: 10/26/2006

108361	TITLE *108361 ASIALOGLYCOPROTEIN RECEPTOR 2; ASGR2
;;C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 4, MEMBER H2; CLEC4H2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ASGR2 gene encodes a glycoprotein that forms the asialoglycoprotein
receptor, also known as the Ashwell receptor, which is specific for
desialylated (galactosyl-terminal) glycoproteins and is expressed
exclusively in hepatic parenchymal cells (Spiess and Lodish, 1985).

See also ASGR1 (108360).

CLONING

From the same cDNA library that was made from the human hepatoma cell
line HepG2 and was used to isolate ASGR1, Spiess and Lodish (1985)
isolated and sequenced a clone encoding a second asialoglycoprotein
receptor, which they referred to as H2 and which had protein sequence
homology of 58% to H1. The rat similarly has 2 ASG receptors, R1 and R2.
Spiess and Lodish (1985) found that H1 is more homologous to R1 than to
H2, and H2 is more homologous to R2 than to H1. Thus, the 2 receptor
genes evolved before the separation of rat and man. Spiess and Lodish
(1985) identified 2 versions of H2 cDNA, differing only by the presence
or absence of a segment of 15 bp within the coding region. They
interpreted this as reflecting differential splicing of an intron.

ANIMAL MODEL

Grewal et al. (2008) found that platelet deficiency associated with
St3gal4 (104240) deficiency and disruption of sialyltransferase function
was restored in Asgr1- or Asgr2-deficient mice. The studies suggested
that ST3GAL4 deficiency exposes endogenous glycan ligands on platelets
that are recognized by the Ashwell receptor in an interaction that
promotes asialo-platelet clearance by hepatocytes and leads to
thrombocytopenia. Wildtype mice infected with Streptococcus pneumoniae,
a pathogen with sialidase (neuraminidase) activity, showed progressively
desialylated platelets and thrombocytopenia due to increased removal of
platelets from the circulation by the hepatic Ashwell receptor. Asgr1-
or Asgr2-deficient mice who were infected showed decreased survival and
signs of severe disseminated intravascular coagulation compared to
infected wildtype mice, with the outcome worse for Asgr1-deficient mice.
Grewal et al. (2008) concluded that the thrombocytopenia in disseminated
intravascular coagulation results from Ashwell receptor-dependent
clearance of platelets that are first desialylated by the sialidase of
the pathogen. The findings revealed that von Willebrand factor (VWF;
613160) and platelets are endogenous ligands of the Ashwell receptor,
implying that hepatocytes are involved in the clearance of these
coagulation factors from the circulation, which is an unexpected
biologic activity for this cell type.

REFERENCE 1. Grewal, P. K.; Uchiyama, S.; Ditto, D.; Varki, N.; Le, D. T.; Nizet,
V.; Marth, J. D.: The Ashwell receptor mitigates the lethal coagulopathy
of sepsis. Nature Med. 14: 648-655, 2008.

2. Spiess, M.; Lodish, H. F.: Sequence of a second human asialoglycoprotein
receptor: conservation of two receptor genes during evolution. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 6465-6469, 1985.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/19/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1990

EDITED carol: 10/04/2010
alopez: 6/27/2008
ckniffin: 6/19/2008
mgross: 3/16/2006
dkim: 6/30/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/20/1990
carol: 7/13/1990
carol: 7/12/1990

601212	TITLE *601212 PROTEIN-TYROSINE KINASE 2, BETA; PTK2B
;;PROLINE-RICH TYROSINE KINASE 2; PYK2;;
FOCAL ADHESION KINASE 2; FAK2;;
CELL ADHESION KINASE, BETA; CAKB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Focal adhesion kinases are cytoplasmic protein-tyrosine kinases
associated with focal adhesions and whose activity is induced by ligand
binding to various receptors including those for integrin, growth
factors, etc. FAKs are known to target paxillin (602505) and are
substrates for Src family kinases (see 190090) (Calalb et al., 1995).
Herzog et al. (1996) identified a gene for another focal adhesion kinase
by low-stringency screening of a hippocampus cDNA library. They
symbolized the gene FAK2. The FAK2 cDNA encodes a predicted 1,009-amino
acid protein with 42% identity to FAK1 (600758). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.5-kb mRNA in brain, kidney, spleen, and lymphocytes.

Protein-tyrosine kinases in the central nervous system are activated in
response to a variety of neurotrophic factors that control neuronal
differentiation and survival via cell surface receptors. Also, protein
phosphorylation is involved in membrane excitability and the function of
ion channels. Lev et al. (1995) discovered a nonreceptor type protein
kinase that is highly expressed in adult rat brain. The kinase, which
they symbolized PYK2 (proline-rich tyrosine kinase-2), was cloned from a
rat spinal cord cDNA library using degenerate PCR primers corresponding
to conserved tyrosine kinase motifs of PYK1 (see Manser et al., 1993).
Lev et al. (1995) cloned the human homolog from a human fetal brain cDNA
library using the rat sequence as a probe. The predicted protein of
1,009 amino acids has 61% sequence identity to the FAK1 protein (PTK2;
600758).

GENE FUNCTION

Lev et al. (1995) showed that the PYK2 protein undergoes rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation in response to various stimuli that elevate
intracellular calcium concentration, such as addition of bradykinin, a
neuropeptide hormone that binds to a G protein-coupled receptor and in
turn stimulates phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis. PYK2 is also tyrosine
phosphorylated following activation of the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (see 100690), by membrane depolarization, and by treatment of
cells with a calcium ionophore. Protein kinase C (176960) activation
also induces PYK2 phosphorylation. Activation of PYK2 leads to the
modulation of ion channel function and activation of the MAP kinase
signaling pathway. Lev et al. (1995) proposed that PYK2 may represent an
important signaling intermediate between neuropeptide activated
receptors or neurotransmitters that increase calcium flux and the
downstream signals that regulate neuronal activity. PYK2 may also
provide a mechanism for a variety of short- and long-term
calcium-dependent signaling events in the nervous system.

Matsuya et al. (1998) found specific interaction between the C-terminal
region of PYK2 and HIC5 (TGFB1I1; 602353). Both proteins were
tyrosine-phosphorylated in parallel in rat fibroblasts exposed to
hypertonic osmotic stress or stimulated with lysophosphatidic acid.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes acute and chronic infection of the liver
and is also a risk factor for hepatic cancer. The virus has only 4 open
reading frames, 3 of which encode the capsid, envelope, and polymerase
proteins. The fourth encodes HBX, a poorly expressed protein required
for viral replication (Ganem, 2001). Bouchard et al. (2001) showed that
HBX induces release of calcium into the cytoplasm, presumably from
mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum. HBX expression thereby induces
activation of PYK2, which activates SRC and HBV DNA replication.
Inhibition of PYK2 or calcium signaling mediated by mitochondrial
calcium channels could block HBV DNA replication, and enhancement of
cytoplasmic calcium was able to substitute for HBX in stimulating HBV
DNA replication.

In a kidney proximal epithelial cell line (OKP) incubated in acid media,
Li et al. (2004) observed an increase in PYK2 phosphorylation and
PYK2/SRC binding. Transfection of OKP cells with dominant-negative PYK2
or small interfering PYK2 duplex RNA blocked acid activation of
sodium/hydrogen exchanger-3 (NHE3, or SLC9A3; 182307), whereas neither
had an effect on glucocorticoid activation of NHE3. Dominant-negative
PYK2 also blocked acid activation of SRC kinase, which is required for
acid regulation of NHE3. Li et al. (2004) concluded that PYK2 is
directly activated by acidic pH and that PYK2 activation is required for
acid activation of SRC kinase and NHE3. Partially purified PYK2 was
activated by acid in a cell-free system, leading Li et al. (2004) to
suggest that PYK2 may serve as the pH sensor that initiates the
acid-regulated signaling cascade involved in NHE3 regulation.

MAPPING

Herzog et al. (1996) assigned the FAK2 gene to chromosome 8 by PCR
analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized it to 8p22-p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Buckbinder et al. (2007) found that Pyk2-null mice were normal in
appearance and body weight, but they had increased bone mass and
improved bone microstructure. Mouse bone marrow cultures showed that
Pyk2 deficiency enhanced differentiation and activity of osteoprogenitor
cells, as did expression of PYK2-specific short hairpin RNA or dominant
interfering proteins in human mesenchymal stem cells. Daily
administration of a small molecule Pyk2 inhibitor increased bone
formation and protected against bone loss in ovariectomized rats, an
established preclinical model of postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Using Pyk2 -/- mice, Kamen et al. (2011) showed that Pyk2 was required
for integrin-mediated degranulation responses in polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs), but not in adhesion-induced cell spreading or
activation of superoxide production. Pyk2-deficient PMNs also displayed
reduced migration on fibrinogen (see 134820)-coated surfaces and reduced
paxillin and Vav (VAV1; 164875) phosphorylation after integrin ligation.
Clearance of Staphylococcus aureus skin abscesses was poor in Pyk2 -/-
mice. The response to soluble agonists, however, was normal. Kamen et
al. (2011) concluded that PYK2 is involved in regulating
adhesion-mediated release of PMN granule contents.

REFERENCE 1. Bouchard, M. J.; Wang, L.-H.; Schneider, R. J.: Calcium signaling
by HBx protein in hepatitis B virus DNA replication. Science 294:
2376-2378, 2001.

2. Buckbinder, L.; Crawford, D. T.; Qi, H.; Ke, H. Z.; Olson, L. M.;
Long, K. R.; Bonnette, P. C.; Baumann, A. P.; Hambor, J. E.; Grasser,
W. A., III; Pan, L. C.; Owen, T. A.; and 11 others: Proline-rich
tyrosine kinase 2 regulates osteoprogenitor cells and bone formation,
and offers an anabolic treatment approach for osteoporosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 10619-10624, 2007.

3. Calalb, M. B.; Polte, T. R.; Hanks, S. K.: Tyrosine phosphorylation
of focal adhesion kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates
kinase activity: a role for Src family kinases. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15:
954-963, 1995.

4. Ganem, D.: The X files--one step closer to closure. Science 294:
2299-2300, 2001.

5. Herzog, H.; Nicholl, J.; Hort, Y. J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Shine,
J.: Molecular cloning and assignment of FAK2, a novel human focal
adhesion kinase, to 8p11.2-p22 by nonisotopic in situ hybridization. Genomics 32:
484-486, 1996.

6. Kamen, L. A.; Schlessinger, J.; Lowell, C. A.: Pyk2 is required
for neutrophil degranulation and host defense responses to bacterial
infection. J. Immun. 186: 1656-1665, 2011.

7. Lev, S.; Moreno, H.; Martinez, R.; Canoll, P.; Peles, E.; Musacchio,
J. M.; Plowman, G. D.; Rudy, B.; Schlessinger, J.: Protein tyrosine
kinase PYK2 involved in Ca(2+)-induced regulation of ion channel and
MAP kinase functions. Nature 376: 737-745, 1995.

8. Li, S.; Sato, S.; Yang, X.; Preisig, P. A.; Alpern, R. J.: Pyk2
activation is integral to acid stimulation of sodium/hydrogen exchanger
3. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1782-1789, 2004.

9. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Tan, L.; Lim, L.: A non-receptor
tyrosine kinase that inhibits the GTPase activity of p21(cdc42). Nature 363:
364-367, 1993.

10. Matsuya, M.; Sasaki, H.; Aoto, H.; Mitaka, T.; Nagura, K.; Ohba,
T.; Ishino, M.; Takahashi, S.; Suzuki, R.; Sasaki, T.: Cell adhesion
kinase beta forms a complex with a new member, Hic-5, of proteins
localized at focal adhesions. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1003-1014, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/18/2002

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/18/1996

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2012
mgross: 3/20/2012
terry: 3/15/2012
mgross: 8/8/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
carol: 1/19/2005
terry: 1/14/2005
mgross: 2/5/2004
carol: 4/3/2002
mgross: 1/18/2002
alopez: 1/12/1999
alopez: 4/8/1998
mark: 4/18/1996
terry: 4/18/1996
mark: 4/18/1996

601639	TITLE *601639 PROTEIN KINASE, cAMP-DEPENDENT, CATALYTIC, ALPHA; PRKACA
DESCRIPTION Most of the effects of cAMP in the eukaryotic cell are mediated through
the phosphorylation of target proteins on serine or threonine residues
by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (EC 2.7.1.37). The inactive
cAMP-dependent protein kinase is a tetramer composed of 2 regulatory and
2 catalytic subunits. The cooperative binding of 4 molecules of cAMP
dissociates the enzyme in a regulatory subunit dimer and 2 free active
catalytic subunits. In the human, 4 different regulatory subunits
(PRKAR1A, 188830; PRKAR1B, 176911; PRKAR2A, 176910; and PRKAR2B, 176912)
and 3 catalytic subunits (PRKACA; PRKACB, 176892; and PRKACG 176893)
have been identified.

MAPPING

Using PCR and Southern blot analysis, Tasken et al. (1996) assigned the
PRKACA gene to chromosome 19. By 2-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization, they regionalized the assignment to 19p13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Studying hippocampal slices from rats of different ages, Yasuda et al.
(2003) found that protein kinase A is required for long-term
potentiation (LTP) in neonatal tissue (less than 9 postnatal days).
After that time, LTP requires calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II (see CAMK2A, 114078). Yasuda et al. (2003) suggested that
developmental changes in synapse morphology, including a shift from
dendritic shafts to dendritic spines and compartmentalization of
calcium, may underlie the changes in kinase activity.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Kim et al. (2005) determined the crystal structure of the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase catalytic subunit bound to a deletion mutant of the
regulatory subunit (RI-alpha; PRKAR1A, 188830) at 2.0-angstrom
resolution. This structure defines a previously unidentified extended
interface in which the large lobe of the catalytic subunit is like a
stable scaffold where tyr247 in the G helix and trp196 in the
phosphorylated activation loop serve as anchor points for binding the
RI-alpha subunit. These residues compete with cAMP for the
phosphate-binding cassette in RI-alpha. In contrast to this catalytic
subunit, RI-alpha undergoes major conformational changes when the
complex is compared with cAMP-bound RI-alpha. Kim et al. (2005)
concluded that the complex provides a molecular mechanism for inhibition
of PKA and suggests how cAMP binding leads to activation.

Zhang et al. (2012) described the 2.3-angstrom structure of full-length
tetrameric RII-beta (PRKAR2B; 176912)(2):catalytic subunit-alpha(2)
holoenzyme. The structure showing a dimer of dimers provided a
mechanistic understanding of allosteric activation by cAMP. The
heterodimers are anchored together by an interface created by the
beta-4/beta-5 loop in the RII-beta subunit, which docks onto the
carboxyl-terminal tail of the adjacent C subunit, thereby forcing the C
subunit into a fully closed conformation in the absence of nucleotide.
Diffusion of magnesium ATP into these crystals trapped not ATP but the
reaction products adenosine diphosphate and the phosphorylated RII-beta
subunit. This complex has implications for the
dissociation-reassociation cycling of PKA. The quaternary structure of
the RII-beta tetramer differs appreciably from the model of the RI-alpha
tetramer, confirming the small-angle x-ray scattering prediction that
the structures of each PKA tetramer are different.

ANIMAL MODEL

The intracellular second messenger cAMP affects cell physiology by
directly interacting with effector molecules that include cyclic
nucleotide-gated ion channels, cAMP-regulated G protein exchange
factors, and cAMP-dependent protein kinases (PKA). Two catalytic
subunits, C-alpha (PRKACA) and C-beta (PRKACB), are expressed in the
mouse and mediate the effects of PKA. Skalhegg et al. (2002) generated a
null mutation in the major catalytic subunit of PKA, C-alpha, and
observed early postnatal lethality in the majority of C-alpha knockout
mice. Surprisingly, a small percentage of C-alpha knockout mice,
although runted, survived to adulthood. This growth retardation was not
due to decreased GH (139250) production but did correlate with a
reduction in IGF1 (147440) mRNA in the liver and diminished production
of the major urinary proteins in kidney. In these animals, compensatory
increases in C-beta levels occurred in brain whereas many tissues,
including skeletal muscle, heart, and sperm, contained less than 10% of
the normal PKA activity. Analysis of sperm in C-alpha knockout males
revealed that spermatogenesis progressed normally but that mature sperm
had defective forward motility.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, C.; Xuong, N.-H.; Taylor, S. S.: Crystal structure of a complex
between the catalytic and regulatory (RI-alpha) subunits of PKA. Science 307:
690-696, 2005.

2. Skalhegg, B. S.; Huang, Y.; Su, T.; Idzerda, R. L.; McKnight, G.
S.; Burton, K. A.: Mutation of the C-alpha subunit of PKA leads to
growth retardation and sperm dysfunction. Molec. Endocr. 16: 630-639,
2002.

3. Tasken, K.; Solberg, R.; Zhao, Y.; Hansson, V.; Jahnsen, T.; Siciliano,
M. J.: The gene encoding the catalytic subunit C-alpha of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (locus PRKACA) localizes to human chromosome region
19p13.1. Genomics 36: 535-538, 1996.

4. Yasuda, H.; Barth, A. L.; Stellwagen, D.; Malenka, R. C.: A developmental
switch in the signaling cascades for LTP induction. Nature Neurosci. 6:
15-16, 2003.

5. Zhang, P.; Smith-Nguyen, E. V.; Keshwani, M. M.; Deal, M. S.; Kornev,
A. P.; Taylor, S. S.: Structure and allostery of the PKA RII-beta
tetrameric holoenzyme. Science 335: 712-716, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/10/2002

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 1/21/1997

EDITED alopez: 02/28/2012
alopez: 2/28/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
wwang: 3/3/2005
terry: 2/25/2005
alopez: 1/9/2003
alopez: 12/3/2002
ckniffin: 12/3/2002
alopez: 10/10/2002
jamie: 1/21/1997

607412	TITLE *607412 BPI FOLD-CONTAINING PROTEIN, FAMILY A, MEMBER 1; BPIFA1
;;PALATE, LUNG, AND NASAL EPITHELIUM CARCINOMA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; PLUNC;;
SPLUNC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The upper respiratory tract, including the nasal and oral cavities, is
the major route of entry of pathogens into the body, and early
recognition of bacterial products in this region is critical for host
defense. A well-established family of 4 proteins involved in this
process includes BPI (109195) and LBP (151990), which are central to the
host defense against bacteria, and CETP (118470) and PLTP (172425),
which have also been implicated in this response. Bingle and Craven
(2002) described a family of 7 candidate host defense proteins in
humans, which they designated PLUNC for palate, lung, and nasal
epithelium clone.

CLONING

Weston et al. (1999) used differential display to identify a gene
transcript that was expressed in the presumptive nasal epithelium of the
mouse embryo. In situ hybridization analysis showed discrete regions of
expression associated with the palate, nasal septum, nasal conchae,
adult trachea, and bronchi of the lung. They designated the gene Plunc.

Bingle and Bingle (2000) reported the cloning and characterization of
the human homolog of Plunc. The cDNA encodes a leucine-rich protein of
256 amino acids that is 72% identical to the murine protein. They
demonstrated by RNA blot analysis that expression of PLUNC was
restricted to the trachea, upper airway, nasopharyngeal epithelium, and
salivary gland.

Bingle and Craven (2002) uncovered the family of PLUNC genes by
searching of sequence databases using the PLUNC sequence as a starting
point. They noted that PLUNC proteins are encoded by adjacent genes
found within a 300-kb region of chromosome 20, suggesting that they may
be under transcriptional control of shared genomic elements. Expression
data showed that PLUNC proteins are found in overlapping regions of the
pulmonary, nasopharyngeal, and oral epithelium, sites where the BPI
family members are not expressed. Bingle and Craven (2002) split the 7
PLUNC family members into short (SPLUNC; less than 256 amino acids) and
long (LPLUNC; more than 458 amino acids) groups. They noted that within
the human PLUNC family, amino acid sequence identity is low, ranging
from 16 to 28%. Members of the BPI family are predicted to share very
closely similar 3-dimensional structures, whereas the PLUNC family is
predicted to have much greater variability in the N-terminal domain,
corresponding to the active domain of BPI, thus creating the notion of a
BPI/PLUNC structural superfamily.

Sung et al. (2002) found that rat Plunc mRNA was expressed in heart,
lung, thymus, and salivary gland, as well as in nasal epithelium.
Western blot analysis detected a 31-kD protein in rat lung, heart, and
spleen and in rat and human mucus. In situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical analyses detected expression on the microvilli layer
of respiratory epithelium, and expression was upregulated on the
ipsilateral side after olfactory bulbectomy.

GENE FUNCTION

Bingle and Craven (2002) suggested that members of the PLUNC family may
function in the innate immune response in regions of the mouth, nose,
and lungs, which are sites of significant bacterial exposure.

Using multiple techniques, Chu et al. (2007) showed that human and mouse
bronchial epithelial cells expressed SPLUNC1. Expression of SPLUNC1
decreased Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mp) levels and inhibited IL8 (146930)
production. Conversely, SPLUNC1 RNA interference enhanced Mp growth and
IL8 production. IL13 (147683) significantly decreased SPLUNC1 expression
and Mp clearance. Chu et al. (2007) concluded that SPLUNC1 is a
host-defense protein against Mp. They suggested that in an allergic
setting, such as in asthma with increased IL13 expression, SPLUNC1
expression is reduced, which may in part account for the role of Mp and
other respiratory infections in asthma pathobiology.

The multisubunit epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC; see 600228) must be
proteolytically activated before it can conduct Na+ and absorb excess
mucosal liquid in airways. Using mass spectrometric and Western blot
analyses, Garcia-Caballero et al. (2009) found that normal human
bronchial epithelial cultures secreted SPLUNC1, which could inhibit
proteolytic activation of ENaC. SPLUNC1 did not show intrinsic
antiprotease activity, but immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
SPLUNC1 directly bound all 3 ENaC subunits. Recombinant SPLUNC1
inhibited ENaC activity in human bronchial epithelial cultures and in
Xenopus oocytes. Knockdown of SPLUNC1 by short hairpin RNA resulted in
failure of bronchial epithelial cultures to regulate surface liquid
height and transepithelial voltage. Garcia-Caballero et al. (2009)
concluded that SPLUNC1 binds and blocks ENaC from proteolytic
activation. They proposed that SPLUNC1 acts as a reporter molecule whose
concentration in airway fluid can adjust ENaC activity and regulate
airway hydration.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bingle and Bingle (2000) determined that the human PLUNC gene contains 9
exons and covers 7.3 kb; the first and last exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

Bingle and Bingle (2000) noted that the EST (Z24371) corresponding to
the microsatellite marker D20S195 contained portions of exons 2 and 3 of
PLUNC. The clone had been localized to chromosome 20q11.2 by Tomer et
al. (1998). Linkage of human PLUNC (BPIFA1) to chromosome 20 was
unequivocally confirmed by the existence of partial genomic clones in
the chromosome 20 sequencing project database.

Bingle and Craven (2002) mapped 3 mouse Plunc orthologs to chromosome 2,
which is syntenic with human chromosome 20q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

He et al. (2005) screened all exons, relevant exon-intron boundaries,
and the approximately 2-kb promoter region of the PLUNC gene (BPIFA1)
and identified 8 SNPs. Three haplotype-tagged SNPs were genotyped in a
case-control Chinese population composed of 239 unrelated patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC; 161550) and 286 healthy controls. Two
promoter SNPs, -2128T-C and -1888T-C, showed significant associations
with susceptibility to NPC (OR = 2.8, p less than 0.0006, and OR = 3.3,
p less than 0.0001, respectively). The distribution of haplotypes
constructed based on the -2128T-C and -1888T-C polymorphisms was
significantly different between NPC patients and controls: individuals
with the C/C haplotype had significantly increased susceptibility to NPC
(OR = 1.86, p = 0.00016). He et al. (2005) concluded that genetic
variation in BPIFA1 may influence susceptibility to NPC in the Chinese
population.

REFERENCE 1. Bingle, C. D.; Bingle, L.: Characterisation of the human plunc
gene, a gene product with an upper airways and nasopharyngeal restricted
expression pattern. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1493: 363-367, 2000.

2. Bingle, C. D.; Craven, C. J.: PLUNC: A novel family of candidate
host defence proteins expressed in the upper airways and nasopharynx. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 937-943, 2002.

3. Chu, H. W.; Thaikoottathil, J.; Rino, J. G.; Zhang, G.; Wu, Q.;
Moss, T.; Refaeli, Y.; Bowler, R.; Wenzel, S. E.; Chen, Z.; Zdunek,
J.; Breed, R.; Young, R.; Allaire, E.; Martin, R. J.: Function and
regulation of SPLUNC1 protein in mycoplasma infection and allergic
inflammation. J. Immun. 179: 3995-4002, 2007.

4. Garcia-Caballero, A.; Rasmussen, J. E.; Gaillard, E.; Watson, M.
J.; Olsen, J. C.; Donaldson, S. H.; Stutts, M. J.; Tarran, R.: SPLUNC1
regulates airway surface liquid volume by protecting ENaC from proteolytic
cleavage. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 11412-11417, 2009. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 15091 only, 2009.

5. He, Y.; Zhou, G.; Zhai, Y.; Dong, X.; Lv, L.; He, F.; Yao, K.:
Association of PLUNC gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in a Chinese population. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 42: 172-176,
2005.

6. Sung, Y. K.; Moon, C.; Yoo, J.-Y.; Moon, C.; Pearse, D.; Pevsner,
J.; Ronnett, G. V.: Plunc, a member of the secretory gland protein
family, is up-regulated in nasal respiratory epithelium after olfactory
bulbectomy. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 12762-12769, 2002.

7. Tomer, Y.; Barbesino, G.; Greenberg, D. A.; Concepcion, E.; Davies,
T. F.; International Consortium for the Genetics of Autoimmune Thyroid
Disease: A new Graves disease-susceptibility locus maps to chromosome
20q11.2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1749-1756, 1998.

8. Weston, W. M.; LeClair, E. E.; Trzyna, W.; McHugh, K. M.; Nugent,
P.; Lafferty, C. M.; Ma, L.; Tuan, R. S.; Greene, R. M.: Differential
display identification of plunc, a novel gene expressed in embryonic
palate, nasal epithelium, and adult lung. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 13698-13703,
1999. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 275: 8262 only, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/21/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/8/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2003

CREATED George E. Tiller: 12/10/2002

EDITED carol: 03/18/2013
alopez: 5/11/2012
mgross: 2/9/2011
terry: 1/21/2011
mgross: 5/14/2009
terry: 5/8/2009
wwang: 3/11/2005
wwang: 3/8/2005
terry: 3/1/2005
cwells: 9/17/2003
mgross: 5/5/2003
cwells: 12/19/2002
cwells: 12/18/2002
cwells: 12/12/2002

612779	TITLE *612779 DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE; DPYD
;;DPD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The DPYD gene encodes dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.1.2), the
initial and rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of the pyrimidine
bases uracil and thymine (Van Kuilenburg et al., 1999).

CLONING

Yokota et al. (1994) cloned and sequenced pig and human DPD cDNAs. The
pig and human enzymes contain 1,025 amino acids and have a calculated
molecular mass of 111 kD. The sequence of the gene suggested that DPD
has at least 3 distinct domains: a possible NADPH binding site and
FAD-binding site in the N terminus, 2 motifs of putative
iron/sulfur-binding sites near the C terminus, and a central peptide
domain corresponding to the uracil-binding site. Expression of the pig
enzyme in E. coli catalyzed the reduction of uracil, thymine, and
5-fluorouracil (5FU) with kinetics approximating those published for the
enzyme purified from mammalian liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wei et al. (1998) characterized the structure of the DPYD gene and
determined that it contains 23 exons spanning about 950 kb.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid strategies, Yokota et al. (1994) mapped the
DPYD gene to the centromeric region of chromosome 1 between 1p22 and
1q21.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Takai et al. (1994) assigned the
DPYD gene to 1p22.

GENE FUNCTION

Van Kuilenburg et al. (1999) studied the expression of DPD in various
blood cell components. They demonstrated that the highest level of DPD
was found in monocytes followed by that in lymphocytes, granulocytes,
and platelets, whereas no significant activity of DPD could be detected
in erythrocytes. The activity of DPD in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells was intermediate between that observed in monocytes and
lymphocytes. Van Kuilenburg et al. (1999) also observed a profound
positive correlation between the DPD activity of these cells and the
percentage of monocytes, thus introducing a large inter- and
intrapatient variability in the activity of DPD.

By cDNA microarray, Western blot analysis, and luciferase reporter
assay, Yoo et al. (2009) identified the transcription factor LSF (TFCP2;
189889) as a positive regulator of DPYD.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Dutch patient with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency
(274270) reported by Van Gennip et al. (1994), Meinsma et al. (1995)
identified homozygosity for a mutation in the DPYD gene (IVS14+1G-A;
612779.0001). Both unaffected parents and 1 unaffected sib were
heterozygous for the mutation.

Wei et al. (1996) identified heterozygosity for the IVS14+1G-A mutation
in a British cancer patient with partial DPD deficiency and severe
toxicity after 5-fluorouracil treatment (see 274270).

Vreken et al. (1997) identified a 4-bp deletion in the DPYD gene
(612779.0003) in affected members of a Dutch consanguineous family with
DPD deficiency.

Among a group of 22 patients from 17 families with complete DPD
deficiency, Van Kuilenburg et al. (1999) identified 7 different
mutations in the DPYD gene. The most common mutation by far, accounting
for 52% of mutant alleles, was the IVS14+1G-A. There were no
genotype/phenotype correlations.

Van Kuilenburg et al. (2009) identified intragenic deletions of the DPYD
gene in 4 patients with severe DPD deficiency in whom no point mutations
were found. Three patients had a homozygous 13.8-kb deletion of exon 12,
and 1 had a homozygous 122-kb deletion of exons 14 through 16 of the
DPYD gene. All of these patients were born of consanguineous parents. A
fifth patient was compound heterozygous for a 4-bp deletion
(612779.0003) in the DPYD gene and a de novo 14-Mb deletion of
chromosome 1p21.3-p13.3, including DPYD and several other genes, which
likely contributed to severe psychomotor retardation and unusual
craniofacial features in this patient. Overall, the study found genomic
deletions affecting the DPYD gene in 7% (5 of 72) of DPD-deficient
patients. These patients had a severe form of the disorder, with
psychomotor retardation, epilepsy, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features,
suggesting that gross deletions have a particularly detrimental effect.

NOMENCLATURE

To standardize DPYD allele nomenclature and to conform with the
international human gene nomenclature guidelines, McLeod et al. (1998)
described an alternative to the existing arbitrary system. Based on
recommendations for human genome nomenclature, they proposed that each
distinct allele be designed by DPYD followed by an asterisk and an
arabic numeral. Criteria for classification as a distinct allele were
also presented.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
5-@FLUOROURACIL TOXICITY, INCLUDED
DPYD, IVS14, G-A, +1

Meinsma et al. (1995) determined the molecular basis of
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency (274270) by studying the
phenotype and genotype of a family of a patient with no DPD activity.
Fibroblast mRNAs from the patient and 4 family members were subjected to
RT-PCR using primers generated from the human DPYD cDNA sequence. In the
patient, DPYD mRNA was found to lack a segment of 165 nucleotides as a
result of exon skipping. In the parents and 1 sib, DPYD mRNA was found
to be heterozygous for the deletion, while a brother had only normal
transcript. The deficient patient had no detectable DPD protein. The
precise nature of the presumed splicing defect was not identified. The
homozygous proband, who was first described by van Gennip et al. (1994),
had been admitted to hospital at the age of 25 months with bilateral
microphthalmia, coloboma of the iris and choroid, nystagmus, and a
gradually increasing psychomotor retardation. No growth retardation or
other neurologic abnormalities were detected. All other members of the
pedigree were healthy and showed no ocular abnormalities.

Wei et al. (1996) identified heterozygosity for the 165-nucleotide
deletion in a British a cancer patient with partial DPD deficiency and
severe toxicity after 5-fluorouracil treatment (see 274270). They found
that a G-to-A transition within the 5-prime splice site of intron 14
resulted in exon skipping and an inactive DPYD allele.

Independently, Vreken et al. (1996) showed that the 165-nucleotide
deletion in the mature DPD mRNA was due to a G-to-A transition in the
invariant GT dinucleotide splice donor site downstream of the skipped
exon. The same mutation was identified in another, unrelated, Dutch
patient. Because this mutation destroyed a unique MaeII restriction
site, rapid screening was possible using restriction enzyme cleavage of
the amplified genomic region encompassing this mutation. Analysis of 50
controls revealed no individuals heterozygous for the mutation. Although
both patients had psychomotor retardation, the other features were
different. The second patient presented with convulsions and had no
ocular manifestations and no microcephaly.

Van Kuilenburg et al. (1997) described another patient with severe
5-fluorouracil-related toxicity and heterozygosity for the same G-to-A
splice site mutation with a deletion of 165 basepairs. Hyperpigmentation
and cardiotoxicity were observed as side effects of 5-fluorouracil in
this patient. The enzyme activity in leukocytes of the patient proved to
be in the heterozygous range. The patients came from Denmark, Finland,
and the Netherlands. The authors stated that the G-to-A mutation had
been found in 8 of 11 patients with complete deficiency of the enzyme.

Vreken et al. (1998) stated that the deletion of exon 14 due to the
G-to-A mutation had been identified in 22 of 42 alleles from patients
with complete DPD deficiency.

Van Kuilenburg et al. (1999) found that the IVS14+1G-A mutation, leading
to deletion of exon 14 of the DPYD gene, accounted for 23 of 44 (52%)
DPD deficiency alleles.

.0002
5-@FLUOROURACIL TOXICITY
DPYD, ASP974VAL

In a patient who experienced severe 5-fluorouracil-related toxicity (see
274270), Harris et al. (1991) and Albin et al. (1995) identified a
mutation in the DPYD gene resulting in an asp974-to-val (D974V)
substitution. The aspartic acid residue at codon 974 is not within the
putative catalytic sites of the protein, but the amino acid is conserved
in the human, pig, and cow sequences.

Ridge et al. (1997) studied the frequency of the D974V mutation in 29
Scottish subjects with low DPD enzyme activity and in 274 American
subjects. They detected no mutations in the 606 alleles studied and
concluded that mutations at codon 974 are a rare event.

.0003
DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
DPYD, 4-BP DEL, 296TCAT

In a Dutch consanguineous family with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
deficiency (274270), Vreken et al. (1997) identified a 4-bp deletion
(296delTCAT) in the DPYD gene, resulting in premature termination. The
deletion was located in a TCAT tandem-repeat sequence and most likely
resulted from unequal crossing over or slipped mispairing. Three
homozygous individuals were identified in the family. Two of these
showed convulsive disorders, but 1 was clinically normal. No clear
correlation between DPYD genotype and phenotype was possible. Van
Kuilenburg et al. (2009) referred to this mutation as 299delTCAT.

.0004
DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
DPYD, CYS29ARG

Vreken et al. (1997) described 2 patients with DPD deficiency (274270)
who were both compound heterozygotes for a cys29-to-arg (C29R)
substitution and the common splice donor site mutation (612779.0001).
Only one of these patients showed a convulsive disorder during
childhood, whereas the other showed no clinical phenotype, further
illustrating the lack of correlation between genotype and phenotype in
DPD deficiency.

Vreken et al. (1997) described another patient who was a compound
heterozygote for C29R and an R886H substitution (612779.0006). The
patient had been hospitalized for upper airway infection and was being
investigated for unexplained hypokalemia. However, there were no
convulsions or other neurologic abnormalities. By assaying recombinant
C29R mutant enzyme, they found that C29R had no detectable DPYD
activity; however, R886H showed activity about 40% of normal. The
authors concluded that the C29R mutation alone was sufficient to explain
the DPD-deficient phenotype and that the R886H mutation was probably a
rare polymorphism.

.0005
DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
DPYD, 1-BP DEL, 1897C

In a child with DPD deficiency (274270), born of consanguineous parents,
Vreken et al. (1997) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (1897delC) in
the DPYD gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature truncation. At
the age of 9 months the patient showed febrile convulsions, severe
neuromotor retardation, and spastic tetraplegia. Cerebral MRI showed
ventriculomegaly with white matter hypodensity. At the age of 6 years,
thymine-uraciluria was noted and DPD deficiency was demonstrated in
fibroblasts. An earlier-born child had died before her first birthday
with severe neuromotor retardation and febrile convulsions.
Surprisingly, the father of the patient was also completely DPD
deficient, although he had no history of convulsions. The mother of the
patient showed intermediate DPD activity consistent with obligate
carrier status. The patient was heterozygous for this 1-bp deletion,
whereas the father was thought to be homozygous. The nature of the
heterozygous mutation carried by the mother and transmitted to the son
was not determined.

.0006
DIHYDROPYRIMIDINE DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
DPYD, ARG886HIS

Vreken et al. (1997) described a patient who was a compound heterozygote
for a C29R mutation (612779.0004) and an arg886-to-his (R886H)
substitution. By assaying recombinant C29R mutant enzyme, they found
that C29R had no detectable DPYD activity; however, R886H showed
activity about 40% of normal. The authors concluded that the C29R
mutation alone was sufficient to explain the DPD-deficient phenotype and
that the R886H mutation was probably a rare polymorphism.

REFERENCE 1. Albin, N.; Johnson, M. R.; Shahinian, H.; Wang, K.; Diasio, R.
B.: Initial characterization of the molecular defect in human dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase deficiency. Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res. (Abstract) 36:
211 only, 1995.

2. Harris, B. E.; Carpenter, J. T.; Diasio, R. B.: Severe 5-fluorouracil
toxicity secondary to dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency:
a potentially more common pharmacogenetic syndrome. Cancer 68: 499-501,
1991.

3. McLeod, H. L.; Collie-Duguid, E. S. R.; Vreken, P.; Johnson, M.
R.; Wei, X.; Sapone, A.; Diasio, R. B.; Fernandez-Salguero, P.; van
Kuilenberg, A. B. P.; van Gennip, A. H.; Gonzales, F. J.: Nomenclature
for human DPYD alleles. Pharmacogenetics 8: 455-459, 1998.

4. Meinsma, R.; Fernandez-Salguero, P.; Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.;
van Gennip A. H.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Human polymorphism in drug metabolism:
mutation in the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene results in exon
skipping and thymine uracilurea (sic). DNA Cell Biol. 14: 1-6, 1995.

5. Ridge, S. A.; Brown, O.; McMurrough, J.; Fernandez-Salguero, P.;
Evans, W. E.; Gonzalez, F. J.; McLeod, H. L.: Mutations at codon
974 of the DPYD gene are a rare event. Brit. J. Cancer 75: 178-179,
1997.

6. Takai, S.; Fernandez-Salguero, P.; Kimura, S.; Gonzalez, F. J.;
Yamada, K.: Assignment of the human dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
gene (DPYD) to chromosome region 1p22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 24:
613-614, 1994.

7. van Gennip, A. H.; Abeling, N. G. G. M.; Stroomer, A. E. M.; van
Lenthe, H.; Bakker, H. D.: Clinical and biochemical findings in six
patients with pyrimidine degradation defects. J. Inherit. Metab.
Dis. 17: 130-132, 1994.

8. van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Meijer, J.; Mul, A. N. P. M.; Hennekam,
R. C. M.; Hoovers, J. M. N.; de Die-Smulders, C. E. M.; Weber, P.;
Mori, A. C.; Bierau, J.; Fowler, B.; Macke, K.; Sass, J. O.; Meinsma,
R.; Hennermann, J. B.; Miny, P.; Zoetekouw, L.; Vijzelaar, R.; Nicolai,
J.; Ylstra, B.; Rubio-Gozalbo, M. E.: Analysis of severely affected
patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency reveals large
intragenic rearrangements of DPYD and a de novo interstitial deletion
del(1)(p13.3p21.3). Hum. Genet. 125: 581-590, 2009.

9. Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; van Lenthe, H.; Blom, M. J.; Mul, E.
P. J.; Van Gennip, A. H.: Profound variation in dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase activity in human blood cells: major implications for
the detection of partly deficient patients. Brit. J. Cancer 79:
620-626, 1999.

10. Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Vreken, P.; Abeling, N. G. G. M.; Bakker,
H. D.; Meinsma, R.; Van Lenthe, H.; De Abreu, R. A.; Smeitink, J.
A. M.; Kayserili, H.; Apak, M. Y.; Christensen, E.; Holopainen, I.;
Pulkki, K.; Riva, D.; Botteon, G.; Holme, E.; Tulinius, M.; Kleijer,
W. J.; Beemer, F. A.; Duran, M.; and 7 others: Genotype and phenotype
in patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Hum.
Genet. 104: 1-9, 1999.

11. Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Vreken, P.; Beex, L. V. A. M.; Meinsma,
R.; Van Lenthe, H.; De Abreu, R. A.; Van Gennip, A. H.: Heterozygosity
for a point mutation in an invariant splice donor site of dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase and severe 5-fluorouracil related toxicity. Europ.
J. Cancer 33: 2258-2264, 1997.

12. Vreken, P.; van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Meinsma, R.; Beemer, F.
A.; Duran, M.; van Gennip, A. H.: Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
deficiency: a novel mutation and expression of missense mutations
in E. coli. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 21: 276-279, 1998. Note: Erratum:
J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 21: 623 only, 1998.

13. Vreken, P.; Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Meinsma, R.; De Abreu, R.
A.; Van Gennip, A. H.: Identification of a four-base deletion (delTCAT296-299)
in the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene with variable clinical
expression. Hum. Genet. 100: 263-265, 1997.

14. Vreken, P.; Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Meinsma, R.; Smit, G. P.
A.; Bakker, H. D.; De Abreu, R. A.; van Gennip, A. H.: A point mutation
in an invariant splice donor site leads to exon skipping in two unrelated
Dutch patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. J.
Inherit. Metab. Dis. 19: 645-654, 1996.

15. Vreken, P.; Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Meinsma, R.; van Gennip,
A. H.: Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency: identification
and expression of missense mutations C29R, R886H and R235W. Hum.
Genet. 101: 333-338, 1997.

16. Vreken, P.; Van Kuilenburg, A. B. P.; Meinsma, R.; van Gennip,
A. H.: Identification of novel point mutations in the dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase gene. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 20: 335-338, 1997.

17. Wei, X.; Elizondo, G.; Sapone, A.; McLeod, H. L.; Raunio, H.;
Fernandez-Salguero, P.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Characterization of the
human dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene. Genomics 51: 391-400,
1998.

18. Wei, X.; McLeod, H. L.; McMurrough, J.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Fernandez-Salguero,
P.: Molecular basis of the human dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
deficiency and 5-fluorouracil toxicity. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 610-615,
1996.

19. Yokota, H.; Fernandez-Salguero, P.; Furuya, H.; Lin, K.; McBride,
O. W.; Podschun, B.; Schnackerz, K. D.; Gonzalez, F. J.: cDNA cloning
and chromosome mapping of human dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, an
enzyme associated with 5-fluorouracil toxicity and congenital thymine
uraciluria. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 23192-23196, 1994.

20. Yoo, B. K.; Gredler, R.; Vozhilla, N.; Su, Z.; Chen, D.; Forcier,
T.; Shah, K.; Saxena, U.; Hansen, U.; Fisher, P. B.; Sarkar, D.:
Identification of genes conferring resistance to 5-fluorouracil. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 12938-12943, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/23/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/7/2010

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 5/7/2009

EDITED carol: 03/12/2013
terry: 1/17/2012
wwang: 10/5/2010
ckniffin: 9/23/2010
wwang: 4/8/2010
ckniffin: 4/7/2010
carol: 5/18/2009
carol: 5/15/2009
ckniffin: 5/8/2009

603850	TITLE *603850 DYNAMIN 1-LIKE; DNM1L
;;DYNAMIN-LIKE PROTEIN 1; DLP1;;
DYNAMIN-RELATED PROTEIN 1; DRP1;;
S. CEREVISIAE DNM1/VPS1-LIKE PROTEIN; DVLP;;
DYNAMIN FAMILY MEMBER, PROLINE-RICH C-TERMINAL DOMAIN-LESS; DYMPLE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNM1L belongs to the dynamin (see DNM1; 602377) family of large GTPases
that mediate membrane remodeling during a variety of cellular processes.
DNM1L has an important role in the division of growing mitochondria and
peroxisomes (summary by Pitts et al. (2004)).

CLONING

By PCR amplification of human hepatoma HepG2 cDNA using oligonucleotides
based on human ESTs homologous to Vps1 and Dnm1 (602377), Shin et al.
(1997) obtained a partial cDNA which they used to screen a HepG2 cDNA
library. They isolated cDNAs encoding a predicted 736-amino acid
protein, DNM1L, which they designated DVLP. DVLP contains the highly
conserved N-terminal tripartite GTP-binding domain, but it lacks the
pleckstrin homology domain and proline-rich region. It shares 45% and
42% amino acid identity with yeast Dnm1 and Vps1, respectively.
Immunofluorescence studies of mammalian cells showed that DVLP localized
to the perinuclear region and did not colocalize with endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) or Golgi marker proteins.

By searching an EST database with a rat dynamin-3 (see 611445) amino
acid sequence, Imoto et al. (1998) identified a human cDNA encoding
DNM1L, which they called DRP1. Northern blot analysis indicated that
DRP1 was expressed ubiquitously in human tissues, with highest levels in
skeletal muscle, heart, kidney, and brain. Immunolocalization studies
showed that DRP1 was enriched in a perinuclear compartment that labeled
with ER and Golgi markers. The localization of DRP1 was highly similar
to the localization of the ER and cis-Golgi GTPase RAB1 (179508), but
not to the localization of the trans-Golgi GTPase RAB6 (179513).

By immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA expression library with serum from a
scleroderma (181750) patient, Kamimoto et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs
encoding DNM1L, which they referred to as DYMPLE. They identified cDNAs
corresponding to 3 alternatively spliced DYMPLE transcripts, which
encode a deduced 736-amino acid protein and deduced isoforms containing
a 29- or 37-amino acid deletion in the C-terminal region. RT-PCR
analysis of mouse tissues demonstrated that alternative splicing
occurred in a tissue-specific manner. Northern blot analysis detected
2.5- and 4.2-kb DYMPLE transcripts in all human tissues examined. The
authors reported that these transcripts were alternatively
polyadenylated. In situ hybridization analysis of mouse brain showed
abundant expression of Dymple mRNA in the cerebellum and in several
regions of the cerebrum and diencephalon. High levels of Dymple mRNA
were found in cerebellar Purkinje cells and pontile giant neurons.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with
glycogen synthase kinase-3-beta (GSK3B; 605004), Hong et al. (1998)
isolated a human fetal liver cDNA encoding DNM1L, which they called
dynamin-like protein-4 (DYNIV). The deduced protein contains 699 amino
acids.

Howng et al. (2004) identified 4 DYNIV splice variants that encode the
full-length 736-amino acid protein and 699-, 710-, and 725-amino acid
isoforms. All isoforms contain an N-terminal tripartite
GTPase/GTP-binding site, and the shorter isoforms bear various in-frame
deletions in their C-terminal halves relative to full-length DYNIV.
RT-PCR detected variable expression of all 4 splice variants in 6 human
cell lines examined.

Pitts et al. (2004) noted that DLP1 has a dynamin-like protein
structure, with a conserved N-terminal GTPase domain, followed by a
conserved middle domain, a nonconserved region, and a conserved
C-terminal coiled-coil domain. Yoon (2010) stated that there are 12
splice variants of rat Dlp1 that encode proteins of 705 to 761 amino
acids. The differential splicing results in changes within the GTPase
and nonconserved domains.

GENE FAMILY

The dynamin superfamily of GTPases is divided into subfamilies on the
basis of structural similarity. Members of the dynamin subfamily,
including dynamin-1 (DNM1; 602377), dynamin-2 (DNM2; 602378), and
dynamin-3 (DNM3; 611445), contain an N-terminal tripartite GTPase
domain, a pleckstrin homology domain, and a C-terminal proline-rich
region. Dynamin subfamily members have been shown to participate in
clathrin-mediated endocytosis at the plasma membrane. Members of the
dynamin-related subfamily, including the S. cerevisiae proteins Dnm1 and
Vps1, contain the N-terminal tripartite GTPase domain but do not have
the pleckstrin homology or proline-rich domains. Vps1 has been shown to
play a role in vesicular transport from the late Golgi compartment to
vacuoles, and Dnm1 is thought to be involved in endosomal trafficking.
Furthermore, Dnm1 has been shown to be essential for the maintenance of
mitochondrial morphology (Otsuga et al., 1998). Mitochondria exist as a
dynamic tubular network with projections that move, break, and reseal in
response to local environmental changes. Dnm1 is required for the
cortical distribution of this network.

GENE FUNCTION

To determine the function of DRP1 (DNM1L), Smirnova et al. (1998)
expressed mutant DRP1 in COS-7 cells. A mutation in the GTPase domain
caused profound alterations in mitochondrial morphology. In cells
expressing mutant DRP1, the tubular projections normally present in
wildtype cells were retracted into large perinuclear aggregates. By
electron microscopy, the mitochondrial aggregates appeared as clusters
of tubules rather than as a large mass of coalescing membrane. The
morphology of other organelles was unaffected by mutant DRP1. In
addition, mutant DRP1 had no effect on the transport functions of the
secretory and endocytic pathways. The authors proposed that DRP1
establishes mitochondrial morphology through a role in distributing
mitochondrial tubules throughout the cytoplasm. They suggested that DRP1
is the functional equivalent of yeast Dnm1.

Imoto et al. (1998) demonstrated that overexpression of wildtype human
DRP1 in mammalian cells increased secretion of a luciferase reporter
protein, whereas overexpression of a GTP-binding site mutant of DRP1
decreased secretion of this marker.

Using an in vitro GTPase assay, Kamimoto et al. (1998) showed that a
bacterially expressed DYMPLE fusion protein hydrolyzed GTP without
additive modifications or coactivators.

Hong et al. (1998) showed that the C-terminal region of the 699-amino
acid DYNIV protein bound to GSK3B.

Shin et al. (1999) found that DNM1L was oligomeric, probably tetrameric,
under physiologic salt conditions, and that it aggregated into
sedimentable complexes under low salt conditions. Analyses using the
yeast 2-hybrid system and immunoprecipitation showed that the N-terminal
and C-terminal regions of DNM1L could interact with each other.

Pitts et al. (1999) transiently transfected normal rat liver cells with
wildtype rat Dlp1 and Dlp1 containing point mutations within conserved
GTP-binding domains. Wildtype Dlp1 localized to distinct nonrandom foci
along the length of mitochondria and in linear arrays on microtubules
and the ER. Expression of the mutant proteins caused a pronounced
collapse of mitochondria into the cell center. The ER of cells
expressing mutant Dlp1 was also less distinct and appeared vesiculated.

Unlike the diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of wildtype DRP1, Santel and
Fuller (2001) found that a GTPase-dead DRP1 mutant distributed to
punctate structures in transfected COS-7 cells. In addition,
mitochondria formed perinuclear aggregates similar to the aggregates
formed in cells overexpressing mitofusin-2 (MFN2; 608507). COS-7 cells
cotransfected with the GTPase-dead DRP1 and MFN2 developed mitochondrial
tubules that extended from the perinuclear mitochondrial cluster towards
the cell periphery. Santel and Fuller (2001) concluded that the size and
morphologic arrangement of mitochondria are due to a dynamic balance
between MFN-dependent mitochondrial fusion and DRP1-dependent
mitochondrial fission.

Yoon et al. (2003) observed that human FIS1 (609003) and rat Dlp1 formed
a complex in transfected cells and could interact with each other
directly in vitro. These and other findings provided evidence that FIS1
regulates mitochondrial fission through a protein-protein interaction
that recruits DLP1 from the cytosol to the mitochondrial surface.

Li and Gould (2003) showed that overexpression of PEX11-beta (PEX11B;
603867) in human fibroblasts induced peroxisome division in a multistep
process involving elongation of preexisting peroxisomes followed by
their division. They found that DLP1 was essential for the peroxisome
division. The 710-amino acid DLP1 isoform, DLP1a, associated with
peroxisomes, and PEX11-beta overexpression recruited DLP1a to peroxisome
membranes. DLP1a and PEX11 proteins did not appear to interact directly.

By swapping domains between rat Dnm2 and rat Dlp1, Pitts et al. (2004)
showed that the coiled-coil domain of Dlp1 conferred mitochondrial
targeting to the protein. However, the mitochondria-specific function of
Dlp1 also required the middle and nonconserved domains.

Jagasia et al. (2005) showed that Drp1, a key component of the
mitochondrial fission machinery, was required and sufficient to induce
mitochondrial fragmentation and programmed cell death during C. elegans
development.

Germain et al. (2005) found that fluorescence-tagged rodent Drp1 was
expressed in the cytosol of COS-7 cells, and that treatment of COS-7 and
human cells with the apoptotic protein BIK (603392) resulted in
recruitment of Drp1 to mitochondria prior to mitochondrial
fragmentation. Drp1 maintained association with mitochondria during
their initial shape change and following loss of mitochondrial potential
and mobilization of cytochrome c (123970). Transmission electron
microscopy showed that BIK expression caused profound opening of
mitochondrial cristae, and these changes were inhibited by expression of
a dominant-negative Drp1 mutant. Germain et al. (2005) concluded that
DRP1 is involved in remodeling and opening of mitochondrial cristae
during apoptosis, and that this function of DRP1 is distinct from its
role in mitochondrial fission.

Type III, or necrosis-like, programmed cell death (PCD) is defined
exclusively by cytoplasmic features and seems to operate in a
caspase-independent manner. Bras et al. (2007) showed that ligation of
CD47 (601028) triggered type III PCD in B cells from healthy volunteers
and patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; 151400), and they
identified DRP1 as a key mediator of this PCD. CD47 ligation induced
DRP1 translocation from the cytosol to mitochondria. In mitochondria,
DRP1 provoked impairment of the mitochondrial electron transport chain,
resulting in dissipation of mitochondrial transmembrane potential,
generation of reactive oxygen species, and a drop in ATP levels.
Responsiveness of cells to CD47 ligation increased following DRP1
overexpression, while resistance to CD47-mediated death was observed
following DRP1 downregulation. In CLL B cells, DRP1 mRNA levels strongly
correlated with death sensitivity.

Cho et al. (2009) found that nitric oxide produced in response to
beta-amyloid protein (104760), thought to be a key mediator of Alzheimer
disease (see 104300), triggered mitochondrial fission, synaptic loss,
and neuronal damage, in part via S-nitrosylation of DRP1 (forming
SNO-DRP1). Preventing nitrosylation of DRP1 by cysteine mutation
abrogated these neurotoxic events. Cho et al. (2009) showed that
SNO-DRP1 is increased in brains of human Alzheimer disease patients and
may thus contribute to the pathogenesis of neurodegeneration.

Malena et al. (2009) tested the hypothesis that altering the balance
between mitochondrial fusion and fission could influence the segregation
of mutant and wildtype mtDNA variants, because it would modify the
number of organelles per cell. Human cells heteroplasmic for the
pathologic 3243A-G (MTTL1; 590050.0001) mitochondrial DNA mutation were
transfected with constructs designed to silence DRP1 or human FIS1
(TTC11; 609003), whose gene products are required for mitochondrial
fission. DRP1 and FIS1 gene silencing were both associated with
increased levels of mutant mitochondrial DNA. The authors concluded that
the extent of the mitochondrial reticular network appears to be an
important factor in determining mutant load.

Huntington disease (HD; 143100) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused
by abnormal expansion of a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract in huntingtin
(HTT; 613004). Song et al. (2011) found mitochondrial abnormalities,
including fragmentation, altered cristae morphology, and arrested
intracellular movement, in fibroblasts from a patient with HD and in
neurons of rodent models of HD. Immunoprecipitation of normal and HD
human or mouse brain indicated that mutant, but not normal, huntingtin
interacted with Drp1. In vitro assays with liposomes that mimicked the
mitochondrial outer membrane revealed that mutant huntingtin stimulated
Drp1 GTPase activity. Expression of a dominant-negative Drp1 mutant
rescued mutant huntingtin-mediated mitochondrial fragmentation, defects
in mitochondrial transport, and neuronal cell death. Electron microscopy
showed that the normal ring- and spiral-like organization of DRP1
oligomers had an additional layer of density with the addition of
mutant, but not normal, huntingtin.

Using Western blot analysis, Wang et al. (2011) found that the
phosphorylated form of Drp1 accumulated in the cytosol of control
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, whereas the unphosphorylated form of Drp1
accumulated in mitochondria-enriched fractions following anoxia
treatment. Drp1 translocation to mitochondria was associated with
anoxia-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and apoptosis. Wang et al.
(2011) characterized upstream events in this apoptotic pathway and found
that p53 (TP53; 191170) downregulated expression of microRNA-499
(MIR499; 613614), which relieved Mir499-dependent repression of the
calcineurin catalytic subunits Cna-alpha (PPP3CA; 114105) and Cna-beta
(PPP3CB; 114106). Knockdown of either Cna-alpha or Cna-beta via small
interfering RNA attenuated dephosphorylation-dependent Drp1 accumulation
in mitochondria, mitochondria fragmentation, and anoxia-induced cell
death.

Endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria exhibit tightly coupled dynamics
and have extensive contacts. In yeast and mammalian cells, Friedman et
al. (2011) tested whether endoplasmic reticulum plays a role in
mitochondrial division. They found that mitochondrial division occurred
at positions where endoplasmic reticulum tubules contacted mitochondria
and mediated constriction before Drp1 recruitment. Friedman et al.
(2011) concluded that endoplasmic reticulum may play an active role in
defining the position of mitochondrial division sites.

Wang et al. (2012) found that RIP1 (RIPK1; 603453), RIP3 (RIPK3;
605817), and MLKL (615153) formed a necrosis complex in human cell
lines. Upon induction of necrosis by TNF-alpha (191160), both isoforms
of PGAM5 (614939), PGAM5L and PGAM5S, interacted with the RIP1-RIP3-MLKL
necrosis complex and were phosphorylated. Phosphorylated PGAM5S then
recruited DRP1 and activated DRP1 by dephosphorylation, resulting in
mitochondrial fragmentation and execution of necrosis. Blockade of
phosphorylation or dephosphorylation signaling at several points in this
signaling cascade, or knockdown of PGAM5 expression, blocked
TNF-alpha-induced necrosis. Knockdown experiments showed that both PGAM5
isoforms and DRP1, but not RIP1, RIP3, or MLKL, were also involved in
necrosis induced by reactive oxygen species or ionophore-mediated
calcium shock.

Korobova et al. (2013) found that actin polymerization through
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized inverted formin-2 (INF2; 610982)
was required for efficient mitochondrial fission in mammalian cells.
INF2 functioned upstream of DRP1. Actin filaments appeared to accumulate
between mitochondria and INF2-enriched ER membranes at constriction
sites. Thus, INF2-induced actin filaments may drive initial
mitochondrial constriction, which allows DRP1-driven secondary
constriction.

GENE STRUCTURE

Howng et al. (2004) determined that the DNM1L gene contains 20 exons and
spans 64 kb. Exons 15 and 16 are subject to differential splicing. The
5-prime flanking sequence contains 3 GC boxes that concatenate AP2
(TFAP2A; 107580)- and SP1 (189906)-binding motifs, but it lacks TATA or
CAAT consensus sequences. Deletion analysis located the minimal promoter
at nucleotides -108 to -100.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Howng et al. (2004) mapped the DNM1L gene
to chromosome 12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a newborn girl with a lethal encephalopathy due to defective
mitochondrial and peroxisomal fission (EMPF; 614388), Waterham et al.
(2007) identified a de novo heterozygous dominant-negative mutation in
the dynamin gene DLP1 (A395D; 603850.0001). The affected infant showed
microcephaly, abnormal brain development, optic atrophy and hypoplasia,
persistent lactic acidemia, and a mildly elevated plasma concentration
of very long-chain fatty acids. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
detected an abnormal gyral pattern in both frontal lobes and was
associated with dysmyelination. Death occurred at 37 days of age.
Immunofluorescence microscopic analyses showed fewer peroxisomes in
fibroblasts from the patient of Waterham et al. (2007) than in
fibroblasts from control subjects. Furthermore, the peroxisomes from the
patient varied markedly in size and were frequently arranged in rows.
This arrangement was similar to that seen in mammalian cells
overexpressing dominant-negative mutant DLP1 or those with DLP1
expression that had been downregulated owing to RNA interference (Koch
et al., 2003; Li and Gould, 2003). Because such mammalian cells also
showed a defect in mitochondrial fission (Smirnova et al., 2001; Yoon et
al., 2001), Waterham et al. (2007) studied the mitochondria of
fibroblasts from the patient using a fluorescent mitochondrial probe.
Mitochondria in the patient's fibroblasts were elongated, tangled,
tubular structures concentrated predominantly around the nucleus.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ishihara et al. (2009) found that Drp1 deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. Drp1 -/- embryos showed reduced development of the heart and
liver, as well as thinned neural tube cell layer. Electron microscopy
revealed that Drp1 -/- embryos had enlarged mitochondria with normal
cristae and cytochrome c oxidase (see 516030) activity. Embryonic
fibroblasts and stem cells from Drp1 -/- mice were healthy and
proliferated normally. The ER and Golgi of Drp1 -/- cells appeared
normal, but their mitochondria were abnormally extended and clustered
near the nucleus. Peroxisomes were also swollen in Drp1 -/- cells.
Cytokinesis in Drp1 -/- fibroblasts proceeded asymmetrically, with
filamentous and highly clustered mitochondria cleaved at a constriction
site of the cell in concert with cytokinesis and segregated unequally
into the daughter cells. Treatment of Drp1 -/- cells with proapoptotic
reagents suggested that Drp1 is involved in later apoptotic events,
including cytochrome c release and caspase activation. Mice with neural
cell-specific Drp1 deletion (NS-Drp1 -/- mice) died shortly after birth
as a result of brain hypoplasia and apoptosis. Primary cultures of
NS-Drp1 -/- mouse forebrain showed decreased number of neurites and
defective synapse formation, suggesting that aggregated mitochondria
fail to distribute properly within neural cell processes. NS-Drp1 -/-
neuronal cells were also highly sensitive to Ca(2+)-dependent apoptosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ENCEPHALOPATHY, LETHAL, DUE TO DEFECTIVE MITOCHONDRIAL AND PEROXISOMAL
FISSION
DNM1L, ALA395ASP

In an infant with a lethal encephalopathy due to defective mitochondrial
and peroxisomal fission (EMPF; 614388), Waterham et al. (2007) found
heterozygosity for a 1184C-A transversion in the DNM1L gene that
resulted in an ala395-to-asp (A395D) substitution in the middle domain
of the protein. The mutation was not found in genomic DNA from blood
cells from either parent, indicating that the mutation either was de
novo or was present only in germline cells of 1 parent. The patient
presented in the first days of life with microcephaly, abnormal brain
development, optic atrophy and hypoplasia, and lactic acidemia, and died
at age 37 days. Overexpression of mutant DNM1L from the patient in
fibroblasts from control subjects induced aberrant mitochondrial and
peroxisomal phenotypes, indicating that the mutation acted in a
dominant-negative manner.

REFERENCE 1. Bras, M.; Yuste, V. J.; Roue, G.; Barbier, S.; Sancho, P.; Virely,
C.; Rubio, M.; Baudet, S.; Esquerda, J. E.; Merle-Beral, H.; Sarfati,
M.; Susin, S. A.: Drp1 mediates caspase-independent type III cell
death in normal and leukemic cells. Molec. Cell. Biol. 27: 7073-7088,
2007.

2. Cho, D.-H.; Nakamura, T.; Fang, J.; Cieplak, P.; Godzik, A.; Gu,
Z.; Lipton, S. A.: S-nitrosylation of Drp1 mediates beta-amyloid-related
mitochondrial fission and neuronal injury. Science 324: 102-105,
2009.

3. Friedman, J. R.; Lackner, L. L.; West, M.; DiBenedetto, J. R.;
Nunnari, J.; Voeltz, G. K.: ER tubules mark sites of mitochondrial
division. Science 334: 358-362, 2011.

4. Germain, M.; Mathai, J. P.; McBride, H. M.; Shore, G. C.: Endoplasmic
reticulum BIK initiates DRP1-regulated remodelling of mitochondrial
cristae during apoptosis. EMBO J. 24: 1546-1556, 2005.

5. Hong, Y.-R.; Chen, C.-H.; Cheng, D.-S.; Howng, S.-L.; Chow, C.-C.
: Human dynamin-like protein interacts with the glycogen synthase
kinase 3-beta. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 249: 697-703, 1998.

6. Howng, S.-L.; Sy, W.-D.; Cheng, T.-S.; Lieu, A.-S.; Wang, C.; Tzou,
W.-S.; Cho, C.-L.; Hong, Y.-R.: Genomic organization, alternative
splicing, and promoter analysis of human dynamin-like protein gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 314: 766-772, 2004.

7. Imoto, M.; Tachibana, I.; Urrutia, R.: Identification and functional
characterization of a novel human protein highly related to the yeast
dynamin-like GTPase Vps1p. J. Cell Sci. 111: 1341-1349, 1998.

8. Ishihara, N.; Nomura, M.; Jofuku, A.; Kato, H.; Suzuki, S. O.;
Masuda, K.; Otera, H.; Nakanishi, Y.; Nonaka, I.; Goto, Y.; Taguchi,
N.; Morinaga, H.; Maeda, M.; Takayanagi, R.; Yokota, S.; Mihara, K.
: Mitochondrial fission factor Drp1 is essential for embryonic development
and synapse formation in mice. Nature Cell Biol. 11: 958-966, 2009.

9. Jagasia, R.; Grote, P.; Westermann, B.; Conradt, B.: DRP-1-mediated
mitochondrial fragmentation during EGL-1-induced cell death in C.
elegans. Nature 433: 754-760, 2005.

10. Kamimoto, T.; Nagai, Y.; Onogi, H.; Muro, Y.; Wakabayashi, T.;
Hagiwara, M.: Dymple, a novel dynamin-like high molecular weight
GTPase lacking a proline-rich carboxyl-terminal domain in mammalian
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1044-1051, 1998.

11. Koch, A.; Thiemann, M.; Grabenbauer, M.; Yoon, Y.; McNiven, M.
A.; Schrader, M.: Dynamin-like protein 1 is involved in peroxisomal
fission. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 8597-8605, 2003.

12. Korobova, F.; Ramabhadran, V.; Higgs, H. N.: An actin-dependent
step in mitochondrial fission mediated by the ER-associated formin
INF2. Science 339: 464-467, 2013.

13. Li, X.; Gould, S. J.: The dynamin-like GTPase DLP1 is essential
for peroxisome division and is recruited to peroxisomes in part by
PEX11. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 17012-17020, 2003.

14. Malena, A.; Loro, E.; Di Re, M.; Holt, I. J.; Vergani, L.: Inhibition
of mitochondrial fission favours mutant over wild-type mitochondrial
DNA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 3407-3416, 2009.

15. Otsuga, D.; Keegan, B. R.; Brisch, E.; Thatcher, J. W.; Hermann,
G. J.; Bleazard, W.; Shaw, J. M.: The dynamin-related GTPase, Dnm1p,
controls mitochondrial morphology in yeast. J. Cell Biol. 143: 333-349,
1998.

16. Pitts, K. R.; McNiven, M. A.; Yoon, Y.: Mitochondria-specific
function of the dynamin family protein DLP1 is mediated by its C-terminal
domains. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 50286-50294, 2004.

17. Pitts, K. R.; Yoon, Y.; Krueger, E. W.; McNiven, M. A.: The dynamin-like
protein DLP1 is essential for normal distribution and morphology of
the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria in mammalian cells. Molec.
Biol. Cell 10: 4403-4417, 1999.

18. Santel, A.; Fuller, M. T.: Control of mitochondrial morphology
by a human mitofusin. J. Cell Sci. 114: 867-874, 2001.

19. Shin, H.-W.; Shinotsuka, C.; Torii, S.; Murakami, K.; Nakayama,
K.: Identification and subcellular localization of a novel mammalian
dynamin-related protein homologous to yeast Vps1p and Dnm1p. J. Biochem. 122:
525-530, 1997.

20. Shin, H.-W.; Takatsu, H.; Mukai, H.; Munekata, E.; Murakami, K.;
Nakayama, K.: Intermolecular and interdomain interactions of a dynamin-related
GTP-binding protein, Dnm1p/Vps1p-like protein. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
2780-2785, 1999.

21. Smirnova, E.; Griparic, L.; Shurland, D.-L.; van der Bliek, A.
M.: Dynamin-related protein Drp1 is required for mitochondrial division
in mammalian cells. Molec. Biol. Cell 12: 2245-2256, 2001.

22. Smirnova, E.; Shurland, D.-L.; Ryazantsev, S. N.; van der Bliek,
A. M.: A human dynamin-related protein controls the distribution
of mitochondria. J. Cell Biol. 143: 351-358, 1998.

23. Song, W.; Chen, J.; Petrilli, A.; Liot, G.; Klinglmayr, E.; Zhou,
Y.; Poquiz, P.; Tjong, J.; Pouladi, M. A.; Hayden, M. R.; Masliah,
E.; Ellisman, M.; Rouiller, I.; Schwarzenbacher, R.; Bossy, B.; Perkins,
G.; Bossy-Wetzel, E.: Mutant huntingtin binds the mitochondrial fission
GTPase dynamin-related protein-1 and increases its enzymatic activity. Nature
Med. 17: 377-382, 2011.

24. Wang, J.-X.; Jiao, J.-Q.; Li, Q.; Long, B.; Wang, K.; Liu, J.-P.;
Li, Y.-R.; Li, P.-F.: miR-499 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by
targeting calcineurin and dynamin-related protein-1. Nature Med. 17:
71-78, 2011.

25. Wang, Z.; Jiang, H.; Chen, S.; Du, F.; Wang, X.: The mitochondrial
phosphatase PGAM5 functions at the convergence point of multiple necrotic
death pathways. Cell 148: 228-243, 2012.

26. Waterham, H. R.; Koster, J.; van Roermund, C. W. T.; Mooyer, P.
A. W.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Leonard, J. V.: A lethal defect of mitochondrial
and peroxisomal fission. New Eng. J. Med. 356: 1736-1741, 2007.

27. Yoon, Y.: Personal Communication. Rochester, Minn.  1/7/2010.

28. Yoon, Y.; Krueger, E. W.; Oswald, B. J.; McNiven, M. A.: The
mitochondrial protein hFis1 regulates mitochondrial fission in mammalian
cells through an interaction with the dynamin-like protein DLP1. Molec.
Cell.  Biol. 23: 5409-5420, 2003.

29. Yoon, Y.; Pitts, K. R.; McNiven, M. A.: Mammalian dynamin-like
protein DLP1 tubulates membranes. Molec. Biol. Cell 12: 2894-2905,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/25/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/7/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/19/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2004

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 5/26/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/29/2013
alopez: 2/26/2013
terry: 2/21/2013
carol: 2/6/2013
mgross: 11/16/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
alopez: 1/6/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
carol: 12/12/2011
ckniffin: 12/12/2011
mgross: 8/26/2011
terry: 8/25/2011
mgross: 8/24/2011
terry: 8/22/2011
alopez: 7/20/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
mgross: 1/25/2010
terry: 1/19/2010
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
carol: 10/15/2008
alopez: 11/19/2007
alopez: 4/22/2005
terry: 4/15/2005
mgross: 3/5/2004
cwells: 3/3/2004
terry: 2/11/2004
carol: 5/25/2000
psherman: 4/17/2000
psherman: 5/27/1999
mgross: 5/27/1999
psherman: 5/27/1999

606389	TITLE *606389 CATION CHANNEL, SPERM-ASSOCIATED, 1; CATSPER1
;;CATSPER
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CATSPER is a sperm-specific ion channel that mediates calcium entry into
sperm and is essential for sperm hyperactivated motility and male
fertility. The CASTPER complex contains 4 pore-forming subunits,
CATSPER1, CATSPER2 (607249), CATSPER3 (609120), and CATSPER4 (609121),
and at least 2 auxiliary proteins, CATSPERB (611169) and CATSPERG
(613452). Each pore-forming subunit has 6 transmembrane-spanning domains
and an intracellular C-terminal coiled-coil domain. In addition,
CATSPER1 has an intracellular N-terminal histidine-rich region. Both the
pore-forming subunits and the auxiliary subunits of CATSPER localize to
the sperm principal piece (review by Ren and Xia, 2010).

CLONING

While searching for calcium channels, Ren et al. (2001) identified an
EST cDNA expressed only in testis. They cloned the corresponding
full-length cDNA from human and mouse testis by PCR and library
screening. The CATSPER gene encodes a protein of 686 amino acids that is
expressed exclusively in testis. The amino acid sequence of CATSPER most
closely resembles a single 6-transmembrane-spanning repeat of the
voltage-dependent calcium channel 4-repeat structure. Human CATSPER
exhibits a high degree of homology (55% identity) with its mouse
counterpart, especially in the transmembrane domains and histidine-rich
region. The transmembrane domains share 81% identity and the pore
regions 89% identity. Using immunofluorescence, Ren et al. (2001)
detected the expression of CATSPER within the principal piece of the
sperm tail.

GENE FUNCTION

Kirichok et al. (2006) used a simple approach to patch-clamp spermatozoa
and to characterize whole-spermatozoan currents and identified a
constitutively active flagellar calcium channel that is strongly
potentiated by intracellular alkalinization. This current is not present
in spermatozoa lacking the sperm-specific putative ion channel protein
Catsper1. This plasma membrane protein of the 6 transmembrane-spanning
ion channel superfamily is specifically localized to the principal piece
of the sperm tail and is required for sperm cell hyperactivation and
male fertility (Ren et al., 2001; Carlson et al., 2003). Kirichok et al.
(2006) concluded that their results identified Catsper1 as a component
of the key flagellar calcium channel, and suggested that intracellular
alkalinization potentiates Catsper current to increase intraflagellar
calcium and induce sperm hyperactivation.

Strunker et al. (2011) demonstrated that progesterone activates the
sperm-specific, pH-sensitive CatSper calcium ion channel. They found
that both progesterone and alkaline pH stimulate a rapid calcium ion
influx with almost no latency, incompatible with a signaling pathway
involving metabotrophic receptors and second messengers. The calcium ion
signals evoked by alkaline pH and progesterone were inhibited by 2 Ca(V)
channel blockers. Patch-clamp recordings from sperm revealed an
alkaline-activated current carried by mono- and divalent ions that
exhibited all the hallmarks of sperm-specific CatSper calcium ion
channels. Progesterone substantially enhanced the CatSper current. The
alkaline- and progesterone-activated CatSper current was inhibited by
both Ca(V) channel blockers. Strunker et al. (2011) concluded that their
results resolved a long-standing controversy over the nongenomic
progesterone signaling. In human sperm, either the CatSper channel
itself or an associated protein serves as the nongenomic progesterone
receptor.

Lishko et al. (2011) elucidated the mechanism of the nongenomic action
of progesterone on human spermatozoa by identifying the calcium ion
channel activated by progesterone. By applying the patch-clamp technique
to mature human spermatozoa, Lishko et al. (2011) found that nanomolar
concentrations of progesterone dramatically potentiate CatSper, a
pH-dependent calcium ion channel of the sperm flagellum. Lishko et al.
(2011) demonstrated that human CatSper is synergistically activated by
elevation of intracellular pH and extracellular progesterone.
Interestingly, human CatSper can be further potentiated by
prostaglandins, but apparently through a binding site other than that of
progesterone. Because their experimental conditions did not support
second messenger signaling, CatSper or a directly associated protein may
serve as the elusive nongenomic progesterone receptor of sperm. Given
that the CatSper-associated progesterone receptor is sperm-specific and
structurally different from the genomic progesterone receptor (607311),
it represents a promising target for the development of a new class of
nonhormonal contraceptives.

GENE STRUCTURE

Avenarius et al. (2009) noted that the CATSPER1 gene comprises 12 coding
exons.

MAPPING

Avenarius et al. (2009) identified the CATSPER1 gene on chromosome
11q13.1 by genomic sequence analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 infertile males with spermatogenic failure-7 (612997) from 2
consanguineous Iranian families, Avenarius et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for 1 of 2 separate insertion mutations in the CATSPER1
gene. CATSPER1 is one of 4 members of the sperm-specific CATSPER
voltage-gated calcium channel family shown to be essential for normal
male fertility in mice. The results suggested that CATSPER1 is also
essential for normal male fertility in humans.

ANIMAL MODEL

To study its function in vivo, Ren et al. (2001) disrupted mouse Catsper
in embryonic stem cells by homologous recombination. Catsper
homozygous-deficient mice were born at expected mendelian ratios and
were indistinguishable from wildtype littermates in survival rates,
appearance, and gross behavior. Homozygous-deficient females mated with
heterozygous-deficient or wildtype males were fertile. Homozygous male
mutants mated with wildtype females displayed mounting behavior
indistinguishable from that of wildtype males but were completely
infertile. Body and testis weights of the mutant mice were not different
from those of wildtype counterparts; sperm counts were not significantly
different, and sperm appeared morphologically similar. However, Catsper
-/- sperm were sluggish and displayed less directed movements. Further
investigation indicated that Catsper is required to penetrate the egg.
Catsper -/- sperm incubated with zona pellucida-free eggs were able to
fertilize the eggs, indicating that Catsper is not required for egg
activation. Ren et al. (2001) demonstrated that Catsper is required for
cAMP-induced calcium influx.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE 7
CATSPER1, 1-BP INS, 539T

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Iranian family with nonsyndromic
male infertility (SPGF7; 612997), Avenarius et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for insertion of a thymine at nucleotide 539 in exon 1 of
the CATSPER1 gene. This insertion was predicted to introduce 8 novel
amino acids followed by a premature termination codon into the CATSPER1
protein (lys180lysfsX8). If the aberrant transcript is not subject to
nonsense-mediated decay, a severely truncated 188-amino acid protein
would be translated. This mutation was not identified in 576 Iranian
control individuals.

.0002
SPERMATOGENIC FAILURE 7
CATSPER1, 5-BP INS, 948ATGGC

In a male from a consanguineous Iranian family with nonsyndromic
infertility (612997), Avenarius et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a 5-bp insertion after nucleotide 948 in exon 1 of the CATSPER1
gene. The frameshift caused by this insertion was predicted to
substitute a methionine at asp317 and introduce 18 novel residues before
a premature stop codon (asp317metfsX18). In the absence of
nonsense-mediated decay, the predicted product would be a truncated
335-residue protein. This mutation was also found in homozygosity in one
female family member. This mutation was not identified in 576 Iranian
control individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Avenarius, M. R.; Hildebrand, M. S.; Zhang, Y.; Meyer, N. C.; Smith,
L. L. H.; Kahrizi, K.; Najmabadi, H.; Smith, R. J. H.: Human male
infertility caused by mutations in the CATSPER1 channel protein. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 84: 505-510, 2009.

2. Carlson, A. E.; Westenbroek, R. E.; Quill, T.; Ren, D.; Clapham,
D. E.; Hille, B.; Garbers, D. L.; Babcock, D. F.: CatSper1 required
for evoked Ca(2+) entry and control of flagellar function in sperm. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 14864-14868, 2003.

3. Kirichok, Y.; Navarro, B.; Clapham, D. E.: Whole-cell patch-clamp
measurements of spermatozoa reveal an alkaline-activated Ca(2+) channel. Nature 439:
737-740, 2006.

4. Lishko, P. V.; Botchkina, I. L.; Kirichok, Y.: Progesterone activates
the principal Ca2+ channel of human sperm. Nature 471: 387-391,
2011.

5. Ren, D.; Navarro, B.; Perez, G.; Jackson, A. C.; Hsu, S.; Shi,
Q.; Tilly, J. L.; Clapham, D. E.: A sperm ion channel required for
sperm motility and male fertility. Nature 413: 603-609, 2001.

6. Ren, D.; Xia, J.: Calcium signaling through CatSper channels in
mammalian fertilization. Physiology 25: 165-175, 2010.

7. Strunker, T.; Goodwin, N.; Brenker, C.; Kashikar, N. D.; Weyand,
I.; Seifert, R.; Kaupp, U. B.: The CatSper channel mediates progesterone-induced
Ca2+ influx in human sperm. Nature 471: 382-386, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/11/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/28/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 10/16/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/15/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
wwang: 5/12/2011
carol: 5/11/2011
mgross: 3/28/2011
alopez: 9/1/2009
terry: 8/25/2009
alopez: 6/7/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
mgross: 9/20/2002
alopez: 10/16/2001

150330	TITLE *150330 LAMIN A/C; LMNA
;;LAMIN A;;
LAMIN C; LMNC
PRELAMIN A, INCLUDED;;
PROGERIN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The LMNA gene encodes lamin A and lamin C. Lamins are structural protein
components of the nuclear lamina, a protein network underlying the inner
nuclear membrane that determines nuclear shape and size. The lamins
constitute a class of intermediate filaments. Three types of lamins, A,
B (see LMNB1; 150340), and C, have been described in mammalian cells
(Fisher et al., 1986).

CLONING

By screening human fibroblast and hepatoma cDNA libraries, Fisher et al.
(1986) isolated cDNAs corresponding to lamin A and lamin C. The lamin A
and C proteins are predicted to have molecular masses of 74 kD and 65
kD, respectively. Fisher et al. (1986) and McKeon et al. (1986) found
that the deduced amino acid sequences from cDNA clones of human lamin A
and C are identical for the first 566 amino acids, but that lamin A
contains an extra 98 amino acids (corresponding to approximately 9 kD)
at the C terminus. Lamin C has 6 unique C-terminal amino acids. Both
lamins A and C contain a 360-residue alpha-helical domain with homology
to a corresponding alpha-helical rod domain that is the structural
hallmark of all intermediate filament proteins. Fisher et al. (1986) and
McKeon et al. (1986) concluded that lamin A and lamin C arise by
alternative splicing from the same gene.

Guilly et al. (1987) detected a 3-kb lamin A mRNA and a 2.1-kb lamin C
mRNA in epithelial HeLa cells, but not in T lymphoblasts. Lamin B was
the only lamin present in T lymphoblasts. Guilly et al. (1987) noted
that the transport of newly synthesized proteins from the cytoplasm into
the nucleus differs from the transport of proteins into other
organelles, such as mitochondria, in that sequences are not cleaved and
remain a permanent feature of the mature polypeptide. Lamin A appears to
be an exception to this rule.

Weber et al. (1989) showed that lamin A is synthesized as a precursor
molecule called prelamin A. Maturation of lamin A involves the removal
of 18 residues from the C terminus, which is accomplished by
isoprenylation and farnesylation involving a C-terminal CAAX
(cysteine-aliphatic-aliphatic-any amino acid) box (Sinensky et al.,
1994).

GENE STRUCTURE

Lin and Worman (1993) demonstrated that the coding region of the lamin
A/C gene spans approximately 24 kb and contains 12 exons. Alternative
splicing within exon 10 gives rise to 2 different mRNAs that code for
prelamin A and lamin C.

MAPPING

Wydner et al. (1996) mapped the LMNA gene to chromosome 1q21.2-q21.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Gross (2013) mapped the LMNA gene to chromosome 1q22 based on an
alignment of the LMNA sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY847595) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Lloyd et al. (2002) identified proteins interacting with the C-terminal
domain of lamin A by screening a mouse 3T3-L1 adipocyte library in a
yeast 2-hybrid interaction screen. Using this approach, the adipocyte
differentiation factor SREBP1 (184756) was identified as a novel lamin A
interactor. In vitro glutathione S-transferase pull-down and in vivo
coimmunoprecipitation studies confirmed an interaction between lamin A
and both SREBP1a and 1c. A binding site for lamin A was identified in
the N-terminal transcription factor domain of SREBP1, between residues
227 and 487. The binding of lamin A to SREBP1 was noticeably reduced by
FPLD mutations. The authors speculated that fat loss seen in
laminopathies may be caused in part by reduced binding of the adipocyte
differentiation factor SREBP1 to lamin A.

Favreau et al. (2004) analyzed myoblast-to-myotube differentiation in a
mouse myogenic cell line overexpressing wildtype or mutant human lamin
A. In contrast to clones overexpressing wildtype lamin A, those
expressing lamin A with the R453W mutation (150330.0002) differentiated
poorly or not at all, did not exit the cell cycle properly, and were
extensively committed to apoptosis. Clones expressing the R482W mutation
(150330.0011) differentiated normally. Favreau et al. (2004) concluded
that lamin A mutated at arginine-453 fails to build a functional
scaffold and/or fails to maintain the chromatin compartmentation
required for differentiation of myoblasts into myocytes.

Using a novel technique to measure nuclear deformation in response to
biaxial strain applied to cells, Lammerding et al. (2004) found that
Lmna -/- cells showed increased nuclear deformation, defective
mechanotransduction, and impaired viability under mechanical strain
compared to wildtype cells. In addition, activity of nuclear
factor-kappa-B (NFKB; 164011), a mechanical stress-responsive
transcription factor that can act as an antiapoptotic signal, was
impaired in the Lmna -/- cells. The findings suggested that lamin A/C
deficiency is associated with both defective nuclear mechanics and
impaired transcriptional activation.

Broers et al. (2004) used a cell compression device to compare wildtype
and Lmna-knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts, and found that Lmna-null
cells showed significantly decreased mechanical stiffness and
significantly lower bursting force. Partial rescue of the phenotype by
transfection with either lamin A or lamin C prevented gross nuclear
disruption, but was unable to fully restore mechanical stiffness.
Confocal microscopy revealed that the nuclei of Lmna-null cells
exhibited an isotropic deformation upon indentation, despite an
anisotropic deformation of the cell as a whole. This nuclear behavior
suggested a loss of interaction of the disturbed nucleus with the
surrounding cytoskeleton. Actin-(102610), vimentin-(193060), and
tubulin-(191110) based filaments showed disturbed interaction in
Lmna-null cells. Broers et al. (2004) suggested that in addition to the
loss of nuclear stiffness, the loss of a physical interaction between
nuclear structures (i.e., lamins) and the cytoskeleton may cause more
general cellular weakness; they proposed a potential key function for
lamins in maintaining cellular tensegrity.

Van Berlo et al. (2005) showed that A-type lamins were essential for the
inhibition of fibroblast proliferation by TGF-beta-1 (190180).
TGF-beta-1 dephosphorylated RB1 (614041) through protein phosphatase 2A
(PPP2CA; 176915), both of which were associated with lamin A/C. In
addition, lamin A/C modulated the effect of TGF-beta-1 on collagen
production, a marker of mesenchymal differentiation. Van Berlo et al.
(2005) proposed a role for lamin A/C in control of gene activity
downstream of TGF-beta-1, via nuclear phosphatases such as PPP2CA.

Capanni et al. (2005) showed that the lamin A precursor was specifically
accumulated in lipodystrophy cells. Pre-lamin A was located at the
nuclear envelope and colocalized with SREBP1 Binding of SREBP1 to the
lamin A precursor was detected in patient fibroblasts, as well as in
control fibroblasts, forced to accumulate pre-lamin A by farnesylation
inhibitors. In contrast, SREBP1 did not interact in vivo with mature
lamin A or C in cultured fibroblasts. Inhibition of lamin A precursor
processing in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes resulted in sequestration of SREBP1
at the nuclear rim, thus decreasing the pool of active SREBP1 that
normally activates PPAR-gamma (601487) and causing impairment of
preadipocyte differentiation. This defect could be rescued by treatment
with troglitazone, a known PPAR-gamma ligand activating the adipogenic
program.

Scaffidi and Misteli (2006) showed that the same molecular mechanism
responsible for Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS; 176670) is
active in healthy cells. Cell nuclei from old individuals acquire
defects similar to those of HGPS patient cells, including changes in
histone modifications and increased DNA damage. Age-related nuclear
defects are caused by sporadic use, in healthy individuals, of the same
cryptic splice site in lamin A whose constitutive activation causes
HGPS. Inhibition of this splice site reverses the nuclear defects
associated with aging. Scaffidi and Misteli (2006) concluded that their
observations implicate lamin A in physiologic aging.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 (see 609423) protease inhibitors
(PIs) targeting the viral aspartyl protease are a cornerstone of
treatment for HIV infection and disease, but they are associated with
lipodystrophy and other side effects. Coffinier et al. (2007) found that
treatment of human and mouse fibroblasts with HIV-PIs caused an
accumulation of prelamin A. The prelamin A in HIV-PI-treated fibroblasts
migrated more rapidly than nonfarnesylated prelamin A, comigrating with
the farnesylated form found in ZMPSTE24 (606480)-deficient fibroblasts.
HIV-PI-treated heterozygous ZMPSTE24 fibroblasts exhibited an
exaggerated accumulation of farnesyl-prelamin A. Western blot and
enzymatic analysis showed that HIV-PIs inhibited ZMPSTE24 activity and
endoproteolytic processing of a GFP-prelamin A fusion protein, but they
did not affect farnesylation of HDJ2 (DNAJA1; 602837) or activity of
farnesyltransferase (see 134635), ICMT (605851), and RCE1 (605385) in
vitro. Coffinier et al. (2007) concluded that HIV-PIs inhibit ZMPSTE24,
leading to an accumulation of farnesyl-prelamin A, possibly explaining
HIV-PI side effects.

The nuclear envelope LINC (links the nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton)
complex, which is formed by SUN (e.g., SUN1, 607723) and nesprin (e.g.,
SYNE1, 608441) proteins, provides a direct connection between the
nuclear lamina and the cytoskeleton. Haque et al. (2010) stated that
SUN1 and SUN2 interact with LMNA and that LMNA is required for the
nuclear envelope localization of SUN2, but not SUN1. They found that
LMNA mutations associated with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD2;
181350) and HGPS disrupted interaction of LMNA with mouse Sun1 and human
SUN2. Nuclear localization of SUN1 and SUN2 was not impaired in EDMD2 or
HGPS cell lines. Expression of SUN1, but not SUN2, at the nuclear
envelope was enhanced in some HGPS cells, likely due to increased
interaction of SUN1 with accumulated prelamin A. Haque et al. (2010)
proposed that different perturbations in LMNA-SUN protein interactions
may underlie the opposing effects of EDMD and HGPS mutations on nuclear
and cellular mechanics.

Liu et al. (2011) reported the generation of induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) from fibroblasts obtained from patients with HGPS. HGPS
iPSCs showed absence of progerin, and more importantly, lacked the
nuclear envelope and epigenetic alterations normally associated with
premature aging. Upon differentiation of HGPS iPSCs, progerin and its
aging-associated phenotypic consequences were restored. Specifically,
directed differentiation of HGPS iPSCs to vascular smooth muscle cells
led to the appearance of premature senescence phenotypes associated with
vascular aging. Additionally, their studies identified DNA-dependent
protein kinase catalytic subunit (PRKDC; 600899) as a downstream target
of progerin. The absence of nuclear PRKDC holoenzyme correlated with
premature as well as physiologic aging. Because progerin also
accumulates during physiologic aging, Liu et al. (2011) argued that
their results provided an in vitro iPSC-based model to study the
pathogenesis of human premature and physiologic vascular aging.

Chen et al. (2012) showed that cells from Lmna -/- mice, which represent
EDMD2, cells from Lmna(L530P/L530P) mice, which represent HGPS, and
cells from HGPS patients all had overaccumulation of the inner nuclear
envelope SUN1 protein. In wildtype cells, Lmna and Sun1 colocalized at
the nuclear envelope. In Lmna -/- cells, larger amounts of Sun1 were
found at the nuclear envelope and also in the Golgi. The larger amounts
of Sun1 appeared to result from reduced protein turnover. Transfection
of increasing amounts of mouse Sun1 into Lmna-null/Sun1-null murine
cells resulted in increased prevalence of nuclear herniations and
apoptosis, and the herniations appeared to result from Sun1 accumulation
in the Golgi. Loss of the Sun1 gene in both mouse models extensively
rescued cellular, tissue, organ, and lifespan abnormalities. Similarly,
knockdown of overaccumulated SUN1 protein in primary human HGPS cells
corrected nuclear defects and cellular senescence. The findings
indicated that accumulation of SUN1 is a common pathogenetic event in
these disorders.

In mice, Ho et al. (2013) found that lamin A/C-deficient (Lmna-null) and
Lmna(N195K/N195K) (see 150330.0007) mutant cells have impaired nuclear
translocation and downstream signaling of the mechanosensitive
transcription factor megakaryoblastic leukemia-1 (MKL1; 606078), a
myocardin family member that is pivotal in cardiac development and
function. Altered nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of MKL1 was caused by
altered actin dynamics in Lmna-null and Lmna(N195K/N195K) mutant cells.
Ectopic expression of the nuclear envelope protein emerin (300384),
which is mislocalized in Lmna mutant cells and also linked to
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (310300) and dilated cardiomyopathy,
restored MKL1 nuclear translocation and rescued actin dynamics in mutant
cells. Ho et al. (2013) concluded that their findings presented a novel
mechanism that could provide insight into the disease etiology for the
cardiac phenotype in many laminopathies, whereby lamin A/C and emerin
regulate gene expression through modulation of nuclear and cytoskeletal
actin polymerization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutations in the LMNA gene cause a wide range of human diseases. Since
more than 10 different clinical syndromes have been attributed to LMNA
mutations, many of which show overlapping features, attempts at broad
classification have been proposed. Worman and Bonne (2007) suggested
that the disorders may be classified into 4 major types: diseases of
striated and cardiac muscle; lipodystrophy syndromes; peripheral
neuropathy; and premature aging. Benedetti et al. (2007) suggested 2
main groups: (1) neuromuscular and cardiac disorders, and (2)
lipodystrophy and premature aging disorders. The phenotypic
heterogeneity of diseases resulting from a mutation in a single gene can
be explained by the numerous roles of the nuclear lamina, including
maintenance of nuclear shape and structure, as well as functional roles
in transcriptional regulation and heterochromatin organization (review
by Capell and Collins, 2006).

Genschel and Schmidt (2000) compiled a list of 41 known mutations,
predominantly missense, in the LMNA gene. Twenty-three different
mutations had been shown to cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy (EDMD2; 181350). Three mutations had been reported to
cause autosomal dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1B;
159001), 8 mutations were known to result in dilated cardiomyopathy
(CMD1A; 115200), and 7 mutations were reported to cause familial partial
lipodystrophy (FPLD2; 151660). In addition, 1 mutation in LMNA (H222Y;
150330.0014) appeared to be responsible for an autosomal recessive,
atypical form of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD3; see 181350).

- Muscular Dystrophies

In 5 families with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(EDMD2; 181350), Bonne et al. (1999) identified 4 mutations in the LMNA
gene (150330.0001-150330.0004) that cosegregated with the disease
phenotype. These findings represented the first identification of
mutations in a component of the nuclear lamina as a cause of an
inherited muscle disorder. The authors noted that lamins interact with
integral proteins of the inner nuclear membrane, including emerin
(300384), which is mutated in the X-linked form of Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy (EDMD1; 310300).

Raffaele di Barletta et al. (2000) showed that heterozygous mutations in
LMNA may cause diverse phenotypes ranging from typical EDMD to no
phenotypic effect. LMNA mutations in patients with autosomal dominant
EDMD occur in the tail and in the 2A rod domain of the protein,
suggesting that unique interactions between lamin A/C and other nuclear
components have an important role in cardiac and skeletal muscle
function. They identified a homozygous LMNA mutation (H222Y;
150330.0014) in 1 patient born of consanguineous unaffected parents,
consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance and a severe atypical
phenotype lacking cardiac features.

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (LGMD1B; 159001) is an autosomal
dominant, slowly progressive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy with
age-related atrioventricular cardiac conduction disturbances and the
absence of early contractures. Muchir et al. (2000) found mutations in
the LMNA gene in 3 LGMD1B families: a missense mutation (150330.0017), a
deletion of a codon (150330.0018), and a splice donor site mutation
(150330.0019). The 3 mutations were identified in all affected members
of the corresponding families and were absent in 100 unrelated control
subjects.

Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) described a form of congenital muscular
dystrophy (MDC) with onset in the first year of life in 15 children
resulting from de novo heterozygous mutations in the LMNA gene (see,
e.g., 150330.0047-150330.0049). Three patients had severe early-onset
disease, with decreased fetal movements in utero, no motor development,
severe hypotonia, diffuse limb and axial muscle weakness and atrophy,
and talipes foot deformities. The remaining 12 children initially
acquired head and trunk control and independent ambulation, but most
lost head control due to neck extensor weakness, a phenotype consistent
with 'dropped head syndrome.' Ten children required ventilatory support.
Cardiac arrhythmias were observed in 4 of the oldest patients, but were
symptomatic only in 1. Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) concluded that the
identified LMNA mutations appeared to correlate with a relatively severe
phenotype, broadening the spectrum of laminopathies. The authors
suggested that this group of patients may define a new disease entity,
which they designated LMNA-related congenital muscular dystrophy
(613205).

Benedetti et al. (2007) reported 27 individuals with mutations in the
LMNA gene resulting in a wide range of neuromuscular disorders.
Phenotypic analysis yielded 2 broad groups of patients. One group
included patients with childhood onset who had skeletal muscle
involvement with predominant scapuloperoneal and facial weakness,
consistent with EDMD or congenital muscular dystrophy. The second group
included patients with later or adult onset who had cardiac disorders or
a limb-girdle myopathy, consistent with LGMD1B. Those in the group with
early onset tended to have missense mutations, whereas those in the
group with adult onset tended to have truncating mutations. Analysis of
the variants showed that those associated with early-onset phenotypes
were primarily found in the Ig-like domain and in coil 2A, which may
interfere with binding to specific ligands. Those associated with later
onset were mostly located in the rod domain and in coil 2B, which was
predicted to affect the surface of lamin A/C dimers and lead to impaired
filament assembly. Benedetti et al. (2007) speculated that there may be
2 different pathogenetic mechanisms associated with neuromuscular
LMNA-related disorders: late-onset phenotypes may arise through loss of
LMNA function secondary to haploinsufficiency, whereas dominant-negative
or toxic gain-of-function mechanisms may underlie the more severe early
phenotypes.

- Dilated Cardiomyopathy and Cardiac Conduction Defects

Fatkin et al. (1999) studied the LMNA gene in 11 families with autosomal
dominant dilated cardiomyopathy and conduction system disease (CMD1A;
115200) linked to a region on chromosome 1 overlapping that of the LMNA
gene. They identified 5 novel missense mutations
(150330.0004-150330.0009): 4 in the alpha-helical rod domain of lamin A,
and 1 in the tail domain of lamin C. No family members with mutations
had joint contractures or skeletal myopathy characteristic of autosomal
dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Furthermore, serum creatine
kinase levels were normal in family members with mutations of the lamin
A rod domain, but mildly elevated in some family members with a defect
in the lamin C tail domain. The authors noted that mutations in the rod
domain of the protein led to dilated cardiomyopathy, whereas mutations
in the head or tail domain caused Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

Van der Kooi et al. (2002) reported a sporadic patient and 2 unrelated
families with mutations in the LMNA gene who presented with varying
degrees and combinations of muscular dystrophy, partial lipodystrophy,
and cardiomyopathy with conduction defects, presumably due to single
mutations (see 150330.0003 and 150330.0005).

Sebillon et al. (2003) screened the coding sequence of LMNA in DNA
samples from 66 index cases of dilated cardiomyopathy with or without
associated features. They identified a glu161-to-lys mutation (E161K;
150330.0028) in a family with early-onset atrial fibrillation preceding
or coexisting with dilated cardiomyopathy, the previously described
R377H mutation (150330.0017) in the family with quadriceps myopathy
associated with dilated cardiomyopathy previously reported by Charniot
et al. (2003), and a 28insA mutation (150330.0029) leading to a
premature stop codon in a third family with dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects. No mutation in LMNA was found in cases with isolated
dilated cardiomyopathy.

Meune et al. (2006) investigated the efficacy of implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) in the primary prevention of sudden
death in patients with cardiomyopathy due to lamin A/C gene mutations.
Patients referred for permanent cardiac pacing were systematically
offered the implantation of an ICD. The patients were enrolled solely on
the basis of the presence of lamin A/C mutations associated with cardiac
conduction defects. Indications for pacemaker implantation were
progressive conduction block and sinus block. In all, 19 patients were
treated. Meune et al. (2006) concluded that ICD implantation in patients
with lamin A/C mutations who are in need of a pacemaker is effective in
treating possibly lethal tachyarrhythmias, and that implantation of an
ICD, rather than a pacemaker, should be considered for such patients.

Taylor et al. (2003) screened the LMNA gene in 40 families and 9
sporadic patients with CMD with or without muscular dystrophy and
identified mutations in 3 families (see, e.g., 150330.0017) and 1
sporadic patient (S573L; 150330.0041). All mutations involved a
conserved residue, cosegregated with the disease within the families,
and were not found in 300 control chromosomes. LMNA mutation carriers
had a severe and progressive form of CMD with significantly poorer
cumulative survival compared to noncarrier CMD patients.

- Dilated Cardiomyopathy and Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism

In a 17-year-old Caucasian female with premature ovarian failure and
dilated cardiomyopathy, who had features consistent with atypical Werner
syndrome (see 277700) but who was negative for mutation in the RECQL2
gene (604611), Nguyen et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a
missense mutation in the LMNA gene (L59R; 150330.0052). The authors
suggested the diagnosis of a laminopathy, most likely an atypical form
of mandibuloacral dysplasia (see 248370).

In a 15-year-old Caucasian girl with premature ovarian failure and
dilated cardiomyopathy, McPherson et al. (2009) identified
heterozygosity for the L59R mutation in the LMNA gene. McPherson et al.
(2009) noted phenotypic similarities between this patient and the
patient previously reported by Nguyen et al. (2007), who carried the
same mutation, as well as a patient originally described by Chen et al.
(2003) with an adjacent A57P mutation in LMNA (150330.0030). Features
common to these 3 patients included premature ovarian failure, dilated
cardiomyopathy, lipodystrophy, and progressive facial and skeletal
changes involving micrognathia and sloping shoulders, but not
acroosteolysis. Although the appearance of these patients was somewhat
progeroid, none had severe growth failure, alopecia, or rapidly
progressive atherosclerosis, and McPherson et al. (2009) suggested that
the phenotype represents a distinct laminopathy involving dilated
cardiomyopathy and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (212112).

- Lipodystrophy Disorders

Patients with Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy, or partial
lipodystrophy type 2 (FPLD2; 151660), are born with normal fat
distribution, but after puberty experience regional and progressive
adipocyte degeneration, often associated with profound insulin
resistance and diabetes. Cao and Hegele (2000) hypothesized that the
analogy between the regional muscle wasting in autosomal dominant
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and the regional adipocyte
degeneration in FPLD, in addition to the chromosomal localization of the
FPLD2 locus on 1q21-q22, made LMNA a good candidate gene for FPLD2.
Studies of 5 Canadian probands with familial partial lipodystrophy of
Dunnigan type indicated that each had a novel missense mutation (R482Q;
150330.0010) that cosegregated with the lipodystrophy phenotype and was
absent from 2,000 normal alleles.

Shackleton et al. (2000) identified 5 different missense mutations in
the LMNA gene (see, e.g., 150330.0010-150330.0012) among 10 kindreds and
3 individuals with partial lipodystrophy. All of the mutations occurred
in exon 8, which the authors noted is within the C-terminal globular
domain of lamin A/C. Flier (2000) commented on the significance of LMNA
mutations in partial lipodystrophy.

Vantyghem et al. (2004) characterized the neuromuscular and cardiac
phenotypes of FPLD patients bearing the heterozygous R482W mutation.
Fourteen patients from 2 unrelated families, including 10 affected
subjects, were studied. Clinical and histologic examination showed an
incapacitating, progressive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy in a
42-year-old woman that had been present since childhood, associated with
a typical postpubertal FPLD phenotype. Six of 8 adults presented the
association of calf hypertrophy, perihumeral muscular atrophy, and a
rolling gait due to proximal lower limb weakness. Muscular histology was
compatible with muscular dystrophy in one of them and/or showed a
nonspecific excess of lipid droplets (in 3 cases). Cardiac septal
hypertrophy and atherosclerosis were frequent in FPLD patients. In
addition, a 24-year-old FPLD patient had a symptomatic second-degree
atrioventricular block. Vantyghem et al. (2004) concluded that most
lipodystrophic patients affected by the FPLD-linked R482W mutation show
muscular and cardiac abnormalities.

Mandibuloacral dysplasia (see 248370) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by postnatal growth retardation, craniofacial
anomalies, skeletal malformations, and mottled cutaneous pigmentation.
Patients with MAD frequently have partial lipodystrophy and insulin
resistance, which are features seen in FPLD. In all affected members of
5 consanguineous Italian families with MAD, Novelli et al. (2002)
identified a homozygous missense mutation (R527H; 150330.0021) in the
LMNA gene. Patient skin fibroblasts showed nuclei that presented
abnormal lamin A/C distribution and a dysmorphic envelope, demonstrating
the pathogenic effect of the mutation.

In affected members of a consanguineous family from north India,
Plasilova et al. (2004) identified a homozygous missense mutation in the
LMNA gene (150330.0033). The extent of skeletal lesions in this family
were consistent with MAD, but affected individuals also had classic
features of progeria. Plasilova et al. (2004) suggested that autosomal
recessive HGPS and mandibuloacral dysplasia may represent a single
disorder with varying degrees of disease severity.

Decaudain et al. (2007) identified changes in codon 482 of the LMNA gene
(see, e.g., R482Q 150330.0010 and R482W; 150330.0011) in 17 of 277
unrelated adults investigated for lipodystrophy and/or insulin
resistance. All 17 had classic features of FPLD2. Ten additional
patients who fulfilled the International Diabetes Federation diagnostic
criteria for metabolic syndrome were found to have heterozygous LMNA
mutations that were not in codon 482, but affected all 3 domains of the
protein, the N terminal, central rod domain, and C terminal globulin
domain (see, e.g., R399C; 150330.0043). Because the phenotype of these
patients was not typical of FPLD2, the diagnosis of laminopathy was
delayed. Although lipodystrophy was less severe than in typical FPLD2,
common features included calf hypertrophy, myalgia, and muscle cramps or
weakness. Two patients had cardiac conduction disturbances. Metabolic
alterations were prominent, especially insulin resistance and
hypertriglyceridemia.

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2B1

In affected members of inbred Algerian families with an axonal form of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease linked to chromosome 1q21.2-q21.3 (CMT2B1;
605588), De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2002) found a shared common
homozygous ancestral haplotype that was suggestive of a founder mutation
and identified a unique mutation in the LMNA rod domain (R298C;
150330.0020). Ultrastructural studies of sciatic nerves of Lmna-null
mice showed a strong reduction of axon density, axonal enlargement, and
the presence of nonmyelinated axons, all of which were highly similar to
the phenotypes of human peripheral axonopathies.

- Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome and Other Premature
Aging Syndromes

Eriksson et al. (2003) identified de novo heterozygous point mutations
in lamin A that cause Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS;
176670). Eighteen of 20 classic cases of HGPS harbored the identical de
novo single-base substitution resulting in a silent gly-to-gly change at
codon 608 within exon 11 (150330.0022). This change creates an exonic
consensus splice site and activates cryptic splicing, leading to
deletion of 50 codons at the end of prelamin A. This prelamin A still
retains the CAAX box but lacks the site for endoproteolytic cleavage.
Eriksson et al. (2003) suggested that there is at least 1 site for
phosphorylation, ser625, that is deleted in the abnormal lamin A
protein. De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2003) independently identified the
heterozygous exon 11 cryptic splice site activation mutation
(1824C-T+1819-1968del; 150330.0022) in 2 HGPS patients. Later cellular
studies (Capell et al., 2005; Glynn and Glover, 2005; Toth et al., 2005)
indicated that Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome results from the
production of a truncated prelamin A, called progerin, which is
farnesylated at its C terminus and accumulates at the nuclear envelope,
causing misshapen nuclei (Yang et al., 2006).

Werner syndrome (277700) is an autosomal recessive progeroid syndrome
caused by mutation in the RECQL2 gene (WRN; 604611). Chen et al. (2003)
reported that of 129 index patients referred to their international
registry for molecular diagnosis of Werner syndrome, 26 (20%) had
wildtype RECQL2 coding regions and were categorized as having 'atypical
Werner syndrome' or 'non-WRN' on the basis of molecular criteria.
Because of some phenotypic similarities between Werner syndrome and
laminopathies including Hutchinson-Gilford progeria, Chen et al. (2003)
sequenced all exons of the LMNA gene in these 26 individuals and found
heterozygosity for novel missense mutations in LMNA in 4 (15%): A57P
(150330.0030), R133L (150330.0027) in 2 persons, and L140R
(150330.0031). Hegele (2003) stated that the clinical designation of
Werner syndrome for each of the 4 patients of Chen et al. (2003), in
whom mutations in the LMNA gene were found, appeared somewhat insecure.
He noted that the comparatively young ages of onset in the patients with
mutant LMNA would be just as consistent with late-onset
Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome as with early-onset Werner syndrome.
Patients with so-called atypical Werner syndrome and mutant LMNA also
expressed components of nonprogeroid laminopathies. Hegele (2003)
suggested that genomic DNA analysis can help draw a diagnostic line that
clarifies potential overlap between older patients with
Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome and younger patients with Werner syndrome,
and that therapies may depend on precise molecular classification.

McPherson et al. (2009) suggested that the patient in whom Chen et al.
(2003) identified an A57P LMNA mutation had a distinct phenotype
involving dilated cardiomyopathy and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
(212112).

Csoka et al. (2004) screened 13 cell lines from atypical progeroid
patients for mutation in the LMNA gene. They identified 3 novel
heterozygous missense mutations in the LMNA gene in 3 patients: a
13-year-old female with a progeroid syndrome, a 15-year-old male with a
lipodystrophy, and a 20-year-old male with 'atypical progeria.' The
mutations identified in the last 2 patients were the most 5-prime and
3-prime missense mutations, respectively, in LMNA identified to that
time.

Reddel and Weiss (2004) reported that transcription efficiencies of the
mutant and wildtype LMNA alleles were equivalent in HGPS. The mutant
allele gave 2 types of transcripts that encoded truncated and normal
lamin A. Abnormally spliced progerin transcript constituted the majority
(84.5%) of the total steady-state mRNA derived from the mutant allele.
The abnormally spliced progerin transcript was a minority (40%) of all
lamin A transcripts obtained from both alleles. Reddel and Weiss (2004)
concluded that the mutated progerin functions as a dominant negative by
interfering with the structure of the nuclear lamina, intranuclear
architecture, and macromolecular interactions, which collectively would
have a major impact on nuclear function.

Fibroblasts from individuals with HGPS have severe morphologic
abnormalities in nuclear envelope structure. Scaffidi and Misteli (2005)
showed that the cellular disease phenotype is reversible in cells from
individuals with HGPS. Introduction of wildtype lamin A protein did not
rescue the cellular disease manifestations. The mutant LMNA mRNA and
lamin A protein could be efficiently eliminated by correction of the
aberrant splicing event using a modified oligonucleotide targeted to the
activated cryptic splice site. Upon splicing correction, HGPS
fibroblasts assumed normal nuclear morphology, the aberrant nuclear
distribution and cellular levels of lamina-associated proteins were
rescued, defects in heterochromatin-specific histone modifications were
corrected, and proper expression of several misregulated genes was
reestablished. The results established proof of principle for the
correction of the premature aging phenotype in individuals with HGPS.

Huang et al. (2005) designed short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) targeting
mutated pre-spliced or mature LMNA mRNAs and expressed them in HGPS
fibroblasts carrying the 1824C-T mutation (150330.0022). One of the
shRNAs reduced the expression levels of mutant lamin A (so-called LA
delta-50) to 26% or lower. The reduced expression was associated with
amelioration of abnormal nuclear morphology, improvement of
proliferative potential, and reduction in the numbers of senescent
cells.

Moulson et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated patients with extremely
severe forms of HGPS associated with unusual mutations in the LMNA gene
(150330.0036 and 150330.0040, respectively). Both mutations resulted in
increased use of the cryptic exon 11 donor splice site that is also
observed with the common 1824C-T mutation (150330.0022). As a
consequence, the ratios of mutant progerin mRNA and protein to wildtype
were higher than in typical HGPS patients. The findings indicated that
the level of progerin expression correlates with severity of disease.

Scaffidi and Misteli (2008) found that progerin (150330.0022) expression
in immortalized human skin fibroblasts produced several defects typical
of HGPS. Progerin also caused the spontaneous differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into endothelial cells, and reduced their
differentiation along the adipogenic lineage. Abnormal differentiation
of MSCs appeared to be due to progerin-induced activation of major
downstream effectors of the Notch signaling pathway, including HES1
(139605), HES5 (607348), and HEY1 (602953). Scaffidi and Misteli (2008)
noted that the progerin splice variant of LMNA is present at low levels
in cells from healthy individuals and has been implicated in the normal
aging process. They suggested that progerin-induced defects in Notch
signaling are involved in normal aging and similarly affect adult MSCs
and their differentiation.

- Restrictive Dermopathy

In 2 of 9 fetuses with restrictive dermopathy (275210), a lethal
genodermatosis in which tautness of the skin causes fetal akinesia or
hypokinesia deformation sequence, Navarro et al. (2004) identified
heterozygous splicing mutations in the LMNA gene, resulting in the
complete or partial loss of exon 11 (150330.0036 and 150330.0022,
respectively). In the other 7 patients, they identified a heterozygous
1-bp insertion resulting in a premature stop codon in the zinc
metalloproteinase STE24 gene (ZMPSTE24; 606480). This gene encodes a
metalloproteinase specifically involved in the posttranslational
processing of lamin A precursor. In all patients carrying a ZMPSTE24
mutation, loss of expression of lamin A as well as abnormal patterns of
nuclear sizes and shapes and mislocalization of lamin-associated
proteins was seen. Navarro et al. (2004) concluded that a common
pathogenetic pathway, involving defects of the nuclear lamina and
matrix, is involved in restrictive dermopathy.

Navarro et al. (2005) described 7 previously reported patients and 3 new
patients with restrictive dermopathy who were homozygous or compound
heterozygous for ZMPSTE24 mutations. In all cases there was complete
absence of both ZMPSTE24 and mature lamin A, associated with prelamin A
accumulation. The authors concluded that restrictive dermopathy is
either a primary or a secondary laminopathy, caused by dominant de novo
LMNA mutations or, more frequently, recessive null ZMPSTE24 mutations.
The accumulation of truncated or normal length prelamin A is, therefore,
a shared pathophysiologic feature in recessive and dominant restrictive
dermopathy.

- Heart-Hand Syndrome, Slovenian Type

In a Slovenian family with heart-hand syndrome (610140), originally
reported by Sinkovec et al. (2005), Renou et al. (2008) identified a
splice site mutation in the LMNA gene (150330.0045) that segregated with
disease and was not found in 100 healthy controls. Analysis of
fibroblasts from 2 affected members of the family revealed truncated
lamin A/C protein and nuclear envelope abnormalities, confirming the
pathogenicity of the mutation.

- Other Associations

Hegele et al. (2000) identified a common single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in LMNA, 1908C/T, which was associated with obesity-related traits
in Canadian Oji-Cree. Hegele et al. (2001) reported association of this
LMNA SNP with anthropometric indices in 186 nondiabetic Canadian Inuit.
They found that physical indices of obesity, such as body mass index,
waist circumference, waist-to-hip circumference ratio, subscapular
skinfold thickness, and subscapular-to-triceps skinfold thickness ratio
were each significantly higher among Inuit subjects with the LMNA 1908T
allele than in subjects with the 1908C/1908C genotype. For each
significantly associated obesity-related trait, the LMNA 1908C/T SNP
genotype accounted for approximately 10 to 100% of the attributable
variation. The results indicated that common genetic variation in LMNA
is an important determinant of obesity-related quantitative traits.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In 14 of 15 families with familial partial lipodystrophy, Speckman et
al. (2000) identified mutations in exon 8 of the LMNA gene: 5 families
had an R482Q mutation (150330.0010); 7 families had an R482W alteration
(150330.0011), and 1 family had a G465D alteration (150330.0015). The
R482Q and R482W mutations occurred on different haplotypes, indicating
that they probably had arisen more than once. One family with an
atypical form of familial partial lipodystrophy had an R582H mutation
(150330.0016) in exon 11 of the LMNA gene, which the authors noted can
affect the lamin A protein only. Speckman et al. (2000) noted that all
mutations in Dunnigan lipodystrophy affect the globular C-terminal
domain of the lamin A/C protein, whereas mutations responsible for
dilated cardiomyopathy and conduction-system disease are usually
clustered in the rod domain of the protein (Fatkin et al., 1999).
Speckman et al. (2000) could not detect mutations in the LMNA gene in 1
FPLD family that showed linkage to 1q21-q23.

Hegele (2005) used hierarchical cluster analysis to assemble 16
laminopathy phenotypes into 2 classes based on organ system involvement,
and then classified 91 reported causative LMNA mutations according to
their position upstream or downstream of the nuclear localization signal
(NLS) sequence. Contingency analysis revealed that laminopathy class and
LMNA mutation position were strongly correlated (p less than 0.0001),
suggesting that laminopathy phenotype and LMNA genotype are nonrandomly
associated.

Lanktree et al. (2007) analyzed the LMNA gene in 3 unrelated patients
with FPLD2 and identified heterozygosity for 3 different missense
mutations, all affecting only the lamin A isoform and each changing a
conserved residue. Two of the mutations, D230N (150330.0042) and R399C
(150330.0043), were 5-prime to the NLS, which is not typical of LMNA
mutations in FPLD2. The third mutation, S573L (150330.0041), had
previously been identified in heterozygosity in a patient with dilated
cardiomyopathy and conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200) and in
homozygosity in a patient with arthropathy, tendinous calcinosis, and
progeroid features (see 248370). None of the mutations were found in 200
controls of multiple ethnicities. Because heterozygosity for an S573L
mutation can cause cardiomyopathy without lipodystrophy or lipodystrophy
without cardiomyopathy, Lanktree et al. (2007) suggested that additional
factors, genetic or environmental, may contribute to the precise tissue
involvement.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mounkes et al. (2003) attempted to create a mouse model for autosomal
dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350) by introducing a
L530P (150330.0004) mutation in the LMNA gene. Although mice
heterozygous for L530P did not show signs of muscular dystrophy and
remained overtly normal up to 6 months of age, mice homozygous for the
mutation showed phenotypes markedly reminiscent of symptoms observed in
progeria patients. Homozygous Lmna L530P/L530P mice were
indistinguishable from their littermates at birth, but by 4 to 6 days
developed severe growth retardation, dying within 4 to 5 weeks.
Homozygous mutant mice showed a slight waddling gait, suggesting
immobility of joints. Other progeria features of these mutant mice
included micrognathia and abnormal dentition--in approximately half of
the mutants a gap was observed between the lower 2 incisors, which also
appeared yellowed. Mutant mice also had loss of subcutaneous fat,
reduced numbers of eccrine and sebaceous glands, increased collagen
deposition in skin, and decreased hair follicle density. Mounkes et al.
(2003) concluded that Lmna L530P/L530P mice have significant phenotypic
overlap with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, including nuclear
envelope abnormalities and decreased doublet capacity and life span of
fibroblasts.

Mounkes et al. (2005) generated mice expressing the human N195K
(150330.0007) mutation and observed characteristics consistent with
CMD1A. Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring of cardiac activity
demonstrated that N195K-homozygous mice died at an early age due to
arrhythmia. Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis showed that
Hf1b/Sp4 (600540), connexin-40 (GJA5; 121013), and connexin-43 (GJA1;
121014) were misexpressed and/or mislocalized in N195K-homozygous mouse
hearts. Desmin staining revealed a loss of organization at sarcomeres
and intercalated disks. Mounkes et al. (2005) hypothesized that
mutations within the LMNA gene may cause cardiomyopathy by disrupting
the internal organization of the cardiomyocyte and/or altering the
expression of transcription factors essential to normal cardiac
development, aging, or function.

Arimura et al. (2005) created a mouse model of autosomal dominant
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy expressing an H222P mutation in Lmna.
At adulthood, male homozygous mice displayed reduced locomotion activity
with abnormal stiff walking posture, and all died by 9 months of age.
They also developed dilated cardiomyopathy with hypokinesia and
conduction defects. These skeletal and cardiac muscle features were also
observed in the female homozygous mice, but with a later onset than in
males. Histopathologic analysis of the mice revealed muscle degeneration
with fibrosis associated with dislocation of heterochromatin and
activation of Smad signaling in heart and skeletal muscles.

Varga et al. (2006) created transgenic mice carrying the G608G
(150330.0022)-mutated human LMNA gene and observed the development of a
dramatic defect of the large arteries, consisting of progressive medial
vascular smooth muscle cell loss and replacement with proteoglycan and
collagen followed by vascular remodeling with calcification and
adventitial thickening. In vivo, these arterial abnormalities were
reflected by a blunted initial response to the vasodilator sodium
nitroprusside, consistent with impaired vascular relaxation, and
attenuated blood pressure recovery after infusion. Varga et al. (2006)
noted that although G608G transgenic mice lacked the external phenotype
seen in human progeria, they demonstrated a progressive vascular
abnormality that closely resembled the most lethal aspect of the human
phenotype.

Frock et al. (2006) found that most cultured muscle cells from Lmna
knockout mice exhibited impaired differentiation kinetics and reduced
differentiation potential. Similarly, knockdown of Lmna or emerin (EMD;
300384) expression by RNA interference in normal muscle cells impaired
differentiation potential and reduced expression of muscle-specific
genes, Myod (159970) and desmin (125660). To determine whether impaired
myogenesis was linked to reduced Myod or desmin levels, Frock et al.
(2006) individually expressed these proteins in Lmna-null myoblasts and
found that both increased the differentiation potential of mutant
myoblasts. Frock et al. (2006) concluded that LMNA and emerin are
required for myogenic differentiation, at least in part, through an
effect on expression of critical myoblast proteins.

Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is caused by the production
of a truncated prelamin A, called progerin, which is farnesylated at its
C terminus and accumulates at the nuclear envelope, causing misshapen
nuclei (Yang et al., 2006). Farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) have
been shown to reverse this cellular abnormality (Yang et al., 2005; Toth
et al., 2005; Capell et al., 2005; Mallampalli et al., 2005). Yang et
al. (2006) generated mice with a targeted HGPS mutation (Lmna HG/+) and
observed phenotypes similar to those in human HGPS patients, including
retarded growth, reduced amounts of adipose tissue, micrognathia,
osteoporosis, and osteolytic lesions in bone, which caused spontaneous
rib fractures in the mutant mice. Treatment with an FTI increased
adipose tissue mass, improved body weight curves, reduced the number of
rib fractures, and improved bone mineralization and bone cortical
thickness.

Yang et al. (2008) created knockin mice expressing a nonfarnesylatable
form of progerin. Knockin mice developed the same disease phenotype as
mice expressing farnesylated progerin, although the phenotype was
milder, and embryonic fibroblasts derived from these mice contained
fewer misshapen nuclei. The steady-state level of nonfarnesylated
progerin, but not mRNA, was lower in cultured fibroblasts and whole
tissues, suggesting that the absence of farnesylation may accelerate
progerin turnover.

In a mouse model of EDMD carrying an H222P mutation in the Lmna gene
(Arimura et al., 2005), Muchir et al. (2007) found that activation of
MAPK (see 176948) pathways preceded clinical signs or detectable
molecular markers of cardiomyopathy. Expression of H222P-mutant Lmna in
heart tissue and isolated cardiomyocytes resulted in tissue-specific
activation of MAPKs and downstream target genes. The results suggested
that activation of MAPK pathways plays a role in the pathogenesis of
cardiac disease in EDMD.

Muchir et al. (2009) demonstrated abnormal activation of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) branch of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade in hearts of
Lmna H222P knockin mice, a model of autosomal Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy. Systemic treatment of Lmna H222P/H222P mice that developed
cardiomyopathy with PD98059, an inhibitor of ERK activation, inhibited
ERK phosphorylation and blocked the activation of downstream genes in
heart. It also blocked increased expression of RNAs encoding natriuretic
peptide precursors and proteins involved in sarcomere organization that
occurred in placebo-treated mice. Histologic analysis and
echocardiography demonstrated that treatment with PD98059 delayed the
development of left ventricular dilatation. PD98059-treated Lmna
H222P/H222P mice had normal cardiac ejection fractions assessed by
echocardiography, whereas placebo-treated mice had a 30% decrease. The
authors emphasized the role of ERK activation in the development of
cardiomyopathy caused by LMNA mutations, and provided further proof of
principle for ERK inhibition as a therapeutic option to prevent or delay
heart failure in humans with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and
related disorders caused by mutations in LMNA.

Davies et al. (2010) created knockin mice harboring a mutant Lmna allele
that yielded exclusively nonfarnesylated prelamin A. These mice had no
evidence of progeria but succumbed to cardiomyopathy. Most of the
nonfarnesylated prelamin A in the tissues of these mice was localized at
the nuclear rim, indistinguishable from the lamin A in wildtype mice.
The cardiomyopathy could not be ascribed to an absence of lamin C
because mice expressing an otherwise identical knockin allele yielding
only wildtype prelamin A appeared normal. The authors concluded that
lamin C synthesis is dispensable in mice and that failure to convert
prelamin A to mature lamin A causes cardiomyopathy in the absence of
lamin C.

Choi et al. (2012) found that ERK activation in H222P/H222P mice
specifically upregulated expression of dual-specificity phosphatase-4
(DUSP4; 602747) in cardiac muscle, with much lower Dusp4 induction in
quadriceps muscle, and no Dusp4 induction in tongue, kidney, and liver.
Dusp4 overexpression in cultured C2C12 muscle cells or targeted to mouse
heart resulted in activation of the Akt (see AKT1; 164730)-Mtor (FRAP1;
601231) metabolic signaling pathway, leading to impaired autophagy and
abnormal cardiac metabolism, similar to findings in H222P/H222P mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, GLN6TER

In a family with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 1
of the LMNA gene that changed glutamine-6 (CAG) to a stop codon (TAG).

.0002
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, ARG453TRP

In a family with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) demonstrated a C-to-T transition in exon 7
of the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg453-to-trp (R453W) substitution.

.0003
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG527PRO

In 2 families with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) found a G-to-C transversion in the LMNA
gene which, resulting in an arg527-to-pro (R527P) substitution. The
mutation, found in heterozygous state, was demonstrated to be de novo in
both families.

Van der Kooi et al. (2002) reported a woman with limb-girdle muscle
weakness, spinal rigidity, contractures, elevated creatine kinase,
cardiac conduction abnormalities (atrial fibrillation), partial
lipodystrophy (151660), and increased serum triglycerides who had the
R527P mutation. Van der Kooi et al. (2002) also reported a family with
the R527P mutation in which the proband, her father, and her son all
presented with varying degrees of EDMD, lipodystrophy, and cardiac
conduction abnormalities.

Makri et al. (2009) reported 2 sisters with early-onset autosomal
dominant muscular dystrophy most consistent with EDMD. Because the girls
were born of consanguineous Algerian parents, they were at first thought
to have an autosomal recessive congenital muscular dystrophy. However,
genetic analysis identified a heterozygous R527P mutation in the LMNA
gene in both patients that was not present in either unaffected parent.
The results were consistent with germline mosaicism or a recurrent de
novo event. The older sib had a difficult birth and showed congenital
hypotonia, diffuse weakness, and mild initial respiratory and feeding
difficulties. She sat unsupported at age 2 years and walked
independently from age 4 years with frequent falls and a waddling gait.
At 13 years she had a high-arched palate, moderate limb hypotonia, and
weakness of the pelvic muscles. There was proximal limb wasting,
moderate cervical, elbow, and ankle contractures, pes cavus, spinal
rigidity, and lordosis/scoliosis. Her sister had mild hypotonia in early
infancy, walked without support at 24 months, and showed proximal muscle
weakness. There were mild contractures of the elbow and ankles. At age 9
years, she showed adiposity of the neck, trunk and abdomen, consistent
with lipodystrophy. Brain MRI and cognition were normal in both sisters,
and neither had cardiac involvement. Muscle biopsies showed a dystrophic
pattern.

.0004
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, LEU530PRO

In a family with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) detected a heterozygous T-to-C transition
in the LMNA gene, resulting in a leu530-to-pro (L530P) substitution.

.0005
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG60GLY

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
178C-G transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg60-to-gly
(R60G) substitution.

Van der Kooi et al. (2002) reported a woman with partial lipodystrophy
(151660), hypertriglyceridemia, and cardiomyopathy with conduction
defects who carried the R60G mutation. The patient's mother reportedly
had similar manifestations. The authors noted that lipodystrophy and
cardiac abnormalities were combined manifestations of the same mutation.

.0006
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, LEU85ARG

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
254T-G transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in a leu85-to-arg (L85R)
substitution.

.0007
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, ASN195LYS

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
585C-G transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an asn195-to-lys
(N195K) substitution.

Using cells from the mouse model of Mounkes et al. (2005), Ho et al.
(2013) found that Lmna N195K embryonic fibroblasts and bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells had impaired nuclear localization
of the mechanosensitive transcription factor MKL1 (606078). Cardiac
sections from Lmna(N195K/N195K) mice had significantly reduced fractions
of cardiomyocytes with nuclear Mkl1, implicating altered Mkl1 signaling
in the development of cardiomyopathy in these animals. Nuclear
accumulation of Mkl1 was substantially lower in Lmna N195K cells than in
wildtype cells. Altered nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of Mkl1 was caused
by altered actin dynamics in Lmna(N195K/N195K) mutant cells. Ectopic
expression of the nuclear envelope protein emerin (300384) restored Mkl1
nuclear translocation and rescued actin dynamics in mutant cells.

.0008
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, GLU203GLY

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
608A-G transition in the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu203-to-gly (E203G)
substitution.

.0009
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, ARG571SER

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy and
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
1711C-A transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg571-to-ser
(R571S) substitution. In this family, the C-terminal of lamin C was
selectively affected by the mutation, and the cardiac phenotype was
relatively milder than that associated with mutations in the rod domain
of the LMNA gene. Furthermore, there was subclinical evidence of
involvement of skeletal muscle. Although affected members of this family
had no skeletal muscle symptoms, some had elevated serum creatine kinase
levels, including 1 asymptomatic family member with the genotype
associated with the disease. The arg571-to-ser mutation affected only
lamin C isoforms, whereas previously described defects causing
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350) perturbed both lamin A and
lamin C isoforms.

.0010
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG482GLN

In 5 probands from 5 Canadian kindreds with familial partial
lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type (151660), Cao and Hegele (2000)
demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition in exon 8 of the
LMNA gene, predicted to result in an arg484-to-gln (R482Q) substitution.
There were no differences in age, gender, or body mass index in
Q482/R482 heterozygotes compared with R482/R482 homozygotes (normals)
from these families; however, there were significantly more Q482/R482
heterozygotes who had definite partial lipodystrophy and frank diabetes.
Also compared with the normal homozygotes, heterozygotes had
significantly higher serum insulin and C-peptide (see 176730) levels.
The LMNA heterozygotes with diabetes were significantly older than
heterozygotes without diabetes.

Shackleton et al. (2000) found the R482Q mutation in a family with
familial partial lipodystrophy. Hegele et al. (2000) analyzed the
relationship between plasma leptin (164160) and the rare LMNA R482Q
mutation in 23 adult familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD) subjects
compared with 25 adult family controls with normal LMNA in an extended
Canadian FPLD kindred. They found that the LMNA Q482/R482 genotype was a
significant determinant of plasma leptin, the ratio of plasma leptin to
body mass index (BMI), plasma insulin, and plasma C peptide, but not
BMI. Family members who were Q482/R482 heterozygotes had significantly
lower plasma leptin and leptin:BMI ratio than unaffected R482/R482
homozygotes. Fasting plasma concentrations of insulin and C peptide were
both significantly higher in LMNA Q482/R482 heterozygotes than in
R482/R482 homozygotes. Multivariate regression analysis revealed that
the LMNA R482Q genotype accounted for 40.9%, 48.2%, 86.9%, and 81.0%,
respectively, of the attributable variation in log leptin, leptin:BMI
ratio, log insulin, and log C peptide. The authors concluded that a rare
FPLD mutation in LMNA determines the plasma leptin concentration.

Boguslavsky et al. (2006) found that overexpression of wildtype LMNA or
mutant R482Q or R482W (150330.0011) in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
prevented cellular lipid accumulation, inhibited triglyceride synthesis,
and prevented normal differentiation into adipocytes. In contrast,
embryonic fibroblasts from Lmna-null mice had increased levels of basal
triglyceride synthesis and differentiated into fat-containing cells more
readily that wildtype mouse cells. Mutations at residue 482 are not
predicted to affect the structure of the nuclear lamina, but may change
interactions with other proteins. The findings of this study suggested
that mutations responsible for FPLD are gain-of-function mutations.
Boguslavsky et al. (2006) postulated that mutations that result in gain
of function may cause higher binding affinity to a proadipogenic
transcription factor, thus preventing it from activating target genes;
overexpression of the wildtype protein may result in increased numbers
of molecules with a normal binding affinity. Overexpression of Lmna was
associated with decreased levels of PPARG2 (601487), a nuclear hormone
receptor transcription factor putatively involved in adipogenic
conversion. Lmna-null cells had increased basal phosphorylation of AKT1
(164730), a mediator of insulin signaling.

.0011
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG482TRP

In 6 families and 3 isolated cases of partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Shackleton et al. (2000) found heterozygosity for C-to-T transition in
the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg482-to-trp (R482W) substitution. This
is the same codon as that affected in the R482Q mutation (150330.0010).
R482L (150330.0012) is a third mutation in the same codon causing
partial lipodystrophy.

Schmidt et al. (2001) identified a family with partial lipodystrophy
carrying the R482W mutation in the LMNA gene. Clinically, the loss of
subcutaneous fat and muscular hypertrophy, especially of the lower
extremities, started as early as in childhood. Acanthosis and severe
hypertriglyceridemia developed later in life, followed by diabetes.
Characterization of the lipoprotein subfractions revealed that affected
children present with hyperlipidemia. The presence and severity of
hyperlipidemia seem to be influenced by age, apolipoprotein E genotype,
and the coexistence of diabetes mellitus. In conclusion, dyslipidemia is
an early and prominent feature in the presented lipodystrophic family
carrying the R482W mutation.

.0012
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG482LEU

In a family with partial lipodystrophy (151660), Shackleton et al.
(2000) found that the affected individuals were heterozygous for a
G-to-T transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg482-to-leu
(R482L) substitution.

.0013
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
LMNA, 1-BP DEL, 959T

In a large family with a severe autosomal dominant dilated
cardiomyopathy with conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200) in which the
majority of affected family members showed signs of mild skeletal muscle
involvement, Brodsky et al. (2000) demonstrated heterozygosity in
affected members for a 1-bp deletion (del959T) deletion in exon 6 of the
LMNA gene. One individual had a pattern of skeletal muscle involvement
that the authors considered consistent with mild Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy (181350).

.0014
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LMNA, HIS222TYR

In a 40-year-old man with a severe, atypical form of EDMD (see 181350),
Raffaele di Barletta et al. (2000) found a homozygous 664C-T transition
in the LMNA gene, resulting in a his222-to-tyr (H222Y) amino acid
substitution. Both parents, who were first cousins, were heterozygous
for the mutation and were unaffected. The mutation was not found among
200 control chromosomes. The patient was the only one with a homozygous
LMNA mutation among a larger study of individuals with autosomal
dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

.0015
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, GLY465ASP

Speckman et al. (2000) found that 1 of 15 families with familial partial
lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan variety (151660) harbored a gly465-to-asp
(G465D) mutation in exon 8 of the LMNA gene.

.0016
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG582HIS

In a family with an atypical form of familial partial lipodystrophy
(151660), Speckman et al. (2000) identified an arg582-to-his (R582H)
mutation in exon 11 of the LMNA gene. In a follow-up of this same
family, Garg et al. (2001) reported that 2 affected sisters showed less
severe loss of subcutaneous fat from the trunk and extremities with some
retention of fat in the gluteal region and medial parts of the proximal
thighs compared to women with typical FPLD2. Noting that the R582H
mutation interrupts only the lamin A protein, Garg et al. (2001)
suggested that in typical FPLD2, interruption of both lamins A and C
causes a more severe phenotype than that seen in atypical FPLD2, in
which only lamin A is altered.

.0017
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG377HIS

In a family with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (159001), Muchir
et al. (2000) found a G-to-A transition in exon 6 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in a substitution of histidine for arginine-377 (R377H).

Taylor et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for the R377H mutation in
an American family of British descent with autosomal dominant dilated
cardiomyopathy and mild limb-girdle muscular disease.

Charniot et al. (2003) described a French family with autosomal dominant
severe dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects or
atrial/ventricular arrhythmias and a skeletal muscular dystrophy of the
quadriceps muscles. Affected members were found to carry the R377H
mutation, which was shown by transfection experiments in both muscular
and nonmuscular cells to lead to mislocalization of both lamin and
emerin (300384). Unlike previously reported cases of LMNA mutations
causing dilated cardiomyopathy with neuromuscular involvement, cardiac
involvement preceded neuromuscular disease in all affected members.
Charniot et al. (2003) suggested that factors other than the R377H
mutation influenced phenotypic expression in this family. Sebillon et
al. (2003) also reported on this family.

In a German woman with LGMD1B, Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous R377H mutation in the LMNA gene. Family
history revealed that the patient's paternal grandmother had proximal
muscle weakness and died from heart disease at age 52, and a paternal
aunt had 'walking difficulties' since youth. The patient's father and 4
cousins all had cardiac disease without muscle weakness ranging from
nonspecific 'heart attacks' to dilated cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia.
The only living affected cousin also carried the mutation.

.0018
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, 3-BP DEL, EXON 3

In a family with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (159001), Muchir
et al. (2000) found a 3-bp deletion (AAG) in exon 3 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in loss of the codon for lysine-208 (delK208).

.0019
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, IVS9, G-C, +5

In a family with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (159001), Muchir
et al. (2000) found a G-to-C transversion in the splice donor site of
intron 9, leading to retention of intron 9 and a frameshift at position
536. This potentially results in a truncated protein lacking half of the
globular tail domain of lamins A/C.

.0020
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2B1
LMNA, ARG298CYS

De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2002) found a homozygous arg298-to-cys
(R298C) mutation in the LMNA gene in affected members of Algerian
families with CMT2B1 (605588).

Ben Yaou et al. (2007) identified a homozygous R298C mutation in a
female and 2 male affected members of an Algerian family with CMT2B1.
The 2 males also had X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (310300)
and a hemizygous mutation in the EMD gene (300384).

.0021
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG527HIS

In 5 consanguineous Italian families, Novelli et al. (2002) demonstrated
that individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia (248370) were homozygous
for an arg527-to-his (R527H) mutation.

In affected members from 2 pedigrees with MADA, Simha et al. (2003)
identified the homozygous R527H mutation.

In a Mexican American boy with MADA born of related parents, Shen et al.
(2003) identified homozygosity for the R527H mutation. The authors noted
that all the patients reported by Novelli et al. (2002) shared a common
disease haplotype, but that the patients reported by Simha et al. (2003)
and their Mexican American patient had different haplotypes, indicating
independent origins of the mutation. The mutation is located within the
C-terminal immunoglobulin-like domain in the center of a beta sheet on
the domain surface of the protein.

Lombardi et al. (2007) identified this mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another missense mutation (150330.0044) in a patient
with an apparent MADA phenotype associated with muscular hyposthenia and
generalized hypotonia.

Garavelli et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated patients with early
childhood onset of MADA features associated with a homozygous R527H
mutation. One presented at age 5 years, 3 months with bulbous distal
phalanges of fingers and was observed to have dysmorphic craniofacial
features, lipodystrophy type A, and acroosteolysis. The second child,
born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, presented at age 4 years, 2
months with a round face, chubby cheeks, thin nose, lipodystrophy type
A, and short, broad distal phalanges. Garavelli et al. (2009) emphasized
that features of this disorder may become apparent as early as preschool
age and that bulbous fingertips may be a clue to the diagnosis.

.0022
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME
RESTRICTIVE DERMOPATHY, LETHAL, INCLUDED
LMNA, GLY608GLY

In 18 of 20 patients with classic Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome
(176670), Eriksson et al. (2003) found an identical de novo 1824C-T
transition, resulting in a silent gly-to-gly mutation at codon 608
(G608G) within exon 11 of the LMNA gene. This substitution created an
exonic consensus splice donor sequence and results in activation of a
cryptic splice site and deletion of 50 codons of prelamin A. This
mutation was not identified in any of the 16 parents available for
testing.

De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2003) identified the exon 11 cryptic splice
site activation mutation (1824C-T+1819-1968del) in 2 HGPS patients.
Immunocytochemical analyses of lymphocytes from 1 patient using specific
antibodies directed against lamin A/C, lamin A, and lamin B1 showed that
most cells had strikingly altered nuclear sizes and shapes, with
envelope interruptions accompanied by chromatin extrusion. Lamin A was
detected in 10 to 20% of HGPS lymphocytes. Only lamin C was present in
most cells, and lamin B1 was found in the nucleoplasm, suggesting that
it had dissociated from the nuclear envelope due to the loss of lamin A.
Western blot analysis showed 25% of normal lamin A levels, and no
truncated form was detected.

Cao and Hegele (2003) confirmed the observations of Eriksson et al.
(2003) using the same cell lines. They referred to this mutation as
2036C-T.

D'Apice et al. (2004) confirmed paternal age effect and demonstrated a
paternal origin of the 2036C-T mutation in 3 families with isolated
cases of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria.

By light and electron microscopy of fibroblasts from HGPS patients
carrying the 1824C-T mutation, Goldman et al. (2004) found significant
changes in nuclear shape, including lobulation of the nuclear envelope,
thickening of the nuclear lamina, loss of peripheral heterochromatin,
and clustering of nuclear pores. These structural defects worsened as
the HGPS cells aged in culture, and their severity correlated with an
apparent accumulation of mutant protein, which Goldman et al. (2004)
designated LA delta-50. Introduction of LA delta-50 into normal cells by
transfection or protein injection induced the same changes. Goldman et
al. (2004) hypothesized that the alterations in nuclear structure are
due to a concentration-dependent dominant-negative effect of LA
delta-50, leading to the disruption of lamin-related functions ranging
from the maintenance of nuclear shape to regulation of gene expression
and DNA replication.

In an infant with restrictive dermopathy (275210), Navarro et al. (2004)
identified the 1824C-T transition in heterozygous state.

In a patient with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria, Wuyts et al. (2005)
identified the G608G mutation. In lymphocyte DNA from the parents,
normal wildtype alleles were observed in the father, but a low signal
corresponding to the mutant allele was detected in the mother's DNA. A
segregation study confirmed that the patient's mutation was transmitted
from the mother, who showed germline and somatic mosaicism without
manifestations of HGPS.

Glynn and Glover (2005) studied the effects of farnesylation inhibition
on nuclear phenotypes in cells expressing normal and G608G-mutant lamin
A. Expression of a GFP-progerin fusion protein in normal fibroblasts
caused a high incidence of nuclear abnormalities (as seen in HGPS
fibroblasts), and resulted in abnormal nuclear localization of
GFP-progerin in comparison with the localization pattern of GFP-lamin A.
Expression of a GFP-lamin A fusion containing a mutation preventing the
final cleavage step, which caused the protein to remain farnesylated,
displayed identical localization patterns and nuclear abnormalities as
in HGPS cells and in cells expressing GFP-progerin. Exposure to a
farnesyltransferase inhibitor (FTI), PD169541, caused a significant
improvement in the nuclear morphology of cells expressing GFP-progerin
and in HGPS cells. Glynn and Glover (2005) proposed that abnormal
farnesylation of progerin may play a role in the cellular phenotype in
HGPS cells, and suggested that FTIs may represent a therapeutic option
for patients with HGPS.

In cells from a female patient with HGPS due to the 1824C-T mutation,
Shumaker et al. (2006) found that the inactive X chromosome showed loss
of histone H3 trimethylation of lys27 (H3K27me3), a marker for
facultative heterochromatin, as well as loss of histone H3
trimethylation of lys9 (H3K9me3), a marker of pericentric constitutive
heterochromatin. Other alterations in epigenetic control included
downregulation of the EZH2 methyltransferase (601573), upregulation of
pericentric satellite III repeat transcripts, and increase in the
trimethylation of H4K20. The epigenetic alterations were observed before
the pathogenic changes in nuclear shape. The findings indicated that the
mutant LMNA protein alters sites of histone methylation known to
regulate heterochromatin and provided evidence that the rapid aging
phenotype of HGPS reflects aspects of normal aging at the molecular
level.

Moulson et al. (2007) demonstrated that HGPS cells with the common
1824C-T LMNA mutation produced about 37.5% of wildtype full-length
transcript, which was higher than previous estimates (Reddel and Weiss,
2004).

Using real-time RT-PCR, Rodriguez et al. (2009) found that progerin
transcripts were expressed in dermal fibroblasts cultured from normal
controls, but at a level more than 160-fold lower than that detected in
dermal fibroblasts cultured from HGPS patients. The level of progerin
transcripts, but not of lamin A or lamin C transcripts, increased in
late-passage cells from both normal controls and HGPS patients.

.0023
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME
LMNA, GLY608SER

In a patient with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (176670),
Eriksson et al. (2003) identified a G-to-A transition in the LMNA gene
resulting in a gly-to-ser substitution at codon 608 (G608S). This
mutation was not identified in either parent.

Cao and Hegele (2003) confirmed the observation of Eriksson et al.
(2003) using the same cell line.

.0024
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, ATYPICAL
LMNA, GLU145LYS

In a patient with somewhat atypical features of progeria (176670),
Eriksson et al. (2003) identified a glu-to-lys substitution at codon 145
(E145K) in exon 2 of the LMNA gene. This mutation was not identified in
either parent. Atypical clinical features, including persistence of
coarse hair over the head, ample subcutaneous tissue over the arms and
legs, and severe strokes beginning at age 4, may subtly distinguish this
phenotype from classic HGPS.

.0025
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL
LMNA, ARG471CYS

In a patient with an apparently typical progeria phenotype (176670) who
was 28 years old at the time that DNA was obtained, Cao and Hegele
(2003) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in
the LMNA gene. One mutation, arg471 to cys (R471C), resulted from a
1623C-T transition. An arg527-to-cys (R527C) substitution (150330.0026),
resulting from a 1791C-T transition, was found on the other allele.
These mutations were not identified in any of 100 control chromosomes.
Parental DNA for this patient and a clinical description of the parents
were not available. Brown (2004) reported that both he and the patient's
physician, Francis Collins, concluded that the patient had
mandibuloacral dysplasia (248370).

Zirn et al. (2008) reported a 7-year-old Turkish girl, born of
consanguineous parents, who was homozygous for the R471C mutation. She
had a phenotype most consistent with an atypical form of MADA, including
lipodystrophy, a progeroid appearance, and congenital muscular dystrophy
with rigid spine syndrome. These latter features were reminiscent of
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350), although there was no
cardiac involvement. She presented at age 10 months with proximal muscle
weakness, contractures, spinal rigidity, and a dystrophic skeletal
muscle biopsy. Characteristic progeroid features and features of
lipodystrophy and mandibuloacral dysplasia were noted at age 3 years and
became more apparent with age. Zirn et al. (2008) commented on the
severity of the phenotype and emphasized the phenotypic variability in
patients with LMNA mutations.

.0026
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, ARG527CYS

See 150330.0025, Cao and Hegele (2003), and Brown (2004).

.0027
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, CHILDHOOD-ONSET, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG133LEU

In a male patient whose phenotype associated generalized acquired
lipoatrophy with insulin-resistant diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, and
hepatic steatosis (151660), Caux et al. (2003) found a heterozygous
398G-T transversion in exon 2 of the LMNA gene that resulted in an
arg-to-leu change at codon 133 (R133L) in the dimerization rod domain of
lamins A and C. The patient also had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with
valvular involvement and disseminated whitish papules.
Immunofluorescence microscopic analysis of the patient's cultured skin
fibroblasts revealed nuclear disorganization and abnormal distribution
of A-type lamins, similar to that observed in patients harboring other
LMNA mutations. This observation broadened the clinical spectrum of
laminopathies, pointing out the clinical variability of lipodystrophy
and the possibility of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and skin involvement.

In 2 unrelated persons with a progeroid syndrome (see 176670), Chen et
al. (2003) found heterozygosity for the R1333L mutation in the LMNA
gene. One was a white Portuguese female who presented at the age of 9
years with short stature. She showed scleroderma-like skin changes and
graying/thinning of hair. Type 2 diabetes developed at the age of 23
years. Hypogonadism, osteoporosis, and voice changes were also present.
The other patient was an African American female in whom the diagnosis
of a progeroid syndrome was made at the age of 18 years.
Scleroderma-like skin, short stature, graying/thinning of hair, and type
2 diabetes at the age of 18 years were features. The deceased father,
paternal aunt, and paternal grandmother of this patient were also
diagnosed with severe insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, suggesting
that the R133L mutation might have been paternally inherited. It is
noteworthy that a substitution in the same codon, R133P (150330.0032),
was reported in a 40-year-old patient with Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy who had disease onset at age 7 years and atrial fibrillation
at age 32 years (Brown et al., 2001). Although Chen et al. (2003)
designated these patients as having 'atypical Werner syndrome' (277700),
Hegele (2003) suggested that the patients more likely had late-onset
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.

Vigouroux et al. (2003) emphasized that a striking feature in the
patient reported by Caux et al. (2003) was muscular hypertrophy of the
limbs, which contrasts with the muscular atrophy usually present in
Werner syndrome. Muscular hypertrophy, along with insulin-resistant
diabetes and hypertriglyceridemia, is more often associated with
LMNA-linked Dunnigan lipodystrophy. Fibroblasts from their patient
showed nuclear abnormalities identical to those described in Dunnigan
lipodystrophy (Vigouroux et al., 2001).

Jacob et al. (2005) studied the pattern of body fat distribution and
metabolic abnormalities in the 2 patients with atypical Werner syndrome
described by Chen et al. (2003). Patient 1, an African American female,
had normal body fat (27%) by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA).
However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed relative paucity of
subcutaneous fat in the distal extremities, with preservation of
subcutaneous truncal fat. She had impaired glucose tolerance and
elevated postprandial serum insulin levels. In contrast, patient 2, a
Caucasian female, had only 11.6% body fat as determined by DEXA and had
generalized loss of subcutaneous and intraabdominal fat on MRI. She had
hypertriglyceridemia and severe insulin-resistant diabetes requiring
more than 200 U of insulin daily. Skin fibroblasts showed markedly
abnormal nuclear morphology compared with those from patient 1. Despite
the deranged nuclear morphology, the lamin A/C remained localized to the
nuclear envelope, and the nuclear DNA remained within the nucleus. Jacob
et al. (2005) concluded that atypical Werner syndrome associated with an
R133L mutation in the LMNA gene is phenotypically heterogeneous.
Furthermore, the severity of metabolic complications seemed to correlate
with the extent of lipodystrophy.

.0028
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, GLU161LYS

Sebillon et al. (2003) described a family with a history of sudden
cardiac death, congestive heart failure, and dilated cardiomyopathy
(CMD1A; 115200). Five affected members had a heterozygous 481G-A
transition in exon 2 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu161-to-lys
(E161K) mutation. Dilated cardiomyopathy was present in only 2 patients,
in whom onset of the disease was characterized by congestive heart
failure and atrial fibrillation (at 29 and 44 years, respectively);
heart transplantation was performed in both patients (at 34 and 51 years
of age). In the 3 other affected members, the onset of disease was also
characterized by atrial fibrillation at 22, 49, and 63 years, but
without dilated cardiomyopathy. A 16-year-old male and 12-year-old
female were also heterozygous for the mutation, but had no signs or
symptoms of heart disease. The 5 affected members were a mother and 2
daughters in 1 branch of the family and 2 brothers in another branch.
Two cardiac deaths were reported in the family history: sudden death at
38 years and congestive heart failure at 68 years. No significant
atrioventricular block was observed in the family, except in 1 patient
for whom cardiac pacing was necessary at 67 years of age because of
sinoatrial block coexisting with atrial fibrillation. Sebillon et al.
(2003) concluded that the phenotype in this family was characterized by
early atrial fibrillation preceding or coexisting with dilated
cardiomyopathy, without significant atrioventricular block, and without
neuromuscular abnormalities.

.0029
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, 1-BP INS, 28A

Sebillon et al. (2003) described a family in which 5 patients with
dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200) were
heterozygous for a 1-bp insertion, 28insA, in exon 1 of the LMNA gene.
Three additional patients were considered as phenotypically affected
with documented dilated cardiomyopathy but were not available for DNA
analysis. In the family history, there were 3 cardiac sudden deaths
before 55 years of age. In the patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, 3
had associated atrioventricular block requiring pacemaker implantation,
1 had premature ventricular beats leading to a cardioverter
defibrillator implantation, and 1 had a mild form of skeletal muscular
dystrophy (mild weakness and wasting of quadriceps muscles, as well as
myogenic abnormalities on electromyogram).

.0030
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, WITH HYPERGONADOTRIPIC HYPOGONADISM
LMNA, ALA57PRO

In an Iranian female with short stature and a progeroid syndrome (see
176670), Chen et al. (2003) found a heterozygous de novo ala57-to-pro
substitution (A57P) resulting from a 584G-C transversion in the LMNA
gene. Onset occurred in her early teens, and she was 23 years old at
diagnosis. Hypogonadism, osteoporosis, osteosclerosis of digits, and
dilated cardiomyopathy were described. Although Chen et al. (2003)
designated this patient as having 'atypical Werner syndrome' (277700),
Hegele (2003) suggested that the patient more likely had late-onset
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.

McPherson et al. (2009) suggested that the patient in whom Chen et al.
(2003) identified an A57P LMNA mutation had a distinct phenotype
involving dilated cardiomyopathy and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
(212112).

.0031
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, CHILDHOOD-ONSET
LMNA, LEU140ARG

In a white Norwegian male with a progeroid syndrome (see 176670), Chen
et al. (2003) found a leu140-to-arg (L140R) substitution resulting from
an 834T-G transversion in the LMNA gene. The patient had onset at age 14
of cataracts, scleroderma-like skin, and graying/thinning of hair, as
well as hypogonadism, osteoporosis, soft tissue calcification, and
premature atherosclerosis. Aortic stenosis and insufficiency were also
present. The patient died at the age of 36 years. Although Chen et al.
(2003) designated this patient as having 'atypical Werner syndrome'
(277700), Hegele (2003) suggested that the patient more likely had
late-onset Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.

.0032
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, ARG133PRO

In a 40-year-old patient with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350)
who had disease onset at age 7 years and atrial fibrillation at age 32
years, Brown et al. (2001) found an arg133-to-pro (R133P) mutation in
the LMNA gene. Chen et al. (2003) noted that the same codon is involved
in the arg133-to-leu (150330.0027) mutation in atypical Werner syndrome.

.0033
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, LYS542ASN

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous family from north India with
features of MADA (248370). Plasilova et al. (2004) identified a
homozygous 1626G-C transversion in exon 10 of the LMNA gene, resulting
in a lys542-to-asn (K542N) substitution. The parents and 1 unaffected
daughter were heterozygous for the mutation. Patients in this family
showed uniform skeletal malformations such as acroosteolysis of the
digits, micrognathia, and clavicular aplasia/hypoplasia, characteristic
of mandibuloacral dysplasia. However, the patients also had classic
features of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (176670). Plasilova et
al. (2004) suggested that autosomal recessive HGPS and MADA may
represent a single disorder with varying degrees of severity.

.0034
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, SER143PHE

In a young girl with congenital muscular dystrophy and progeroid
features (see 613205), Kirschner et al. (2005) identified a 1824C-T
transition in the LMNA gene, resulting in a de novo heterozygous
missense mutation, ser143 to phe (S143F). The child presented during the
first year of life with myopathy with marked axial weakness, feeding
difficulties, poor head control and axial weakness. Progeroid features,
including growth failure, sclerodermatous skin changes, and osteolytic
lesions, developed later. At routine examination at age 8 years, she was
found to have a mediolateral myocardial infarction.

In cultured skin fibroblasts derived from the patient reported by
Kirschner et al. (2005), Kandert et al. (2007) found dysmorphic nuclei
with blebs and lobulations that accumulated progressively with cell
passage. Immunofluorescent staining showed altered lamin A/C
organization and aggregate formation. There was aberrant localization of
lamin-associated proteins, particularly emerin (EMD; 300384) and
nesprin-2 (SYNE2; 608442), which was reduced or absent from the nuclear
envelope. However, a subset of mutant cells expressing the giant 800-kD
isoform of SYNE2 showed a milder phenotype, suggesting that this isoform
exerts a protective effect. Proliferating cells were observed to express
the 800-kD SYNE2 isoform, whereas nonproliferating cells did not. In
addition, mutant cells showed defects in the intranuclear organization
of acetylated histones and RNA polymerase II compared to control cells.
The findings indicated that the S143F mutant protein affects nuclear
envelope architecture and composition, chromatin organization, gene
expression, and transcription. The findings also implicated nesprin-2 as
a structural reinforcer at the nuclear envelope.

.0035
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, TYR259TER

In 9 affected members of Dutch family with limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy type 1B (159001), van Engelen et al. (2005) identified a
777T-A transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in a tyr259-to-ter
substitution (Y259X). The heterozygous Y259X mutation led to a classic
LGMD1B phenotype. One infant homozygous for the mutation was born of
consanguineous parents who were both affected, and delivered at 30
weeks' gestational age by cesarean section because of decreasing cardiac
rhythm. The infant died at birth from very severe generalized muscular
dystrophy. Cultured skin fibroblasts from the infant showed complete
absence of A-type lamins leading to disorganization of the lamina,
alterations in the protein composition of the inner nuclear membrane,
and decreased life span. Van Engelen et al. (2005) noted that the
fibroblasts from this child showed remarkable similarity, in nuclear
architectural defects and in decreased life span, to the fibroblasts of
homozygous LMNA (L530P/L530P) mice (Mounkes et al., 2003).

.0036
RESTRICTIVE DERMOPATHY, LETHAL
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, INCLUDED
LMNA, IVS11, G-A, +1

In a premature infant who died at 6 months of age due to restrictive
dermopathy (275210), Navarro et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous
G-to-A transition at position 1 in the intron 11 donor site of the LMNA
gene (IVS11+1G-A), resulting in loss of exon 11 from the transcript. The
patient expressed lamins A and C and a truncated prelamin A.

In a patient with an extremely severe form of HGPS (176670), Moulson et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the +1
position of the donor splice site of intron 11 in the LMNA gene
(1968+1G-A). RT-PCR studies showed a truncated protein product identical
to that observed in HGPS cell lines with the common 1824C-T mutation
(150330.0022), indicating that the new mutation resulted in the abnormal
use of the same cryptic exon 11 splice site. The findings were in
contrast to those reported by Navarro et al. (2004), who observed
skipping of exon 11 with 1968+1G-A. Further quantitative studies of the
patient's cells by Moulson et al. (2007) found a 4.5-fold increase in
the relative ratio of mutant mRNA and protein to wildtype prelamin A
compared to typical HGPS cells. The findings were confirmed by Western
blot analysis and provided an explanation for the severe phenotype
observed in this patient. He had had abnormally thick and tight skin
observed at 11 weeks of age, and developed more typical but severe
progeroid features over time. He died of infection at age 3.5 years.

.0037
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, ALA529VAL

In 2 unrelated Turkish patients with mandibuloacral dysplasia with type
A lipodystrophy (248370), a 21-year-old woman previously described by
Cogulu et al. (2003) and an 18-year-old man, Garg et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for a 1586C-T transition in the LMNA gene,
resulting in an ala529-to-val (A529V) substitution. Intragenic SNPs
revealed a common haplotype spanning 2.5 kb around the mutated
nucleotide in the parents of both patients, suggesting ancestral origin
of the mutation. The female patient had no breast development despite
normal menstruation, a phenotype different from that seen in women with
the R527H mutation (150330.0021).

.0038
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, GLN493TER

In a German woman with LGMD1B (159001), Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous 1477C-T transition in exon 8 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in a gln493-to-ter (Q493X) substitution. She presented with
slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness beginning in the lower
extremities and later involving the upper extremities. EMG showed both
neurogenic and myopathic defects in the quadriceps muscle. At age 53
years, she was diagnosed with atrioventricular conduction block and
arrhythmia requiring pacemaker implantation. Family history showed that
her mother had walking difficulties from age 40 years and died of a
heart attack at age 54. Six other deceased family members had suspected
cardiomyopathy without muscle involvement.

.0039
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, IVS8, G-C, +5

Morel et al. (2006) reported 2 sisters, the children of
nonconsanguineous Punjabi parents, with familial partial lipodystrophy
type 2 (FPLD2; 151660). The first presented with acanthosis nigricans at
age 5 years, diabetes with insulin resistance, hypertension, and
hypertriglyceridemia at age 13 years, and partial lipodystrophy starting
at puberty. Her sister and their mother had a similar metabolic profile
and physical features, and their mother died of vascular disease at age
32 years. LMNA sequencing showed that the sisters were each heterozygous
for a novel G-to-C mutation at the intron 8 consensus splice donor site,
which was absent from the genomes of 300 healthy individuals. The
retention of intron 8 in mRNA predicted a prematurely truncated lamin A
isoform (516 instead of 664 amino acids) with 20 nonsense 3-prime
terminal residues. The authors concluded that this was the first LMNA
splicing mutation to be associated with FPLD2, and that it causes a
severe clinical and metabolic phenotype.

.0040
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME
LMNA, VAL607VAL

In a patient with a severe form of HGPS (176670), Moulson et al. (2007)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1821G-A transition in exon 11 of the
LMNA gene, resulting in a val607-to-val (V607V) substitution. The
1821G-A mutation favored the use of the same cryptic splice site as the
common 1824C-T mutation (150330.0022) and produced the same resultant
progerin product. However, the ratio of mutant to wildtype mRNA and
protein was increased in the patient compared to typical HGPS cells. The
patient had flexion contractures, thick and tight skin, and other severe
progeroid features. He died of infection at 26 days of age.

.0041
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED;;
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LMNA, SER573LEU

In a 50-year-old Italian woman with sporadic dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Taylor et al. (2003) identified
heterozygosity for a 1718C-T transition in exon 11 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in a ser573-to-leu substitution at a highly conserved residue,
predicted to affect the carboxyl tail of the lamin A isoform. The
mutation was not found in the proband's 2 unaffected offspring or in 300
control chromosomes, but her unaffected 60-year-old sister also carried
the mutation.

Van Esch et al. (2006) analyzed the LMNA gene in a 44-year-old male of
European descent with arthropathy, tendinous calcifications, and a
progeroid appearance (see 248370) and identified homozygosity for the
S573L mutation. Progeroid features included a small pinched nose, small
lips, micrognathia with crowded teeth, cataract, and alopecia. He also
had generalized lipodystrophy, and sclerodermatous skin. The arthropathy
affected predominantly the distal femora and proximal tibia in the knee
with tendinous calcifications. However, he had normal clavicles and no
evidence of acroosteolysis. The authors concluded that he had a novel
phenotype. The patient's unaffected 15-year-old son was heterozygous for
the mutation, which was not found in 450 control chromosomes. The
authors noted that the patient had no evidence of cardiomyopathy and his
70-year-old mother, an obligate heterozygote, had no known cardiac
problems.

In a 75-year-old European male with partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Lanktree et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the S573L mutation
in the LMNA gene.

.0042
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ASP230ASN

In a 46-year-old South Asian female with partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Lanktree et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 688G-A transition
in exon 4 of the LMNA gene, resulting in an asp230-to-asn (D230N)
substitution at a conserved residue located 5-prime to the nuclear
localization signal. The mutation, predicted to affect only the lamin A
isoform, was not found in 200 controls of multiple ethnic backgrounds.

.0043
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG399CYS

In a 50-year-old European female with partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Lanktree et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 1195C-T
transition in exon 7 of the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg399-to-cys
(R399C) substitution at a conserved residue located 5-prime to the
nuclear localization signal. The mutation, predicted to affect only the
lamin A isoform, was not found in 200 controls of multiple ethnic
backgrounds.

Decaudain et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous R399 mutation in a
woman with severe metabolic syndrome. She was diagnosed with
insulin-resistant diabetes at age 32. Chronic hyperglycemia led to
retinopathy, peripheral neuropathy, and renal failure. She had severe
hypertriglyceridemia and diffuse atherosclerosis, requiring coronary
artery bypass at age 49. Physical examination revealed android fat
distribution with lipoatrophy of lower limbs and calves hypertrophy
without any muscle weakness. Her mother and a brother had diabetes and
died several years earlier.

.0044
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL
LMNA, VAL440MET

In a 27-year-old Italian woman with a mandibuloacral dysplasia type A
(MADA; 248370)-like phenotype, Lombardi et al. (2007) found compound
heterozygosity for missense mutations in the LMNA cDNA: a G-to-A
transition at position 1318 in exon 7 that gave rise to a val-to-met
substitution at codon 440 (V440M), and an R527H substitution
(150330.0021). Each healthy parent was a simple heterozygote for one or
the other mutation. The apparent MADA phenotype was associated with
muscular hyposthenia and generalized hypotonia. Clavicular hypoplasia
and metabolic imbalances were absent. Lombardi et al. (2007)
hypothesized that lack of homozygosity for the R527H mutation attenuated
the MADA phenotype, while the V440M mutation may have contributed to
both the muscle phenotype and the pathogenic effect of the single R527H
mutation.

.0045
HEART-HAND SYNDROME, SLOVENIAN TYPE
LMNA, IVS9AS, T-G, -12

In affected members of a Slovenian family with heart-hand syndrome
(610140), originally reported by Sinkovec et al. (2005), Renou et al.
(2008) identified heterozygosity for a T-G transversion in intron 9 of
the LMNA gene (IVS9-12T-G), predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination in exon 10, with the addition of 14 new amino
acids at the C terminus. The mutation was not found in unaffected family
members or in 100 healthy controls. Analysis of fibroblasts from 2
affected individuals confirmed the presence of truncated protein and
revealed aberrant localization of lamin A/C accumulated in intranuclear
foci as well as dysmorphic nuclei with nuclear envelope herniations.

.0046
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, ALA529THR

In a 56-year-old Japanese woman, born of consanguineous parents, with
mandibuloacral dysplasia and type A lipodystrophy (248370), Kosho et al.
(2007) identified a homozygous 1585G-A transition in exon 9 of the LMNA
gene, resulting in an ala529-to-thr (A529T) substitution. The authors
stated that she was the oldest reported patient with the disorder. In
addition to classic MAD with lipodystrophy type A phenotype, including
progeroid appearance, acroosteolysis of the distal phalanges, and loss
of subcutaneous fat in the limbs, she had severe progressive destructive
skeletal and osteoporotic changes. Vertebral collapse led to paralysis.
However, Kosho et al. (2007) also noted that other factors may have
contributed to the severe osteoporosis observed in this patient. Another
mutation in this codon, A529V (150330.0037), results in a similar
phenotype.

.0047
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, LEU380SER

In a 7-year-old boy with a LNMA-related congenital muscular dystrophy
(613205), Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous
mutation in exon 6 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a leu380-to-ser
(L380S) substitution. He showed decreased movements in utero, hypotonia,
talipes foot deformities, no head or trunk control, distal joint
contractures, respiratory insufficiency, and paroxysmal atrial
tachycardia. Serum creatine kinase was increased, and muscle biopsy
showed dystrophic changes.

.0048
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, ARG249TRP

In a 9-year-old girl with congenital muscular dystrophy (613205),
Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in
exon 4 of the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg249-to-trp (R249W)
substitution. She presented at age 3 to 6 months with axial weakness and
talipes foot deformities. She lost head support at 9 months, had
respiratory insufficiency, joint contractures, and axial and limb muscle
weakness. A de novo heterozygous R249W mutation was also identified in
an unrelated 3-year-old boy with congenital LGMD1B who showed decreased
movements in utero, hypotonia, distal contractures, no head or trunk
control, and respiratory insufficiency. Both patients had increased
serum creatine kinase and showed myopathic changes on EMG studies.

.0049
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED, INCLUDED;;
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B, INCLUDED
LMNA, GLU358LYS

Mercuri et al. (2004) identified a de novo heterozygous 1072G-A
transition in exon 5 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu358-to-lys
(E358K) substitution in 5 unrelated patients with muscular dystrophy.
Three patients had the common phenotype of autosomal dominant
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350), 1 had early-onset LGMD1B
(159001), and the last had had a more severe disorder consistent with
congenital muscular dystrophy (613205). The mutation was not identified
in 150 controls. The patient with LGMD1B also had cardiac conduction
abnormalities, respiratory failure, and features of lipodystrophy
(151660). Mercuri et al. (2004) commented on the extreme phenotypic
variability associated with this mutation.

In 4 unrelated patients with LMNA-related congenital muscular dystrophy,
Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in
exon 6 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu358-to-lys (E358K)
substitution. Three patients presented before 1 year of age with
hypotonia and later developed head drop with neck muscle weakness. There
was delayed motor development with early loss of ambulation, distal limb
contractures, axial and limb muscle weakness, respiratory insufficiency
requiring mechanical ventilation, increased serum creatine kinase, and
dystrophic changes on muscle biopsy. One patient developed ventricular
tachycardia at age 20 years. The fourth patient with congenital LGMD1B
had decreased fetal movements and presented at age 3 to 6 months with
hypotonia, loss of head control, and delayed motor development.

.0050
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, 3-BP DEL, 94AAG

In an 18-month-old boy with LMNA-related congenital muscular dystrophy
(613205), D'Amico et al. (2005) identified a de novo heterozygous 3-bp
deletion (94delAAG) in exon 1 of the LMNA gene, resulting in the
deletion of lys32. Although he had normal early motor development, he
showed prominent neck extensor weakness resulting in a 'dropped head'
phenotype at age 1 year. He was able to stand independently but had some
difficulty walking.

.0051
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
LMNA, ARG644CYS

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to various phenotypes has not been confirmed.

An arg644-to-cys (R644C) mutation in the LMNA gene has been found in
several different phenotypic presentations (Genschel et al., 2001;
Mercuri et al., 2005; Rankin et al., 2008); however, the pathogenicity
of the mutation has not been confirmed (Moller et al., 2009).

In a German patient with dilated cardiomyopathy with no history history
of conduction system disease (see 152000), Genschel et al. (2001)
identified heterozygosity for a 1930C-T transition in exon 11 of the
LMNA gene resulting in an R644C substitution in the C-terminal domain of
lamin A. The authors noted that the mutation is solely within lamin A,
but not lamin C, whereas previously reported mutations causing dilated
cardiomyopathy are located more in the rod domain of the protein.

Mercuri et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for the R644C mutation
in 4 patients with skeletal and cardiac muscle involvement of varying
severity. In 1 patient, the mutation was found in the affected brother
and the unaffected father, and was not found in the affected mother. The
mutation was not found in 100 unrelated control subjects.

Rankin et al. (2008) described 9 patients in 8 families with the same
mutation. Patients 1 and 2 presented with lipodystrophy and insulin
resistance; patient 1 also had focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Patient 3 presented with motor neuropathy, patient 4 with arthrogryposis
and dilated cardiomyopathy with left ventricular noncompaction, patient
5 with severe scoliosis and contractures, patient 6 with limb-girdle
weakness, and patient 7 with hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance.
Patients 8 and 9 were brothers who had proximal weakness and
contractures. The same LMNA was identified in 9 unaffected individuals
in these 9 families, but was not detected in 200 German and 300 British
controls. Rankin et al. (2008) suggested that extreme phenotypic
diversity and low penetrance are associated with the R644C mutation.

.0052
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, WITH HYPERGONADOTRIPIC HYPOGONADISM
LMNA, LEU59ARG

In a 17-year-old Caucasian female with dilated cardiomyopathy and
ovarian failure (212112), Nguyen et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 176T-C transition in exon 1 of the LMNA gene, predicted to
result in a leu59-to-arg (L59R) substitution. Analysis of nuclear
morphology in patient fibroblasts showed more irregularity and variation
than that of control fibroblasts, with denting, blebbing, and irregular
margins. The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents or in 116
population-based controls.

In a 15-year-old Caucasian girl with dilated cardiomyopathy and ovarian
failure who died from an arrhythmia while awaiting cardiac
transplantation, McPherson et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for
the L59R mutation in the LMNA gene. The mutation was presumed to be de
novo, although the unaffected parents declined DNA testing. The patient
also had a healthy older sister, and there was no family history of
cardiomyopathy or hypogonadism.

.0053
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, ARG541GLY

In 2 sibs with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1A; 115200), Malek et al.
(2011) identified a heterozygous 1621C-G transversion in exon 10 of the
LMNA gene, resulting in an arg541-to-gly (R541G) substitution in the
C-terminal tail region. The 23-year-old male proband had a history of
paroxysmal atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia and was found by
echocardiogram to have dilation of the left ventricle and global
hypokinesis. Cardiac MRI showed discrete regional areas of akinesis with
muscle thinning in the left ventricle and marked hypertrabeculation in
dysfunctional regions, as well as evidence of fibrosis. The proband's
sister had sinus bradycardia and supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias, but normal echocardiogram and cardiac MRI. The sibs' father
and paternal aunt had both died of dilated cardiomyopathy. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the R541G mutant resulted in
the formation of abnormal lamin aggregates, most of which were
sickle-shaped, suggesting aberrant formation of the inner nuclear lamina
from misassembled lamin dimers.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Krohne and Benavente (1986); Lebel and Raymond (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Arimura, T.; Helbling-Leclerc, A.; Massart, C.; Varnous, S.; Niel,
F.; Lacene, E.; Fromes, Y.; Toussaint, M.; Mura, A.-M.; Keller, D.
I.; Amthor, H.; Isnard, R.; Malissen, M.; Schwartz, K.; Bonne, G.
: Mouse model carrying H222P-Lmna mutation develops muscular dystrophy
and dilated cardiomyopathy similar to human striated muscle laminopathies. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 155-169, 2005.

2. Benedetti, S.; Menditto, I.; Degano, M.; Rodolico, C.; Merlini,
L.; D'Amico, A.; Palmucci, L.; Berardinelli, A.; Pegoraro, E.; Trevisan,
C. P.; Morandi, L.; Moroni, I.; and 15 others: Phenotypic clustering
of lamin A/C mutations in neuromuscular patients. Neurology 69:
1285-1292, 2007.

3. Ben Yaou, R.; Toutain, A.; Arimura, T.; Demay, L.; Massart, C.;
Peccate, C.; Muchir, A.; Llense, S.; Deburgreave, N.; Leturcq, F.;
Litim, K. E.; Rahmoun-Chiali, N.; Richard, P.; Babuty, D.; Recan-Budiartha,
D.; Bonne, G.: Multitissular involvement in a family with LMNA and
EMD mutations: role of digenic mechanism? Neurology 68: 1883-1894,
2007.

4. Boguslavsky, R. L.; Stewart, C. L.; Worman, H. J.: Nuclear lamin
A inhibits adipocyte differentiation: implications for Dunnigan-type
familial partial lipodystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 653-663,
2006.

5. Bonne, G.; Di Barletta, M. R.; Varnous, S.; Becane, H.-M.; Hammouda,
E.-H.; Merlini, L.; Muntoni, F.; Greenberg, C. R.; Gary, F.; Urtizberea,
J.-A.; Duboc, D.; Fardeau, M.; Toniolo, D.; Schwartz, K.: Mutations
in the gene encoding lamin A/C cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy. Nature Genet. 21: 285-288, 1999.

6. Brodsky, G. L.; Muntoni, F.; Miocic, S.; Sinagra, G.; Sewry, C.;
Mestroni, L.: Lamin A/C gene mutation associated with dilated cardiomyopathy
with variable skeletal muscle involvement. Circulation 101: 473-476,
2000.

7. Broers, J. L. V.; Peeters, E. A. G.; Kuijpers, H. J. H.; Endert,
J.; Bouten, C. V. C.; Oomens, C. W. J.; Baaijens, F. P. T.; Ramaekers,
F. C. S.: Decreased mechanical stiffness in LMNA-/- cells is caused
by defective nucleo-cytoskeletal integrity: implications for the development
of laminopathies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2567-2580, 2004.

8. Brown, C. A.; Lanning, R. W.; McKinney, K. Q.; Salvino, A. R.;
Cherniske, E.; Crowe, C. A.; Darras, B. T.; Gominak, S.; Greenberg,
C. R.; Grosmann, C.; Heydemann, P.; Mendell, J. R.; Pober, B. R.;
Sasaki, T.; Shapiro, F.; Simpson, D. A.; Suchowersky, O.; Spence,
J. E.: Novel and recurrent mutations in lamin A/C in patients with
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 102: 359-367,
2001.

9. Brown, W. T.: Personal Communication. Staten Island, N.Y.  1/12/2004.

10. Cao, H.; Hegele, R. A.: LMNA is mutated in Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria (MIM 176670) but not in Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch progeroid
syndrome (MIM 264090). J. Hum. Genet. 48: 271-274, 2003.

11. Cao, H.; Hegele, R. A.: Nuclear lamin A/C R482Q mutation in Canadian
kindreds with Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 109-112, 2000.

12. Capanni, C.; Mattioli, E.; Columbaro, M.; Lucarelli, E.; Parnaik,
V. K.; Novelli, G.; Wehnert, M.; Cenni, V.; Maraldi, N. M.; Squarzoni,
S.; Lattanzi, G.: Altered pre-lamin A processing is a common mechanism
leading to lipodystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1489-1502, 2005.

13. Capell, B. C.; Collins, F. S.: Human laminopathies: nuclei gone
genetically awry. Nature Rev. Genet. 7: 940-952, 2006.

14. Capell, B. C.; Erdos, M. R.; Madigan, J. P.; Fiordalisi, J. J.;
Varga, R.; Conneely, K. N.; Gordon, L. B.; Der, C. J.; Cox, A. D.;
Collins, F. S.: Inhibiting farnesylation of progerin prevents the
characteristic nuclear blebbing of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 12879-12884, 2005.

15. Caux, F.; Dubosclard, E.; Lascols, O.; Buendia, B.; Chazouilleres,
O.; Cohen, A.; Courvalin, J.-C.; Laroche, L.; Capeau, J.; Vigouroux,
C.; Christin-Maitre, S.: A new clinical condition linked to a novel
mutation in lamins A and C with generalized lipoatrophy, insulin-resistant
diabetes, disseminated leukomelanodermic papules, liver steatosis,
and cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 1006-1013, 2003.

16. Charniot, J.-C.; Pascal, C.; Bouchier, C.; Sebillon, P.; Salama,
J.; Duboscq-Bidot, L.; Peuchmaurd, M.; Desnos, M.; Artigou, J.-Y.;
Komajda, M.: Functional consequences of an LMNA mutation associated
with a new cardiac and non-cardiac phenotype. Hum. Mutat. 21: 473-481,
2003.

17. Chen, C.-Y.; Chi, Y.-H.; Mutalif, R. A.; Starost, M. F.; Myers,
T. G.; Anderson, S. A.; Stewart, C. L.; Jeang, K.-T.: Accumulation
of the inner nuclear envelope protein Sun1 is pathogenic in progeric
and dystrophic laminopathies. Cell 149: 565-577, 2012.

18. Chen, L.; Lee, L.; Kudlow, B. A.; Dos Santos, H. G.; Sletvold,
O.; Shafeghati, Y.; Botha, E. G.; Garg, E.; Hanson, N. B.; Martin,
G. M.; Mian, I. S.; Kennedy, B. K.; Oshima, J.: LMNA mutations in
atypical Werner's syndrome. Lancet 362: 440-445, 2003.

19. Choi, J. C.; Wu, W.; Muchir, A.; Iwata, S.; Homma, S.; Worman,
H. J.: Dual specificity phosphatase 4 mediates cardiomyopathy caused
by lamin A/C (LMNA) gene mutation. J. Biol. Chem. 287: 40513-40524,
2012.

20. Coffinier, C.; Hudon, S. E.; Farber, E. A.; Chang, S. Y.; Hrycyna,
C. A.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.: HIV protease inhibitors block the
zinc metalloproteinase ZMPSTE24 and lead to an accumulation of prelamin
A in cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 13432-13437, 2007.

21. Cogulu, O.; Gunduz, C.; Darcan, S.; Kadioglu, B.; Ozkinay, F.;
Ozkinay, C.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia with absent breast development.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 119A: 391-392, 2003.

22. Csoka, A. B.; Cao, H.; Sammak, P. J.; Constantinescu, D.; Schatten,
G. P.; Hegele, R. A.: Novel lamin A/C gene (LMNA) mutations in atypical
progeroid syndromes. J. Med. Genet. 41: 304-308, 2004.

23. D'Amico, A.; Haliloglu, G.; Richard, P.; Talim, B.; Maugenre,
S.; Ferreiro, A.; Guicheney, P.; Menditto, I.; Benedetti, S.; Bertini,
E.; Bonne, G.; Topaloglu, H.: Two patients with 'dropped head syndrome'
due to mutations in LMNA or SEPN1 genes. Neuromusc. Disord. 15:
521-524, 2005.

24. D'Apice, M. R.; Tenconi, R.; Mammi, I.; van den Ende, J.; Novelli,
G.: Paternal origin of LMNA mutations in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria.
(Letter) Clin. Genet. 65: 52-54, 2004.

25. Davies, B. S. J.; Barnes, R. H., II; Tu, Y.; Ren, S.; Andres,
D. A.; Spielmann, H. P.; Lammerding, J.; Wang, Y.; Young, S. G.; Fong,
L. G.: An accumulation of non-farnesylated prelamin A causes cardiomyopathy
but not progeria. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 2682-2694, 2010.

26. Decaudain, A.; Vantyghem, M.-C.; Guerci, B.; Hecart, A.-C.; Auclair,
M.; Reznik, Y.; Narbonne, H.; Ducluzeau, P.-H.; Donadille, B.; Lebbe,
C.; Bereziat, V.; Capeau, J.; Lascols, O.; Vigouroux, C.: New metabolic
phenotypes in laminopathies: LMNA mutations in patients with severe
metabolic syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4835-4844, 2007.

27. De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Bernard, R.; Cau, P.; Navarro, C.; Amiel,
J.; Boccaccio, I.; Lyonnet, S.; Stewart, C. L.; Munnich, A.; Le Merrer,
M.; Levy, N.: Lamin A truncation in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. Science 300:
2055 only, 2003.

28. De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Chaouch, M.; Kozlov, S.; Vallat, J.-M.;
Tazir, M.; Kassouri, N.; Szepetowski, P.; Hammadouche, T.; Vandenberghe,
A.; Stewart, C. L.; Grid, D.; Levy, N.: Homozygous defects in LMNA,
encoding lamin A/C nuclear-envelope proteins, cause autosomal recessive
axonal neuropathy in human (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disorder type 2) and
mouse. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 726-736, 2002. Note: Erratum: Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 70: 1075 only, 2002.

29. Eriksson, M.; Brown, W. T.; Gordon, L. B.; Glynn, M. W.; Singer,
J.; Scott, L.; Erdos, M. R.; Robbins, C. M.; Moses, T. Y.; Berglund,
P.; Dutra, A.; Pak, E.; Durkin, S.; Csoka, A. B.; Boehnke, M.; Glover,
T. W.; Collins, F. S.: Recurrent de novo point mutations in lamin
A cause Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature 423: 293-298,
2003.

30. Fatkin, D.; MacRae, C.; Sasaki, T.; Wolff, M. R.; Porcu, M.; Frenneaux,
M.; Atherton, J.; Vidaillet, H. J., Jr.; Spudich, S.; De Girolami,
U.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Missense mutations in the rod
domain of the lamin A/C gene as causes of dilated cardiomyopathy and
conduction-system disease. New Eng. J. Med. 341: 1715-1724, 1999.

31. Favreau, C.; Higuet, D.; Courvalin, J.-C.; Buendia, B.: Expression
of a mutant lamin A that causes Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
inhibits in vitro differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 24: 1481-1492, 2004.

32. Fisher, D. Z.; Chaudhary, N.; Blobel, G.: cDNA sequencing of
nuclear lamins A and C reveals primary and secondary structural homology
to intermediate filament proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 6450-6454,
1986.

33. Flier, J. S.: Pushing the envelope on lipodystrophy. Nature
Genet. 24: 103-104, 2000.

34. Frock, R. L.; Kudlow, B. A.; Evans, A. M.; Jameson, S. A.; Hauschka,
S. D.; Kennedy, B. K.: Lamin A/C and emerin are critical for skeletal
muscle satellite cell differentiation. Genes Dev. 20: 486-500, 2006.

35. Garavelli, L.; D'Apice, M. R.; Rivieri, F.; Bertoli, M.; Wischmeijer,
A.; Gelmini, C.; De Nigris, V.; Albertini, E.; Rosato, S.; Virdis,
R.; Bacchini, E.; Dal Zotto, R.; Banchini, G.; Iughetti, L.; Bernasconi,
S.; Superti-Furga, A.; Novelli, G.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia type
A in childhood. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2258-2264, 2009.

36. Garg, A.; Cogulu, O.; Ozkinay, F.; Onay, H.; Agarwal, A. K.:
A novel homozygous ala529val LMNA mutation in Turkish patients with
mandibuloacral dysplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 5259-5264,
2005.

37. Garg, A.; Vinaitheerthan, M.; Weatherall, P. T.; Bowcock, A. M.
: Phenotypic heterogeneity in patients with familial partial lipodystrophy
(Dunnigan variety) related to the site of missense mutations in lamin
A/C gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 59-65, 2001.

38. Genschel, J.; Bochow, B.; Kuepferling, S.; Ewert, R.; Hetzer,
R.; Lochs, H.; Schmidt, H. H.-J.: A R644C mutation within lamin A
extends the mutations causing dilated cardiomyopathy. Hum. Genet. 17:
154 only, 2001. Note: Full article online.

39. Genschel, J.; Schmidt, H. H.-J.: Mutations in the LMNA gene encoding
lamin A/C. Hum. Mutat. 16: 451-459, 2000.

40. Glynn, M. W.; Glover, T. W.: Incomplete processing of mutant
lamin A in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria leads to nuclear abnormalities,
which are reversed by farnesyltransferase inhibition. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 2959-2969, 2005.

41. Goldman, R. D.; Shumaker, D. K.; Erdos, M. R.; Eriksson, M.; Goldman,
A. E.; Gordon, L. B.; Gruenbaum, Y.; Khuon, S.; Mendez, M.; Varga,
R.; Collins, F. S.: Accumulation of mutant lamin A causes progressive
changes in nuclear architecture in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 8963-8968, 2004.

42. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

43. Guilly, M. N.; Bensussan, A.; Bourge, J. F.; Bornens, M.; Courvalin,
J. C.: A human T lymphoblastic cell line lacks lamins A and C. EMBO
J. 6: 3795-3799, 1987.

44. Haque, F.; Mazzeo, D.; Patel, J. T.; Smallwood, D. T.; Ellis,
J. A.; Shanahan, C. M.; Shackleton, S.: Mammalian SUN protein interaction
networks at the inner nuclear membrane and their role in laminopathy
disease processes. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 3487-3498, 2010.

45. Hegele, R. A.: LMNA mutation position predicts organ system involvement
in laminopathies. Clin. Genet. 68: 31-34, 2005.

46. Hegele, R. A.: Drawing the line in progeria syndromes. Lancet 362:
416-417, 2003.

47. Hegele, R. A.; Cao, H.; Harris, S. B.; Zinman, B.; Hanley, A.
J.; Anderson, C. M.: Genetic variation in LMNA modulates plasma leptin
and indices of obesity in aboriginal Canadians. Physiol. Genomics 3:
39-44, 2000.

48. Hegele, R. A.; Cao, H.; Huff, M. W.; Anderson, C. M.: LMNA R482Q
mutation in partial lipodystrophy associated with reduced plasma leptin
concentration. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 3089-3093, 2000.

49. Hegele, R. A.; Huff, M. W.; Young, T. K.: Common genomic variation
in LMNA modulates indexes of obesity in Inuit. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
2747-2751, 2001.

50. Ho, C. Y.; Jaalouk, D. E.; Vartiainen, M. K.; Lammerding, J.:
Lamin A/C and emerin regulate MKL1-SRF activity by modulating actin
dynamics. Nature 497: 507-511, 2013.

51. Huang, S.; Chen, L.; Libina, N.; Janes, J.; Martin, G. M.; Campisi,
J.; Oshima, J.: Correction of cellular phenotypes of Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria cells by RNA interference. Hum. Genet. 118: 444-450, 2005.

52. Jacob, K. N.; Baptista, F.; dos Santos, H. G.; Oshima, J.; Agarwal,
A. K.; Garg, A.: Phenotypic heterogeneity in body fat distribution
in patients with atypical Werner's syndrome due to heterozygous arg133leu
lamin A/C mutation. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 6699-6706, 2005.

53. Kandert, S.; Luke, Y.; Kleinhenz, T.; Neumann, S.; Lu, W.; Jaeger,
V. M.; Munck, M.; Wehnert, M.; Muller, C. R.; Zhou, Z.; Noegel, A.
A.; Dabauvalle, M.-C.; Karakesisoglou, I.: Nesprin-2 giant safeguards
nuclear envelope architecture in LMNA S143F progeria cells. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 16: 2944-2959, 2007. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
17: 468 only, 2008.

54. Kirschner, J.; Brune, T.; Wehnert, M.; Denecke, J.; Wasner, C.;
Feuer, A.; Marquardt, T.; Ketelsen, U.-P.; Wieacker, P.; Bonnemann,
C. G.; Korinthenberg, R.: p.S143F mutation in lamin A/C: a new phenotype
combining myopathy and progeria. Ann. Neurol. 57: 148-151, 2005.

55. Kosho, T.; Takahashi, J.; Momose, T.; Nakamura, A.; Sakurai, A.;
Wada, T.; Yoshida, K.; Wakui, K.; Suzuki, T.; Kasuga, K.; Nishimura,
G.; Kato, H.; Fukushima, Y.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia and a novel
LMNA mutation in a woman with severe progressive skeletal changes. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 143A: 2598-2603, 2007.

56. Krohne, G.; Benavente, R.: The nuclear lamins: a multigene family
of proteins in evolution and differentiation. Exp. Cell Res. 162:
1-10, 1986.

57. Lammerding, J.; Schulze, P. C.; Takahashi, T.; Kozlov, S.; Sullivan,
T.; Kamm, R. D.; Stewart, C. L.; Lee, R. T.: Lamin A/C deficiency
causes defective nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction. J. Clin.
Invest. 113: 370-378, 2004.

58. Lanktree, M.; Cao, H.; Rabkin, S. W.; Hanna, A.; Hegele, R. A.
: Novel LMNA mutations seen in patients with familial partial lipodystrophy
subtype 2 (FPLD2; MIM 151660). (Letter) Clin. Genet. 71: 183-186,
2007.

59. Lebel, S.; Raymond, Y.: Lamin A is not synthesized as a larger
precursor polypeptide. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 149: 417-423,
1987.

60. Lin, F.; Worman, H. J.: Structural organization of the human
gene encoding nuclear lamin A and nuclear lamin C. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
16321-16326, 1993.

61. Liu, G.-H.; Barkho, B. Z.; Ruiz, S.; Diep, D.; Qu, J.; Yang, S.-L.;
Panopoulos, A. D.; Suzuki, K.; Kurian, L.; Walsh, C.; Thompson, J.;
Boue, S.; Fung, H. L.; Sancho-Martinez, I.; Zhang, K.; Yates, J.,
III; Belmonte, J. C. I.: Recapitulation of premature ageing with
iPSCs from Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature 472: 221-225,
2011.

62. Lloyd, D. J.; Trembath, R. C.; Shackleton, S.: A novel interaction
between lamin A and SREBP1: implications for partial lipodystrophy
and other laminopathies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 769-777, 2002.

63. Lombardi, F.; Gullotta, F.; Columbaro, M.; Filareto, A.; D'Adamo,
M.; Vielle, A.; Guglielmi, V.; Nardone, A. M.; Azzolini, V.; Grosso,
E.; Lattanzi, G.; D'Apice, M. R.; Masala, S.; Maraldi, N. M.; Sbraccia,
P.; Novelli, G.: Compound heterozygosity for mutations in LMNA in
a patient with a myopathic and lipodystrophic mandibuloacral dysplasia
type A phenotype. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4467-4471, 2007.

64. Makri, S.; Clarke, N. F.; Richard, P.; Maugenre, S.; Demay, L.;
Bonne, G.; Guicheney, P.: Germinal mosaicism for LMNA mimics autosomal
recessive congenital muscular dystrophy. Neuromusc. Disord. 19:
26-28, 2009.

65. Malek, L. A.; Labib, S.; Mazurkiewicz, L.; Saj, M.; Ploski, R.;
Tesson, F.; Bilinska, Z. T.: A new c.1621 C-G, p.R541G lamin A/C
mutation in a family with DCM and regional wall motion abnormalities
(akinesis/dyskinesis): genotype-phenotype correlation. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
83-86, 2011.

66. Mallampalli, M. P.; Huyer, G.; Bendale, P.; Gelb, M. H.; Michaelis,
S.: Inhibiting farnesylation reverses the nuclear morphology defect
in a HeLa cell model for Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 14416-14421, 2005.

67. McKeon, F. D.; Kirschner, M. W.; Caput, D.: Homologies in both
primary and secondary structure between nuclear envelope and intermediate
filament proteins. Nature 319: 463-468, 1986.

68. McPherson, E.; Turner, L.; Zador, I.; Reynolds, K.; Macgregor,
D.; Giampietro, P. F.: Ovarian failure and dilated cardiomyopathy
due to a novel lamin mutation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 567-572,
2009.

69. Mercuri, E.; Brown, S. C.; Nihoyannopoulos, P.; Poulton, J.; Kinali,
M.; Richard, P.; Piercy, R. J.; Messina, S.; Sewry, C.; Burke, M.
M.; McKenna, W.; Bonne, G.; Muntoni, F.: Extreme variability of skeletal
and cardiac muscle involvement in patients with mutations in exon
11 of the lamin A/C gene. Muscle Nerve 31: 602-609, 2005.

70. Mercuri, E.; Poppe, M.; Quinlivan, R.; Messina, S.; Kinali, M.;
Demay, L.; Bourke, J.; Richard, P.; Sewry, C.; Pike, M.; Bonne, G.;
Muntoni, F.; Bushby, K.: Extreme variability of phenotype in patients
with an identical missense mutation in the lamin A/C gene: from congenital
onset with severe phenotype to milder classic Emery-Dreifuss variant. Arch.
Neurol. 61: 690-694, 2004.

71. Meune, C.; Van Berlo, J. H.; Anselme, F.; Bonne, G.; Pinto, Y.
M.; Duboc, D.: Primary prevention of sudden death in patients with
lamin A/C gene mutations. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 354: 209-210,
2006.

72. Moller, D. V.; Pham, T. T.; Gustafsson, F.; Hedley, P.; Ersboll,
M. K.; Bundgaard, H.; Andersen, C. B.; Torp-Pedersen, C.; Kober, L.;
Christiansen, M.: The role of lamin A/C mutations in Danish patients
with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Europ. J. Heart Fail. 11:
1031-1035, 2009.

73. Morel, C. F.; Thomas, M. A.; Cao, H.; O'Neil, C. H.; Pickering,
J. G.; Foulkes, W. D.; Hegele, R. A.: A LMNA splicing mutation in
two sisters with severe Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy
type 2. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 2689-2695, 2006.

74. Moulson, C. L.; Fong, L. G.; Gardner, J. M.; Farber, E. A.; Go,
G.; Passariello, A.; Grange, D. K.; Young, S. G.; Miner, J. H.: Increased
progerin expression associated with unusual LMNA mutations causes
severe progeroid syndromes. Hum. Mutat. 28: 882-889, 2007.

75. Mounkes, L. C.; Kozlov, S.; Hernandez, L.; Sullivan, T.; Stewart,
C. L.: A progeroid syndrome in mice is caused by defects in A-type
lamins. Nature 423: 298-301, 2003.

76. Mounkes, L. C.; Kozlov, S. V.; Rottman, J. N.; Stewart, C. L.
: Expression of an LMNA-N195K variant of A-type lamins results in
cardiac conduction defects and death in mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
2167-2180, 2005.

77. Muchir, A.; Bonne, G.; van der Kooi, A. J.; van Meegen, M.; Baas,
F.; Bolhuis, P. A.; de Visser, M.; Schwartz, K.: Identification of
mutations in the gene encoding lamins A/C in autosomal dominant limb
girdle muscular dystrophy with atrioventricular conduction disturbances
(LGMD1B). Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1453-1459, 2000.

78. Muchir, A.; Pavlidis,. P.; Decostre, V.; Herron, A. J.; Arimura,
T.; Bonne, G.; Worman, H. J.: Activation of MAPK pathways links LMNA
mutations to cardiomyopathy in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 1282-1293, 2007.

79. Muchir, A.; Shan, J.; Bonne, G.; Lehnart, S. E.; Worman, H. J.
: Inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling to
prevent cardiomyopathy caused by mutation in the gene encoding A-type
lamins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 241-247, 2009.

80. Navarro, C. L.; Cadinanos, J.; De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Bernard,
R.; Courrier, S.; Boccaccio, I.; Boyer, A.; Kleijer, W. J.; Wagner,
A.; Giuliano, F.; Beemer, F. A.; Freije, J. M.; Cau, P.; Hennekam,
R. C. M.; Lopez-Otin, C.; Badens, C.; Levy, N.: Loss of ZMPSTE24
(FACE-1) causes autosomal recessive restrictive dermopathy and accumulation
of lamin A precursors. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1503-1513, 2005.

81. Navarro, C. L.; De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Bernard, R.; Boccaccio,
I.; Boyer, A.; Genevieve, D.; Hadj-Rabia, S.; Gaudy-Marqueste, C.;
Smitt, H. S.; Vabres, P.; Faivre, L.; Verloes, A.; Van Essen, T.;
Flori, E.; Hennekam, R.; Beemer, F. A.; Laurent, N.; Le Merrer, M.;
Cau, P.; Levy, N.: Lamin A and ZMPSTE24 (FACE-1) defects cause nuclear
disorganization and identity restrictive dermopathy as a lethal neonatal
laminopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2493-2503, 2004.

82. Nguyen, D.; Leistritz, D. F.; Turner, L.; MacGregor, D.; Ohson,
K.; Dancey, P.; Martin, G. M.; Oshima, J.: Collagen expression in
fibroblasts with a novel LMNA mutation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 352:
603-608, 2007.

83. Novelli, G.; Muchir, A.; Sangiuolo, F.; Helbling-Leclerc, A.;
D'Apice, M. R.; Massart, C.; Capon, F.; Sbraccia, P.; Federici, M.;
Lauro, R.; Tudisco, C.; Pallotta, R.; Scarano, G.; Dallapiccola, B.;
Merlini, L.; Bonne, G.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia is caused by a mutation
in LMNA-encoding lamin A/C. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 426-431, 2002.

84. Plasilova, M.; Chattopadhyay, C.; Pal, P.; Schaub, N. A.; Buechner,
S. A.; Mueller, H.; Miny, P.; Ghosh, A.; Heinimann, K.: Homozygous
missense mutation in the lamin A/C gene causes autosomal recessive
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 41: 609-614,
2004.

85. Quijano-Roy, S.; Mbieleu, B.; Bonnemann, C. G.; Jeannet, P.-Y.;
Colomer, J.; Clarke, N. F.; Cuisset, J.-M.; Roper, H.; De Meirleir,
L.; D'Amico, A.; Yaou, R. B.; Nascimento, A.; and 12 others: De
novo LMNA mutations cause a new form of congenital muscular dystrophy. Ann.
Neurol. 64: 177-186, 2008.

86. Raffaele di Barletta, M.; Ricci, E.; Galluzzi, G.; Tonali, P.;
Mora, M.; Morandi, L.; Romorini, A.; Voit, T.; Orstavik, K. H.; Merlini,
L.; Trevisan, C.; Biancalana, V.; Housmanowa-Petrusewicz, I.; Bione,
S.; Ricotti, R.; Schwartz, K.; Bonne, G.; Toniolo, D.: Different
mutations in the LMNA gene cause autosomal dominant and autosomal
recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66:
1407-1412, 2000.

87. Rankin, J.; Auer-Grumbach, M.; Bagg, W.; Colclough, K.; Duong,
N. T.; Fenton-May, J.; Hattersley, A.; Hudson, J.; Jardine, P.; Josifova,
D.; Longman, C.; McWilliam, R.; Owen, K.; Walker, M.; Wehnert, M.;
Ellard, S.: Extreme phenotypic diversity and nonpenetrance in families
with the LMNA gene mutation R644C. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 1530-1542,
2008.

88. Reddel, C. J.; Weiss, A. S.: Lamin A expression levels are unperturbed
at the normal and mutant alleles but display partial splice site selection
in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 41: 715-717,
2004.

89. Renou, L.; Stora, S.; Yaou, R. B.; Volk, M.; Sinkovec, M.; Demay,
L.; Richard, P.; Peterlin, B.; Bonne, G.: Heart-hand syndrome of
Slovenian type: a new kind of laminopathy. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 45:
666-671, 2008.

90. Rodriguez, S.; Coppede, F.; Sagelius, H.; Eriksson, M.: Increased
expression of the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome truncated lamin
A transcript during cell aging. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 928-937,
2009.

91. Rudnik-Schoneborn, S.; Botzenhart, E.; Eggermann, T.; Senderek,
J.; Schoser, B. G. H.; Schroder, R.; Wehnert, M.; Wirth, B.; Zerres,
K.: Mutations of the LMNA gene can mimic autosomal dominant proximal
spinal muscular atrophy. Neurogenetics 8: 137-142, 2007.

92. Scaffidi, P.; Misteli, T.: Lamin A-dependent nuclear defects
in human aging. Science 312: 1059-1063, 2006.

93. Scaffidi, P.; Misteli, T.: Lamin A-dependent misregulation of
adult stem cells associated with accelerated ageing. Nature Cell
Biol. 10: 452-459, 2008.

94. Scaffidi, P.; Misteli, T.: Reversal of the cellular phenotype
in the premature aging disease Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature
Med. 11: 440-445, 2005.

95. Schmidt, H. H.-J.; Genschel, J.; Baier, P.; Schmidt, M.; Ockenga,
J.; Tietge, U. J. F.; Propsting, M.; Buttner, C.; Manns, M. P.; Lochs,
H.; Brabant, G.: Dyslipemia in familial partial lipodystrophy caused
by an R482W mutation in the LMNA gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
2289-2295, 2001.

96. Sebillon, P.; Bouchier, C.; Bidot, L. D.; Bonne, G.; Ahamed, K.;
Charron, P.; Drouin-Garraud, V.; Millaire, A.; Desrumeaux, G.; Benaiche,
A.; Charniot, J.-C.; Schwartz, K.; Villard, E.; Komajda, M.: Expanding
the phenotype of LMNA mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy and functional
consequences of these mutations. J. Med. Genet. 40: 560-567, 2003.

97. Shackleton, S.; Lloyd, D. J.; Jackson, S. N. J.; Evans, R.; Niermeijer,
M. F.; Singh, B. M.; Schmidt, H.; Brabant, G.; Kumar, S.; Durrington,
P. N.; Gregory, S.; O'Rahilly, S.; Trembath, R. C.: LMNA, encoding
lamin A/C, is mutated in partial lipodystrophy. Nature Genet. 24:
153-156, 2000.

98. Shen, J. J.; Brown, C. A.; Lupski, J. R.; Potocki, L.: Mandibuloacral
dysplasia caused by homozygosity for the R527H mutation in lamin A/C. J.
Med. Genet. 40: 854-857, 2003.

99. Shumaker, D. K.; Dechat, T.; Kohlmaier, A.; Adam, S. A.; Bozovsky,
M. R.; Erdos, M. R.; Eriksson, M.; Goldman, A. E.; Khuon, S.; Collins,
F. S.; Jenuwein, T.; Goldman, R. D.: Mutant nuclear lamin A leads
to progressive alterations of epigenetic control in premature aging. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 8703-8708, 2006.

100. Simha, V.; Agarwal, A. K.; Oral, E. A.; Fryns, J.-P.; Garg, A.
: Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in patients with mandibuloacral
dysplasia-associated lipodystrophy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
2821-2824, 2003.

101. Sinensky, M.; Fantle, K.; Trujillo, M.; McLain, T.; Kupfer, A.;
Dalton, M.: The processing pathway of prelamin A. J. Cell Sci. 107:
61-67, 1994.

102. Sinkovec, M.; Petrovic, D.; Volk, M.; Peterlin, B.: Familial
progressive sinoatrial and atrioventricular conduction disease of
adult onset with sudden death, dilated cardiomyopathy, and brachydactyly:
a new type of heart-hand syndrome? Clin. Genet. 68: 155-160, 2005.

103. Speckman, R. A.; Garg, A.; Du, F.; Bennett, L.; Veile, R.; Arioglu,
E.; Taylor, S. I.; Lovett, M.; Bowcock, A. M.: Mutational and haplotype
analyses of families with familial partial lipodystrophy (Dunnigan
variety) reveal recurrent missense mutations in the globular C-terminal
domain of lamin A/C. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1192-1198, 2000. Note:
Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 775 only, 2000.

104. Taylor, M. R. G.; Fain, P. R.; Sinagra, G.; Robinson, M. L.;
Robertson, A. D.; Carniel, E.; Di Lenarda, A.; Bohlmeyer, T. J.; Ferguson,
D. A.; Brodsky, G. L.; Boucek, M. M.; Lascor, J.; Moss, A. C.; Li,
W.-L. P.; Stetler, G. L.; Muntoni, F.; Bristow, M. R.; Mestroni, L.;
Familial Dilated Cardiomyopathy Registry Research Group: Natural
history of dilated cardiomyopathy due to lamin A/C gene mutations. J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 41: 771-780, 2003. Note: Erratum: J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 42: 590 only, 2003.

105. Toth, J. I.; Yang, S. H.; Qiao, X.; Beigneux, A. P.; Gelb, M.
H.; Moulson, C. L.; Miner, J. H.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.: Blocking
protein farnesyltransferase improves nuclear shape in fibroblasts
from humans with progeroid syndromes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
12873-12878, 2005.

106. Van Berlo, J. H.; Voncken, J. W.; Kubben, N.; Broers, J. L. V.;
Duisters, R.; van Leeuwen, R. E. W.; Crijns, H. J. G. M.; Ramaekers,
F. C. S.; Hutchison, C. J.; Pinto, Y. M.: A-type lamins are essential
for TGF-beta-1 induced PP2A to dephosphorylate transcription factors. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 2839-2849, 2005.

107. van der Kooi, A. J.; Bonne, G.; Eymard, B.; Duboc, D.; Talim,
B.; Van der Valk, M.; Reiss, P.; Richard, P.; Demay, L.; Merlini,
L.; Schwartz, K.; Busch, H. F. M.; de Visser, M.: Lamin A/C mutations
with lipodystrophy, cardiac abnormalities, and muscular dystrophy. Neurology 59:
620-623, 2002.

108. van Engelen, B. G. M.; Muchir, A.; Hutchison, C. J.; van der
Kooi, A. J.; Bonne, G.; Lammens, M.: The lethal phenotype of a homozygous
nonsense mutation in the lamin A/C gene. Neurology 64: 374-376,
2005.

109. Van Esch, H.; Agarwal, A. K.; Debeer, P.; Fryns, J.-P.; Garg,
A.: A homozygous mutation in the lamin A/C gene associated with a
novel syndrome of arthropathy, tendinous calcinosis, and progeroid
features. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 517-521, 2006.

110. Vantyghem, M. C.; Pigny, P.; Maurage, C. A.; Rouaix-Emery, N.;
Stojkovic, T.; Cuisset, J. M.; Millaire, A.; Lascols, O.; Vermersch,
P.; Wemeau, J. L.; Capeau, J.; Vigouroux, C.: Patients with familial
partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type due to a LMNA R482W mutation
show muscular and cardiac abnormalities. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
5337-5346, 2004.

111. Varga, R.; Eriksson, M.; Erdos, M. R.; Olive, M.; Harten, I.;
Kolodgie, F.; Capell, B. C.; Cheng, J.; Faddah, D.; Perkins, S.; Avallone,
H.; San, H.; Qu, X.; Ganesh, S.; Gordon, L. B.; Virmani, R.; Wight,
T. N.; Nabel, E. G.; Collins, F. S.: Progressive vascular smooth
muscle cell defects in a mouse model of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria
syndrome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 3250-3255, 2006.

112. Vigouroux, C.; Auclair, M.; Dubosclard, E.; Pouchelet, M.; Capeau,
J.; Courvalin, J.-C.; Buendia, B.: Nuclear envelope disorganization
in fibroblasts from lipodystrophic patients with heterozygous R482Q/W
mutations in the lamin A/C gene. J. Cell Sci. 114: 4459-4468, 2001.

113. Vigouroux, C.; Caux, F. Capeau, J.; Christin-Maitre, S.; Cohen,
A.: LMNA mutations in atypical Werner's syndrome. (Letter) Lancet 362:
1585 only, 2003.

114. Weber, K.; Plessmann, U.; Traub, P.: Maturation of nuclear lamin
A involves a specific carboxy-terminal trimming, which removes the
polyisoprenylation site from the precursor; implications for the structure
of the nuclear lamina. FEBS Lett. 257: 411-414, 1989.

115. Worman, H. J.; Bonne, G.: 'Laminopathies': a wide spectrum of
human diseases. Exp. Cell Res. 313: 2121-2133, 2007.

116. Wuyts, W.; Biervliet, M.; Reyniers, E.; D'Apice, M. R.; Novelli,
G.; Storm, K.: Somatic and gonadal mosaicism in Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria. Am. J. Med. Genet. 135A: 66-68, 2005.

117. Wydner, K. L.; McNeil, J. A.; Lin, F.; Worman, H. J.; Lawrence,
J. B.: Chromosomal assignment of human nuclear envelope protein genes
LMNA, LMNB1, and LBR by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 32:
474-478, 1996.

118. Yang, S. H.; Andres, D. A.; Spielmann, H. P.; Young, S. G.; Fong,
L. G.: Progerin elicits disease phenotypes of progeria in mice whether
or not it is farnesylated. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 3291-3300, 2008.

119. Yang, S. H.; Bergo, M. O.; Toth, J. I.; Qiao, X.; Hu, Y.; Sandoval,
S.; Meta, M.; Bendale, P.; Gelb, M. H.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.
: Blocking protein farnesyltransferase improves nuclear blebbing in
mouse fibroblasts with a targeted Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome
mutation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 10291-10296, 2005.

120. Yang, S. H.; Meta, M.; Qiao, X.; Frost, D.; Bauch, J.; Coffinier,
C.; Majumdar, S.; Bergo, M. O.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.: A farnesyltransferase
inhibitor improves disease phenotypes in mice with a Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria syndrome mutation. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 2115-2121, 2006.

121. Zirn, B.; Kress, W.; Grimm, T.; Berthold, L. D.; Neubauer, B.;
Kuchelmeister, K.; Muller, U.; Hahn, A.: Association of homozygous
LMNA mutation R471C with new phenotype: mandibuloacral dysplasia,
progeria, and rigid spine muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
1049-1054, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 9/10/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/23/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/11/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/10/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/26/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/14/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/19/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/13/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/20/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/27/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/7/2010
Nara Sobreira - updated: 1/8/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/5/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/2/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/3/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/30/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/13/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/16/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/19/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/23/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/5/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/30/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/7/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/17/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/13/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/2/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/9/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/22/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/8/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/26/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/22/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/15/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/1/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/5/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/1/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/19/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/17/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/3/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/12/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 5/3/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/17/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/22/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/25/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/16/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/6/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/4/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/16/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/2000
Paul Brennan - updated: 4/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/28/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/14/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/5/1988

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
tpirozzi: 9/10/2013
tpirozzi: 8/23/2013
alopez: 7/11/2013
mgross: 6/10/2013
alopez: 6/10/2013
mgross: 3/26/2013
carol: 10/17/2012
carol: 10/16/2012
ckniffin: 10/3/2012
carol: 6/5/2012
alopez: 4/12/2012
alopez: 10/11/2011
terry: 10/4/2011
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
terry: 3/9/2011
wwang: 3/2/2011
ckniffin: 2/14/2011
carol: 12/7/2010
carol: 10/19/2010
wwang: 10/19/2010
ckniffin: 10/13/2010
mgross: 9/20/2010
mgross: 8/16/2010
terry: 8/10/2010
mgross: 8/6/2010
terry: 7/27/2010
wwang: 4/13/2010
ckniffin: 4/7/2010
ckniffin: 2/24/2010
carol: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 1/11/2010
carol: 1/8/2010
carol: 1/6/2010
ckniffin: 1/5/2010
wwang: 11/5/2009
ckniffin: 11/2/2009
wwang: 8/3/2009
ckniffin: 7/9/2009
alopez: 7/7/2009
terry: 6/30/2009
wwang: 6/25/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
terry: 5/13/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/22/2009
alopez: 4/16/2009
wwang: 3/11/2009
ckniffin: 3/5/2009
carol: 2/24/2009
wwang: 2/23/2009
terry: 2/19/2009
wwang: 11/19/2008
mgross: 10/27/2008
alopez: 9/23/2008
wwang: 6/11/2008
terry: 6/5/2008
wwang: 2/1/2008
ckniffin: 1/30/2008
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
wwang: 11/20/2007
ckniffin: 11/7/2007
alopez: 11/6/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
wwang: 10/25/2007
ckniffin: 10/16/2007
terry: 9/20/2007
alopez: 7/17/2007
wwang: 6/14/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
wwang: 6/8/2007
wwang: 5/11/2007
ckniffin: 5/2/2007
carol: 4/9/2007
alopez: 3/22/2007
wwang: 3/12/2007
terry: 3/8/2007
wwang: 8/9/2006
alopez: 8/3/2006
terry: 8/1/2006
wwang: 7/5/2006
ckniffin: 6/26/2006
wwang: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
wwang: 3/22/2006
wwang: 2/23/2006
terry: 2/15/2006
alopez: 2/15/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
terry: 2/1/2006
terry: 10/12/2005
wwang: 7/8/2005
terry: 7/5/2005
alopez: 6/13/2005
wwang: 6/8/2005
wwang: 6/1/2005
tkritzer: 5/25/2005
terry: 5/19/2005
wwang: 5/18/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 4/13/2005
wwang: 3/22/2005
wwang: 3/18/2005
terry: 3/16/2005
terry: 3/15/2005
carol: 3/8/2005
wwang: 3/7/2005
terry: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
terry: 2/17/2005
joanna: 2/9/2005
carol: 12/8/2004
tkritzer: 12/7/2004
tkritzer: 11/4/2004
terry: 11/3/2004
mgross: 10/27/2004
tkritzer: 10/15/2004
terry: 10/12/2004
terry: 6/28/2004
tkritzer: 5/10/2004
carol: 5/4/2004
carol: 5/3/2004
ckniffin: 4/29/2004
ckniffin: 4/28/2004
ckniffin: 4/27/2004
ckniffin: 4/15/2004
cwells: 3/4/2004
tkritzer: 2/26/2004
terry: 2/25/2004
cwells: 2/23/2004
terry: 2/17/2004
cwells: 2/16/2004
terry: 2/9/2004
carol: 1/21/2004
terry: 1/20/2004
tkritzer: 1/13/2004
ckniffin: 1/6/2004
terry: 11/11/2003
tkritzer: 10/24/2003
alopez: 10/22/2003
tkritzer: 10/22/2003
tkritzer: 10/7/2003
tkritzer: 10/1/2003
alopez: 8/25/2003
alopez: 7/7/2003
tkritzer: 6/25/2003
tkritzer: 6/24/2003
terry: 6/11/2003
alopez: 5/28/2003
terry: 5/28/2003
alopez: 5/9/2003
alopez: 4/30/2003
terry: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/25/2003
alopez: 4/23/2003
joanna: 4/23/2003
alopez: 4/16/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
ckniffin: 4/10/2003
tkritzer: 2/28/2003
carol: 1/3/2003
tkritzer: 12/23/2002
ckniffin: 12/16/2002
cwells: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/15/2002
cwells: 10/28/2002
tkritzer: 8/23/2002
tkritzer: 8/22/2002
terry: 8/16/2002
alopez: 4/19/2002
carol: 4/2/2002
alopez: 3/27/2002
terry: 3/21/2002
mcapotos: 12/21/2001
alopez: 11/6/2001
cwells: 10/8/2001
cwells: 10/4/2001
cwells: 7/20/2001
cwells: 7/16/2001
alopez: 3/16/2001
cwells: 1/11/2001
terry: 1/2/2001
alopez: 8/16/2000
mcapotos: 7/24/2000
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 6/30/2000
carol: 5/9/2000
alopez: 5/8/2000
terry: 4/13/2000
alopez: 4/10/2000
alopez: 2/1/2000
terry: 1/28/2000
alopez: 12/14/1999
carol: 12/14/1999
mgross: 12/3/1999
terry: 12/3/1999
alopez: 3/1/1999
alopez: 2/26/1999
terry: 2/23/1999
terry: 4/22/1996
mark: 4/22/1996
mark: 12/7/1995
carol: 10/1/1993
carol: 8/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 2/3/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

600114	TITLE *600114 CHAPERONIN CONTAINING T-COMPLEX POLYPEPTIDE 1, SUBUNIT 3; CCT3
;;CHAPERONIN CONTAINING TCP1, SUBUNIT 3;;
CCT-GAMMA; CCTG;;
TCP1 RING COMPLEX, POLYPEPTIDE 5; TRIC5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Molecular chaperones are proteins capable of folding or assembling
nascent proteins in a higher order structure. A molecular chaperone
called TCP1 ring complex (TRiC) plays a role in actin and tubulin
folding. TRiC is composed of 2 heteromeric subunits of 6 to 9 different
proteins. The cytoplasmic T-complex protein-1 (TCP1; 186980), an
abundant testicular germ cell protein, has been found in this complex.
Other components of TRiC, such as TRIC5, are TCP1-related proteins
(Sevigny et al., 1994).

CLONING

Joly et al. (1994) cloned a mouse cDNA corresponding to tryptic
fragments of the bovine TRiCP5 subunit described by Frydman et al.
(1992). The mouse TRiCP5 shares 48% nucleotide and 34% amino acid
homology with mouse Tcp1. It is a cytosolic protein also found in the
nuclear matrix of several cultured human cell lines. Furthermore, like
TCP1, it is highly expressed in testis.

Sevigny et al. (1994) cloned a partial human cDNA clone homologous to
mouse TRiCP5.

Walkley et al. (1996) cloned the human cDNA from a kidney library. The
1.9-kb cDNA encodes a predicted 544-amino acid protein that is 98%
similar to the mouse sequence and 75% similar to the yeast gene. The
mRNA is expressed in a variety of human tissues and at high levels in
mouse testis.

Sevigny et al. (1996) cloned the gene coding for the mouse P5 subunit.

GENE FUNCTION

Feldman et al. (1999) demonstrated that the folding and assembly of the
VHL protein (608537) into a complex with its partner proteins, elongin B
(600787) and elongin C (600788), is directly mediated by the chaperonin
TRiC. Their results defined a novel role for TRiC in mediating
oligomerization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sevigny et al. (1996) determined that the mouse Tric5 gene contains 14
exons distributed within 25 kb of genomic DNA. Sevigny et al. (1996)
used primer extension to demonstrate multiple transcription start points
for the Tric5 gene. This was considered consistent with the lack of any
obvious TATA box upstream of the transcription start points.

MAPPING

Sevigny et al. (1994) mapped the TRIC5 gene to chromosome 1q23 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. The fact that the human TRIC5 gene
is not on chromosome 6 like other TCP1-related proteins implied to
Sevigny et al. (1994) that the genes coding the TCP1-related proteins
present in the TCP1 ring complex are probably not organized in a cluster
and thus are not synchronously regulated by a cis-acting control region
such as the LCR involved in the regulation of globin synthesis.

Sevigny et al. (1996) showed that the mouse genome contains 1 Tric5 gene
and 1 Tric5 pseudogene located on chromosomes 3F and 5B, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Feldman, D. E.; Thulasiraman, V.; Ferreyra, R. G.; Frydman, J.
: Formation of the VHL-elongin BC tumor suppressor complex is mediated
by the chaperonin TRiC. Molec. Cell 4: 1051-1061, 1999.

2. Frydman, J.; Nimmesgern, E.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Wall, J. S.;
Tempst, P.; Hartl, F.-U.: Function in protein folding of TRiC, a
cytosolic ring complex containing TCP-1 and structurally related subunits. EMBO
J. 11: 4767-4778, 1992.

3. Joly, E. C.; Sevigny, G.; Todorov, I. T.; Bibor-Hardy, V.: cDNA
encoding a novel TCP1-related protein. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1217:
224-226, 1994.

4. Sevigny, G.; Joly, E. C.; Bibor-Hardy, V.; Lemieux, N.: Assignment
of the human homologue of the mTRiC-P5 gene (TRIC5) to band 1q23 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 22: 634-636, 1994.

5. Sevigny, G.; Lemieux, N.; Steyaert, A.; Bibor-Hardy, V.: Structure
of the gene coding for the mouse TRiC-P5 subunit of the cytosolic
chaperonin TRiC. Genomics 31: 107-110, 1996.

6. Walkley, N. A.; Demaine, A. G.; Malik, A. N.: Cloning, structure
and mRNA expression of human Cctg, which encodes the chaperonin subunit
CCT-gamma. Biochem. J. 313: 381-389, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2000
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/20/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1994

EDITED mgross: 11/21/2006
mgross: 11/20/2006
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
tkritzer: 9/17/2003
mgross: 7/14/2000
mgross: 7/13/2000
mgross: 1/7/2000
alopez: 7/27/1999
alopez: 7/26/1999
mark: 5/20/1996
terry: 5/20/1996
mark: 2/7/1996
terry: 2/2/1996
carol: 9/14/1994

606450	TITLE *606450 NEUROEPITHELIAL CELL TRANSFORMING GENE 1; NET1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By expression cloning and PCR of a neuroepithelioma cell line, followed
by screening of a mammary epithelial cell line, Chan et al. (1996)
obtained a cDNA encoding NET1. Sequence analysis predicted that the
601-amino acid protein has a DBL homology (DH) domain that is 21%
similar to that of DBL (311030), particularly in the leucine-rich
region. The DH domain is a 240-amino acid region initially identified in
DBL. DH domain proteins interact with members of the RAS superfamily of
GTP-binding proteins. NET1 also possesses a pleckstrin-homology domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of major 3.0- and
minor 2.4-kb NET1 transcripts, with highest levels in placenta.
Functional analysis showed that NET1 induced morphologic alterations and
conferred a malignant phenotype in vitro and in nude mice.

MAPPING

By FISH, Chan et al. (1996) mapped the NET1 gene to 10p15, a region
involved in nonrandom translocation in acute nonlymphocytic leukemia
(ANLL).

REFERENCE 1. Chan, A. M.-L.; Takai, S.; Yamada, K.; Miki, T.: Isolation of
a novel oncogene, NET1, from neuroepithelioma cells by expression
cDNA cloning. Oncogene 12: 1259-1266, 1996.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/9/2001

EDITED mgross: 11/09/2001

602116	TITLE *602116 YEATS DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 4; YEATS4
;;GLIOMA-AMPLIFIED SEQUENCE 41; GAS41
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Gene amplification, which is generally considered to occur late in tumor
development, is a common feature of high-grade glioma. Fischer et al.
(1997) reported cloning and sequencing a cDNA, termed GAS41 by them,
that was identified in a glioblastoma cell line by
microdissection-mediated cDNA capture (Gracia et al., 1996). An
increased copy number of GAS41 was found in glioblastoma multiforme and
astrocytoma III, and at a high frequency in astrocytoma grades I and II.
Sequence comparison indicated high similarity between the GAS41 protein,
yeast and human AF9 (159558), and human ENL (159556). Fischer et al.
(1997) noted that both AF9 and ENL belong to a class of transcription
factors, indicating that GAS41 may also represent a transcription
factor. With GAS41 being the first gene found with increased copy number
in low-grade glioma, this study provided the first evidence that gene
amplification can occur in early tumor development.

GENE FUNCTION

The NuA4 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complex is responsible for
acetylation of the N-terminal tails of histone H4 (see 602822) and H2A
(see 613499) in yeast. Its catalytic subunit, Esa1, is homologous to
human TIP60 (HTATIP; 601409). Using affinity purification, Western blot
analysis, cell fractionation, immunoprecipitation, and mass
spectrometry, Doyon et al. (2004) found that TIP60 and its splice
variant, TIP60B/PLIP, were part of a multisubunit NuA4 complex with HAT
activity in several human cell lines. They identified human homologs for
11 of the 12 yeast NuA4 subunits, including GAS41.

By immunoprecipitation analysis of human 293T cells, Park and Roeder
(2006) found that GAS41 associated with TIP60 complex core subunits and
with H2AZ (H2AFZ; 142763), a component of the SWI2/SNF2 (SMARCA2;
600014)-related CBP (CREBBP; 600140) activator protein (SRCAP) complex,
confirming that GAS41 is a genuine subunit of the TIP60 and SRCAP
complexes. TIP60 complexes containing GAS41 showed typical
TIP60-mediated H3 and H4 acetyltransferase activity on free core
histones. Either knockdown of GAS41 expression with small interfering
RNA or specific interruptions of the C-terminal coiled-coil motif of the
GAS41 protein activated the p53 (TP53; 191170) tumor suppressor pathway.
Activation of the p53 pathway did not result from changes in TIP60
complex assembly or TIP60 coactivator functions for p53. GAS41 was
prebound to the promoters of 2 p53 tumor suppressor pathway genes, p21
(CDKN1A; 116899) and p14(ARF) (CDKN2A; 600160), in normal unstressed
cells, but GAS41 dissociated from both promoters in response to
p53-activating stress signals.

Using RNA interference in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells, Fazzio et al.
(2008) found that depletion of any of 7 components of the Tip60-p400
(EP400; 606265) HAT and nucleosome remodeling complex, including Yeats4,
caused the same phenotype. Unlike normal ES cells, which grow in
spherical 3-dimensional colonies, ES cells depleted of any the 7
Tip60-p400 HAT components showed a flattened and elongated morphology,
with monolayer growth and reduced cell-cell contacts. These knockdown
cells continued to cycle, with reduced cells in S phase and increased
cells in G2 phase. The effect of Tip60-p400 HAT component knockdown was
unique to ES cells, as negligible changes were observed following
knockdown in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

By yeast 2-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses, Lauffart et al.
(2002) showed that TAAC1 (605301) interacted with the C-terminal 109
amino acids of GAS41.

Zimmermann et al. (2002) found that targeted disruption of both Gas41
alleles in a chicken prelymphoid cell line resulted in a significant
decrease in RNA synthesis and subsequent cell death, indicating that
GAS41 is required for RNA transcription.

Braas et al. (2004) found that the chicken Gas41 promoter contains
several potential Myb (189990)-binding sites, and they demonstrated that
Gas41 is a v-Myb target gene.

MAPPING

The GAS41 gene maps to chromosome 12q13-q15 (Gracia et al., 1996).

REFERENCE 1. Braas, D.; Gundelach, H.; Klempnauer, K.-H.: The glioma-amplified
sequence 41 gene (GAS41) is a direct Myb target gene. Nucleic Acids
Res. 32: 4750-4757, 2004.

2. Doyon, Y.; Selleck, W.; Lane, W. S.; Tan, S.; Cote, J.: Structural
and functional conservation of the NuA4 histone acetyltransferase
complex from yeast to humans. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 1884-1896,
2004.

3. Fazzio, T. G.; Huff, J. T.; Panning, B.: An RNAi screen of chromatin
proteins identifies Tip60-p400 as a regulator of embryonic stem cell
identity. Cell 134: 162-174, 2008.

4. Fischer, U.; Heckel, D.; Michel, A.; Janka, M.; Hulsebos, T.; Meese,
E.: Cloning of a novel transcription factor-like gene amplified in
human glioma including astrocytoma grade I. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6:
1817-1822, 1997.

5. Gracia, E.; Fischer, U.; Elkahloun, A.; Trent, J. M.; Meese, E.;
Meltzer, P. S.: Isolation of genes amplified in human cancers by
microdissection mediated cDNA capture. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 595-600,
1996.

6. Lauffart, B.; Howell, S. J.; Tasch, J. E.; Cowell, J. K.; Still,
I. H.: Interaction of the transforming acidic coiled-coil 1 (TACC1)
protein with ch-TOG and GAS41/NuBI1 suggests multiple TACC1-containing
protein complexes in human cells. Biochem. J. 363: 195-200, 2002.

7. Park, J. H.; Roeder, R. G.: GAS41 is required for repression of
the p53 tumor suppressor pathway during normal cellular proliferation. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 26: 4006-4016, 2006.

8. Zimmermann, K.; Ahrens, K.; Matthes, S.; Buerstedde, J.-M.; Stratling,
W. H.; Phi-van, L.: Targeted disruption of the GAS41 gene encoding
a putative transcription factor indicates that GAS41 is essential
for cell viability. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 18626-18631, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/25/2007
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/8/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/12/1997

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
mgross: 11/7/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
mgross: 6/27/2007
terry: 6/25/2007
wwang: 5/8/2007
mgross: 5/8/2007
cwells: 3/13/2002
terry: 2/22/2002
terry: 6/4/2001
dholmes: 11/18/1997
jenny: 11/12/1997

608277	TITLE *608277 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 15; CHST15
;;B-CELL RAG-ASSOCIATED GENE; BRAG;;
N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE 4-SULFATE 6-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE;;
GalNAc4S-6ST;;
KIAA0598
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned KIAA0598. The 3-prime untranslated
region of the transcript contains an Alu repeat. The deduced 561-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 72 kD. RT-PCR
detected high expression in all tissues examined.

By differential display of genes coexpressed with RAG1 (179615),
followed by screening a pre-B-cell cDNA library, Verkoczy et al. (1998)
cloned BRAG. The deduced protein contains 503 amino acids and has a
calculated molecular mass of 55 kD. In vitro translation resulted in a
doublet that migrated between 69 and 49 kD by SDS-PAGE. BRAG is a type
II transmembrane glycoprotein with an 81-amino acid cytoplasmic N
terminus, followed by a transmembrane domain, and a 405-amino acid
extracellular C terminus. The N terminus contains a putative
palmitoylation site and several phosphorylation sites, and the C
terminus contains 4 putative N-glycosylation sites. Verkoczy et al.
(1998) also identified a putative splice variant that contains an
in-frame 12-bp deletion. Northern blot analysis detected a 5.0-kb BRAG
transcript expressed in all B-cell lines that also expressed RAG1.
Little or no expression was detected in several nonlymphoid cell lines,
and no expression was detected in T-cell lines, irrespective of RAG1
expression. Northern blot analysis of whole tissues detected expression
in bone marrow and tonsil, but not in heart, thymus, or placenta. RNA
dot blot analysis detected high levels in fetal and adult spleen,
peripheral blood leukocytes, and lymph node, moderate levels in heart,
ovary, stomach, and brain putamen, and low levels in bone marrow and
several other tissues. Zoo blot analysis performed under low stringency
conditions indicated that the BRAG gene is conserved across eukaryotes.
High stringency conditions revealed predominant bands only in human and
baboon DNA.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) determined that BRAG is a membrane-integrated
glycoprotein that is expressed as a disulfide-linked dimer in B cells.
They found glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of BRAG, with apparent
molecular masses of about 63 and 52 kD, respectively, in the
intracellular fraction of tonsillar B cells and in transfected
erythroleukemia cells; only the glycosylated product associated with the
cell surface.

Ohtake et al. (2001) determined that the KIAA0589 protein (Nagase et
al., 1998) shares significant similarity with GalNAc4S-6ST purified from
squid cartilage. They also noted that the nucleotide sequence of
KIAA0598 is nearly identical to that of BRAG (Verkoczy et al., 1998),
but the deduced proteins are significantly different. However, the
KIAA0598 and BRAG proteins are both type II transmembrane proteins, and
both contain a 3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate
(PAPS)-binding domain characteristic of most sulfotransferases.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yuki et al. (2000) determined that the BRAG gene contains 7 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Verkoczy et al. (1998) showed that BRAG induced RAG1 expression
following transfection into a B-cell line, but not following
transfection into a nonlymphoid cell line.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) found that BRAG associated with phosphorylated
proteins in unstimulated mature B cells, but not in B cells activated
through B-cell receptor cross-linking. They presented evidence that BRAG
functions as a cell surface receptor capable of cell signaling.

Ohtake et al. (2001) characterized the enzymatic activity of KIAA0598,
which they designated GalNAc4S-6ST, following transfection into COS-7
cells and confirmed that it displays sulfotransferase activity. They
found that GalNAc4S-6ST catalyzed the transfer of sulfate from PAPS to
position 6 of the nonreducing terminal and internal N-acetylgalatosamine
4-sulfate residues in chondroitin sulfate A and dermatan sulfate. Only
nonreducing terminal N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate residues were
sulfated when a trisaccharide and a pentasaccharide with sulfated groups
at position 4 of N-acetylgalactosamine residues were used as acceptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0598
gene to chromosome 10.

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Verkoczy et al. (1998) mapped
the CHST15 gene to chromosome 10q26. Using Southern blot analysis, they
determined that CHST15 is a single-copy gene that is not likely to be a
member of a multigene family.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

2. Ohtake, S.; Ito, Y.; Fukuta, M.; Habuchi, O.: Human N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase cDNA is related to human B cell recombination
activating gene-associated gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43894-43900,
2001.

3. Verkoczy, L. K.; Guinn, B.; Berinstein, N. L.: Characterization
of the human B cell RAG-associated gene, hBRAG, as a B cell receptor
signal-enhancing glycoprotein dimer that associates with phosphorylated
proteins in resting B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20967-20979, 2000.

4. Verkoczy, L. K.; Marsden, P. A.; Berinstein, N. L.: hBRAG, a novel
B cell lineage cDNA encoding a type II transmembrane glycoprotein
potentially involved in the regulation of recombination activating
gene 1 (RAG1). Europ. J. Immun. 28: 2839-2853, 1998.

5. Yuki, M.; Yoshinaga, K.; Yamakawa, H.; Sakurada, K.; Sato, S.;
Yajima, A.; Horii, A.: Structure, expression and mutational analysis
of the hBRAG gene on 10q in the frequently deleted region in human
endometrial cancer. Oncol. Rep. 7: 1339-1342, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2010
mgross: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
mgross: 11/21/2003

602964	TITLE *602964 TRANSLIN-ASSOCIATED FACTOR X; TSNAX
;;TRAX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Translin (TSN; 600575) is a DNA-binding protein that specifically binds
to consensus sequences at breakpoint junctions of chromosomal
translocations in many cases of lymphoid malignancies. Aoki et al.
(1997) used a yeast 2-hybrid system to screen a human spleen cDNA
library for potential interactions of TSN with other proteins. They
isolated a TSNAX cDNA, termed TRAX (translin-associated factor X) by the
authors, whose product specifically interacted with TSN in
cotransformation and in vitro interaction assays. The cDNA encodes a
putative 290-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 33
kD. The protein contains a heptad repeat of hydrophobic amino acids
consistent with the hypothetical leucine zipper structure. The authors
found 28% amino acid sequence identity between TSNAX and TSN, with 38%
identity in the C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis revealed a
single TSNAX transcript of 2.7 kb, with a tissue distribution similar to
that of the TSN transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2009) reconstituted long double-stranded RNA- and duplex
siRNA-initiated RISC (RNA-induced silencing complex) activities with the
use of recombinant Drosophila Dicer-2 (see 606241), R2D2, and Ago2
(606229) proteins. They used this core reconstitution system to purify
an RNAi regulator that they termed C3PO (component 3 promoter of RISC),
a complex of translin and TRAX. C3PO is a magnesium ion-dependent
endoribonuclease that promotes RISC activation by removing siRNA
passenger strand cleavage products. Liu et al. (2009) showed that TRAX
is unstable without translin and that TRAX is the catalytic subunit of
C3PO. Liu et al. (2009) concluded that their study established an in
vitro RNAi reconstitution system and identified C3PO as a key activator
of the core RNAi machinery.

GENE STRUCTURE

Meng et al. (2000) determined that the genomic structure of TSNAX is
similar to that of TSN, consisting of 6 exons encompassing approximately
27 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Meng et al. (2000) mapped the
TSNAX gene to chromosome 1q41.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cannon et al. (2005) conducted a population-based twin cohort study in
Finland to examine the association of SNPs of DISC1 (605210) and TRAX
with schizophrenia (SCZD9; 604906) and several endophenotypic traits
thought to be involved in the disease pathogenesis. Two hundred and
thirty-six subjects consisting of 7 pairs concordant for schizophrenia
(6 monozygotic, 1 dizygotic), 52 pairs discordant for schizophrenia (20
monozygotic, 32 dizygotic), and 59 demographically balanced normal pairs
(28 monozygotic, 31 dizygotic) were drawn from a twin cohort consisting
of all same-sex twins born in Finland from 1940 through 1957. Diagnosis
was confirmed, and performance measurements on neurocognitive tests of
short- and long-term memory as well as gray matter volume measurements
as assessed on MRI images were recorded. A common haplotype
incorporating 3 SNPs near the translocation breakpoint of DISC1 (HEP1;
odds ratio, 2.6, p = 0.02) and a rare haplotype incorporating 4 markers
from the DISC1 and TRAX genes (combined HEP2/HEP3; odds ratio, 13.0, p =
0.001) were significantly overrepresented among individuals with
schizophrenia. These haplotypes were also associated with several
quantitative and endophenotypic traits including impairments in short-
and long-term memory, functioning, and reduced gray matter density in
the prefrontal cortex.

REFERENCE 1. Aoki, K.; Ishida, R.; Kasai, M.: Isolation and characterization
of a cDNA encoding a translin-like protein, TRAX. FEBS Lett. 401:
109-112, 1997.

2. Cannon, T. D.; Hennah, W.; van Erp, T. G. M.; Thompson, P. M.;
Lonnqvist, J.; Huttenen, M.; Gasperoni, T.; Tuulio-Henriksson, A.;
Pirkola, T.; Toga, A. W.; Kaprio, J.; Mazziotta, J.; Peltonen, L.
: Association of DISC1/TRAX haplotypes with schizophrenia, reduced
prefrontal gray matter, and impaired short- and long-term memory. Arch.
Gen. Psychiat. 62: 1205-1213, 2005.

3. Liu, Y.; Ye, X.; Jiang, F.; Liang, C.; Chen, D.; Peng, J.; Kinch,
L. N.; Grishin, N. V.; Liu, Q.: C3PO, an endoribonuclease that promotes
RNAi by facilitating RISC activation. Science 325: 750-753, 2009.

4. Meng, G.; Aoki, K.; Tokura, K.; Nakahara, K.; Inazawa, J.; Kasai,
M.: Genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding
TRAX, a translin-associated factor X. J. Hum. Genet. 45: 305-308,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/1/2009
John Logan Black, III - updated: 11/30/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2000

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 8/12/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/10/2009
terry: 9/1/2009
carol: 11/30/2007
carol: 12/6/2000
carol: 8/13/1998

603768	TITLE *603768 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1, REGULATORY SUBUNIT 12B; PPP1R12B
;;MYOSIN PHOSPHATASE TARGET SUBUNIT 2; MYPT2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The holoenzyme of smooth muscle myosin phosphatase consists of 3
subunits: the catalytic subunit PP1c-delta (PPP1CB; 600590), and 2
putative regulatory subunits, MYPT (myosin phosphatase target) and M20.
The N-terminal half of MYPT binds to both PP1c-delta and phosphorylated
myosin, thereby increasing myosin phosphatase activity. The C-terminal
region contains the phosphorylation site thought to be involved in
inhibition of phosphatase activity, as well as binding sites for M20 and
several other substances. The MYPT1 (602021) gene encodes one human MYPT
isoform. By screening a human brain cDNA library with a rat MYPT1 cDNA,
Fujioka et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding MYPT2, a second human
isoform. The predicted 982-amino acid MYPT2 protein shares 61% sequence
identity with MYPT1. Like MYPT1, MYPT2 contains 7 ankyrin repeats near
the N terminus and C-terminal leucine zipper motifs. Northern blot
analysis revealed that MYPT2 is expressed as multiple transcripts in a
tissue-specific pattern, with the strongest expression in heart and
skeletal muscle. Western blots detected the 125-kD MYPT2 protein only in
brain and heart, in contrast to MYPT1, which is widely distributed in
human tissues. In vitro, recombinant proteins containing the N-terminal
two-thirds of either MYPT2 or MYPT1 bound to PP1c-delta and increased
activity toward phosphorylated myosin light chain.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Fujioka et al. (1998) mapped the
MYPT2 gene to 1q32.1.

REFERENCE 1. Fujioka, M.; Takahashi, N.; Odai, H.; Araki, S.; Ichikawa, K.;
Feng, J.; Nakamura, M.; Kaibuchi, K.; Hartshorne, D. J.; Nakano, T.;
Ito, M.: A new isoform of human myosin phosphatase targeting/regulatory
subunit (MYPT2): cDNA cloning, tissue expression, and chromosomal
mapping. Genomics 49: 59-68, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/22/1999

EDITED carol: 08/21/2001
alopez: 4/22/1999

611347	TITLE *611347 INTEGRATOR COMPLEX SUBUNIT 3; INTS3
;;INT3;;
SENSOR OF SINGLE-STRANDED DNA COMPLEX, SUBUNIT A,; SOSSA;;
SOSS COMPLEX, SUBUNIT A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

INTS3 is a subunit of the Integrator complex, which associates with the
C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II large subunit (POLR2A; 180660)
and mediates 3-prime end processing of small nuclear RNAs U1 (RNU1;
180680) and U2 (RNU2; 180690) (Baillat et al., 2005). INTS3 is also a
subunit of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding complexes involved in the
maintenance of genome stability (Huang et al., 2009).

GENE FUNCTION

By SDS-PAGE of proteins that copurified with INTS11 (CPSF3L; 611354) in
HEK293 cells, Baillat et al. (2005) identified INTS3 as a subunit of the
Integrator complex.

Using HEK293 cells for tandem affinity purification, Huang et al. (2009)
identified INTS3, which they called SOSSA, and SOSSC (613273) as common
components of 2 distinct and complementary ssDNA-binding heterotrimeric
complexes defined by their inclusion of either SOSSB1 (SSBP1; 600439) or
SOSSB2 (SSBP2; 607389), but not both. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
confirmed that SOSS complexes formed in HeLa cells independent of DNA
damage. Recombinant heterotrimeric SOSS complexes specifically bound
ssDNA, but not double-stranded DNA. SOSSA served as the central assembly
factor, and SOSSB and SOSSC bound overlapping regions on SOSSA, but they
did not interact directly with each other. Depletion of SOSSA by small
interfering RNA led to dramatic decreases in SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 protein
levels, abrogated targeting of SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 to chromatin, increased
ionizing radiation sensitivity, caused defective G2/M checkpoint, and
impaired homologous recombination repair. Huang et al. (2009)
demonstrated that both SOSS complexes and the CTIP (RBBP8; 604124)/RPA
(see RPA1; 179835) complex acted downstream of the MRE11 (600814)-RAD50
(604040)-NBS1 (NBN; 602667) complex and functioned in DNA damage repair.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the INTS3
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP WI-15199).

REFERENCE 1. Baillat, D.; Hakimi, M.-A.; Naar, A. M.; Shilatifard, A.; Cooch,
N.; Shiekhattar, R.: Integrator, a multiprotein mediator of small
nuclear RNA processing, associates with the C-terminal repeat of RNA
polymerase II. Cell 123: 265-276, 2005.

2. Huang, J.; Gong, Z.; Ghosal, G.; Chen, J.: SOSS complexes participate
in the maintenance of genomic stability. Molec. Cell 35: 384-393,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/17/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
wwang: 8/17/2007

188230	TITLE *188230 THY-1 T-CELL ANTIGEN; THY1
;;THETA ANTIGEN;;
CD90 ANTIGEN; CD90
DESCRIPTION Thy-1 is the designation for a major cell surface glycoprotein
characteristic to T cells, as first defined in the mouse and rat (Raff,
1971; Letarte-Muirhead et al., 1975). The Thy-1 glycoproteins are
constituents of thymocytes and neurons and probably are involved in
cell-cell interactions. The putative human homolog of Thy-1 of the mouse
is called K117. The human homolog of the rodent antigen was studied by
Ades et al. (1980). Using a monoclonal antibody, McKenzie and Fabre
(1981) studied the tissue distribution of the antigen. By use of a gene
clone in somatic cell hybrids, Seki et al. (1985) assigned the THY1 gene
to chromosome 11. Van den Elsen et al. (1985) predicted that the human
Thy-1 homolog maps to chromosome 11 because that is where they found T3D
(186790) to map and in the mouse T3D and Thy-1 map to chromosome 9 along
with certain other loci that are on human 11q. A multigene family is a
group of homologous genes with similar function. A supergene family is a
set of multigene families and single genes related by sequence (implying
common ancestry) but not necessarily related in function. Hood et al.
(1985) refer to the immunoglobulin supergene family which includes
Thy-1, poly-Ig receptor, heavy, kappa and lambda immunoglobulins, Lyt-2
(T8), alpha and beta chains of T-cell antigen receptor and the closely
homologous gamma chain, class I MHC antigen, beta-2-microglobulin, and
the alpha and beta chains of class II MHC antigens. Thy-1 is
structurally the simplest of these, consisting of a single
immunoglobulin homology unit that is either intermediate between V and C
or somewhat more similar to a V homology unit (Williams and Gagnon,
1982). The Thy-1 glycoprotein is also exceptional in that it is on the
cell surface as a free homology unit and apparently does not associate
either with itself or with other polypeptides. Its role in immune
response is unclear. It is expressed on fibroblasts and brain cells in
addition to some T cells. The significant role of Thy-1 in developing
nervous tissue (Morris, 1985) may be of relevance to disorders such as
ataxia-telangiectasia (208900) that combine neurologic and immunologic
defects. By somatic cell and in situ hybridization, van Rijs et al.
(1985) localized the gene to 11q23-11q24. Rettig et al. (1985) assigned
the gene to 11q13-qter, by Southern analysis of DNA from hybrid cells
containing rearranged chromosomes 11. HGM7 gave the regional assignment
as 11q22.3. Tunnacliffe and McGuire (1990) constructed a physical map of
11q23 by pulsed field gel electrophoresis and showed that THY1 lies in
11q23.3 as the most telomeric of a group of 6 genes:
cen--CD3E--CD3D--CD3G--PBGD--CBL2--THY1--qter.

Chromosome 11 seems to carry an inordinately large number of genes for
cell surface antigens (Rettig et al., 1985); according to the 1985
workshop on Human Gene Mapping (Grzeschik and Kazazian, 1985), at least
21 cellular antigens recognized by monoclonal antibodies and other
serologic means map to 11. Mansour et al. (1987) gave a useful history
of our understanding of the Thy-1 glycoprotein and a review of its
evolution. Using RFLPs, Gatti et al. (1987) mapped the THY1 gene against
APOA1 (107680). THY1 appeared to be distal to APOA1; there was 1%
recombination between the 2 loci in males and 2% in females. Gatti et
al. (1988) demonstrated RFLPs in the THY1 gene that are potentially
useful as markers in linkage studies. Greenspan and O'Brien (1989)
showed in the mouse that a factor secreted by nonneuronal accessory
cells of dorsal root ganglion cultures stimulates neurite outgrowth in
neonatal sympathetic ganglion neurons. They presented evidence that this
is identical to Thy-1. It is this function in separate tissues that
might explain pleiotropic manifestations of some syndromes such as
ataxia-telangiectasia (208900) or cartilage-hair hypoplasia (250250).

Cao et al. (2001) found that introduction of chromosome 11 completely
suppressed tumorigenicity of the highly malignant and tumorigenic
ovarian cancer cell line SKOV-3 but introduction of chromosome 17 could
only partially suppress tumorigenicity. Microcell-mediated chromosome
transfer was applied to introduce a normal copy of chromosome 11 into
SKOV-3 cells; a panel of 5 hybrid clones were generated. Two of the
clones were completely nontumorigenic in severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice for up to 150 and 200 days; 2 other clones
had a latency period of 123 and 109 days, respectively. In vitro cell
doubling time was found to be highly variable and did not correlate with
tumorigenicity, implying that suppression of in vivo tumorigenicity and
in vitro cell proliferation are under separate genetic control. A number
of studies had demonstrated a high frequency of loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) of chromosome 11, both 11p and 11q, in ovarian cancer. To identify
the gene or genes associated with tumor suppression in the ovarian cell
line SKOV-3, Abeysinghe et al. (2003) performed cDNA subtractive
hybridization using a suppression subtractive hybridization method.
Using this approach, they identified the differential expression of the
cell surface glycoprotein THY1, the gene for which maps to 11q23.3. The
expression of THY1 was found to be exclusive in the 2 nontumorigenic
clones as determined by Northern blot analysis at the mRNA level and by
immunocytochemistry and quantitative flow cytometry at the protein
expression level. Several genes related to cell growth and
differentiation were found to be upregulated in the nontumorigenic
clones, including THBS1 (188060), SPARC (182120), and fibronectin
(135600).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bonewald et al. (1984); Rettig et al. (1985); Rettig et al. (1985);
Tse et al. (1985)
REFERENCE 1. Abeysinghe, H. R.; Cao, Q.; Xu, J.; Pollock, S.; Veyberman, Y.;
Guckert, N. L.; Keng, P.; Wang, N.: THY1 expression is associated
with tumor suppression of human ovarian cancer. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 143:
125-132, 2003.

2. Ades, E. W.; Zwerner, R. K.; Acton, R. T.; Balch, C. M.: Isolation
and partial characterisation of the human homologue of Thy-1. J.
Exp. Med. 151: 400-406, 1980.

3. Bonewald, L.; Ades, E. W.; Tung, E.; Marchalonis, J. J.; Wang,
A. C.: Biochemical characterization of human Thy-1. J. Immunogenet. 11:
283-296, 1984.

4. Cao, Q.; Abeysinghe, H.; Chow, O.; Xu, J.; Kaung, H.-L.; Fong,
C.-T.; Keng, P.; Insel, R. A.; Lee, W.-C. M.; Barrett, J. C.; Wang,
N.: Suppression of tumorigenicity in human ovarian carcinoma cell
line SKOV-3 by microcell-mediated transfer of chromosome 11. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 129: 131-137, 2001.

5. Gatti, R. A.; Lathrop, G. M.; Salser, W.; Silver, J.; Lalouel,
J. M.; White, R.: Location of Thy-1 with respect to a primary linkage
map of chromosome 11q. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 618
only, 1987.

6. Gatti, R. A.; Shaked, R.; Wei, S.; Koyama, M.; Salser, W.; Silver,
J.: DNA polymorphism in the human Thy-1 gene. Hum. Immun. 22: 145-150,
1988.

7. Greenspan, R. J.; O'Brien, M. C.: Genetic evidence for the role
of Thy-1 in neurite outgrowth in the mouse. J. Neurogenet. 5: 25-36,
1989.

8. Grzeschik, K.-H.; Kazazian, H. H.: Report of the committee on
the genetic constitution of chromosomes 10, 11, and 12. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 179-205, 1985.

9. Hood, L.; Kronenberg, M.; Hunkapiller, T.: T cell antigen receptors
and the immunoglobulin supergene family. Cell 40: 225-229, 1985.

10. Letarte-Muirhead, M.; Barclay, A. N.; Williams, A. F.: Purification
of the Thy-1 molecule, a major cell surface glycoprotein of rat thymocytes. Biochem.
J. 151: 685-697, 1975.

11. Mansour, M. H.; Negm, H. I.; Cooper, E. L.: Thy-1 evolution. Dev.
Comp. Immun. 11: 3-15, 1987.

12. McKenzie, J. L.; Fabre, J. W.: Human Thy-1: unusual localization
and possible functional significance in lymphoid tissues. J. Immun. 126:
843-850, 1981.

13. Morris, R.: Thy-1 in developing nervous tissue. Dev. Neurosci. 7:
133-160, 1985.

14. Raff, M. C.: Surface antigenic markers for distinguishing T and
B lymphocytes in mice. Transplant. Rev. 6: 52-80, 1971.

15. Rettig, W. J.; Dracopoli, N. C.; Chesa, P. G.; Spengler, B. A.;
Beresford, H. R.; Davies, P.; Biedler, J. L.; Old, L. J.: Role of
human chromosome 11 in determining surface antigenic phenotype of
normal and malignant cells: somatic cell genetic analysis of eight
antigens, including putative human Thy-1. J. Exp. Med. 162: 1603-1619,
1985.

16. Rettig, W. J.; Dracopoli, N. C.; Silver, J.; Old, L. J.: Human
THY-1: regional mapping on chromosome 11 and comparison with other
chromosome 11-encoded cell surface glycoproteins. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 731 only, 1985.

17. Rettig, W. J.; Dracopoli, N. C.; Spengler, B. A.; Biedler, J.
L.; Old, L. J.: Somatic cell genetic analysis of human cell surface
antigens, including putative human Thy-1: eight distinct antigenic
systems controlled by chromosome 11. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40:
732 only, 1985.

18. Seki, T.; Spurr, N.; Obata, F.; Goyert, S.; Goodfellow, P.; Silver,
J.: The human Thy-1 gene: structure and chromosomal location. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 6657-6661, 1985.

19. Tse, A. G. D.; Barclay, A. N.; Watts, A.; Williams, A. F.: A
glycophospholipid tail at the carboxyl terminus of the Thy-1 glycoprotein
of neurons and thymocytes. Science 230: 1003-1008, 1985.

20. Tunnacliffe, A.; McGuire, R. S.: A physical linkage group in
human chromosome band 11q23 covering a region implicated in leukocyte
neoplasia. Genomics 8: 447-453, 1990.

21. van den Elsen, P.; Bruns, G.; Gerhard, D. S.; Pravtcheva, D.;
Jones, C.; Housman, D.; Ruddle, F. A.; Orkin, S.; Terhorst, C.: Assignment
of the gene coding for the T3-delta subunit of the T3--T-cell receptor
complex to the long arm of human chromosome 11 and to mouse chromosome
9. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 2920-2924, 1985.

22. van Rijs, J.; Giguere, V.; Hurst, J.; van Agthoven, T.; Geurts
van Kessel, A.; Goyert, S.; Grosveld, F.: Chromosomal localization
of the human Thy-1 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 5832-5835, 1985.

23. Williams, A. F.; Gagnon, J.: Neuronal cell Thy-1 glycoprotein:
homology with immunoglobulin. Science 216: 696-703, 1982.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED wwang: 06/15/2005
tkritzer: 9/17/2003
tkritzer: 9/15/2003
mark: 7/12/1995
davew: 7/18/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
carol: 5/5/1989

604515	TITLE *604515 B-CELL LINKER PROTEIN; BLNK
;;SH2 DOMAIN-CONTAINING LEUKOCYTE PROTEIN, 65-KD; SLP65;;
B CELL-SPECIFIC ADAPTOR PROTEIN; BASH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The BLNK gene encodes a B-cell linker protein. Linker or adaptor
proteins provide mechanisms by which receptors can amplify and regulate
downstream effector proteins. BLNK is essential for normal B-cell
development (Fu et al., 1998).

CLONING

Fu et al. (1998) identified a novel B-cell linker protein, which they
called BLNK. BLNK encodes a 456-amino acid polypeptide with basic,
acidic, proline-rich, and SH2 domains. An alternatively spliced product
called BLNK-S lacks basepairs 760 to 828 within the proline-rich domain.
The murine Blnk protein shares 82% identity with human BLNK. There
appeared to be no alternatively spliced form of mouse BLNK. BLNK shows
greatest homology to the SLP76 (601603) linker protein. BLNK mRNA is
predominantly expressed in the spleen, although some level of expression
can be seen in liver, kidney, and pancreas. Expression of BLNK proteins
was detected only in B-cell lines.

Wienands et al. (1998) independently cloned BLNK, which they called
SLP65.

GENE FUNCTION

Fu et al. (1998) showed that BLNK interfaces the B-cell receptor
(BCR)-associated SYK tyrosine kinase (600085) with PLC-gamma (172420),
the VAV guanine nucleotide exchange factor (164875), and the GRB2
(108355) and NCK (600508) adaptor proteins. Tyrosine phosphorylation of
BLNK by SYK provides docking sites for these SH2-containing effector
molecules that, in turn, permits the phosphorylation and/or activation
of their respective signaling pathways. Thus, BLNK represents a central
linker protein that bridges the B-cell receptor-associated kinases with
a multitude of signaling pathways and may regulate biologic outcomes of
B-cell function and development.

Ishiai et al. (1999) demonstrated that BLNK is essential in activating
phospholipase C (PLC)-gamma-2 (PLCG2; 600220) and JNK (601158). The
BCR-induced PLC-gamma-2 activation, but not the JNK activation, was
restored by introduction of a membrane-associated form of PLC-gamma-2
into BLNK-deficient B cells. As JNK activation requires both Rac1
(602048) and PLC-gamma-2, Ishiai et al. (1999) concluded that BLNK
regulates the Rac1-JNK pathway, in addition to modulating PLC-gamma-2
localization.

Jumaa et al. (2003) showed that the differentiation regulator SLP65
inhibits pre-B-cell leukemia in mice. Reconstitution of SLP65 expression
in an SLP65 -/- pre-B-cell line led to enhanced differentiation in vitro
and prevented the development of pre-B-cell leukemia in immune-deficient
mice. Tyrosine-96 of SLP65 was required for this activity. The murine
knockout SLP65 pre-B-cell leukemia resembles human childhood pre-B ALL.
Indeed, 16 of the 34 childhood pre-B ALL samples that were tested showed
a complete loss or drastic reduction of SLP65 expression. Jumaa et al.
(2003) suggested that this loss is probably due to the incorporation of
alternative exons into SLP65 transcripts, leading to premature stop
codons. Thus, Jumaa et al. (2003) concluded that the somatic loss of
SLP65 and the accompanying block in pre-B-cell differentiation might be
one of the primary causes of childhood pre-B ALL.

Taguchi et al. (2004) identified a pre-B ALL cell line lacking BLNK
expression in which stimulation of pre-BCR resulted in an absence of
phosphorylation of PLCG2 and an increase in intracellular calcium. In
contrast, activation of MAP kinase (see 602425) and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (see 601232) signaling was not affected. Taguchi et al. (2004)
concluded that BLNK is essential for PLCG2-induced calcium influx and
that BLNK-deficient cell lines may provide an in vitro model for
investigation of the role of BLNK in the pre-B-cell receptor-mediated
signaling mechanism.

Kohler et al. (2005) found that the leucine zipper in the highly
conserved N terminus of mouse Slp65 was essential for its association
with the plasma membrane. Mutation of critical leucines in the zipper
region abolished membrane association, as demonstrated by flow cytometry
and immunofluorescence microscopy.

Sprangers et al. (2006) identified defective SLP65 expression in 7 of 28
cases of pre-B lymphoblastic leukemia and 5 of 27 cases of B-cell
lymphoma. SLP65 deficiency correlated with RAG1 (179615)/RAG2 (179616)
expression and unremitting VH gene rearrangement activity.
Reconstitution of SLP65 expression in SLP65-deficient leukemia and
lymphoma cell lines resulted in RAG1/RAG2 downregulation and prevented
de novo VH-DJH rearrangements and secondary VH replacement. Sprangers et
al. (2006) concluded that iterative VH gene rearrangement represents a
frequent feature in B-lymphoid malignancy and can be attributed to SLP65
deficiency in many cases.

GENE STRUCTURE

The BLNK gene comprises 17 exons spread over about 65 kb of DNA
(Minegishi et al., 1999).

MAPPING

Minegishi et al. (1999) mapped the BLNK gene to chromosome 10q23.2 using
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a boy with agammaglobulinemia and absent B cells (AGM4; 613502),
Minegishi et al. (1999) identified a homozygous splice defect in the
BLNK gene (604515.0001). Although this patient had normal numbers of
pro-B cells, he had no pre-B cells or mature B cells, indicating that
BLNK plays a critical role in orchestrating the pro-B cell to pre-B cell
transition. The patient had developed recurrent otitis at 8 months of
age; after 2 episodes of pneumonia, he was evaluated for
immunodeficiency at 16 months of age. At that time, he had no detectable
serum IgG, IgM, or IgA, and he had less than 1% B cells in the
peripheral circulation. He was started on gammaglobulin replacement, and
between 2 and 20 years of age he did well except for chronic otitis and
sinusitis, hepatitis C acquired from intravenous gammaglobulin, and an
episode of protein-losing enteropathy in adolescence.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pappu et al. (1999) generated mice deficient in Blnk by targeted
disruption. B-cell development in Blnk -/- mice was blocked at the
transition from B220+CD43+ progenitor B to B220+CD43- precursor B cells.
Only a small percentage of IgM M++, but not mature IgM(lo)IgD(hi), B
cells were detected in the periphery. Pappu et al. (1999) concluded that
BLNK is an essential component of the BCR signaling pathways and is
required to promote B-cell development.

Flemming et al. (2003) showed that both wildtype and Slp65 -/- bone
marrow-derived B cells required IL7 (146660) for proliferation. In the
absence of IL7, or by the reintroduction of Slp65, many mutant cells
expressed surface IgM and downregulated the pre-BCR. Cells lacking both
the pre-BCR and Slp65 had severely reduced proliferative capacity due to
a requirement for pre-B-cell receptor signaling leading to Erk (see
MAPK1; 176948) activation and Slp65 -/- cell survival. Flemming et al.
(2003) also found that Slp65-deficient mice were significantly more
likely to develop pre-B-cell lymphoma and solid tumors than were
wildtype mice. The authors concluded that SLP65 acts as an efficient
tumor suppressor by accelerating the progression of cells through a
mutation-prone developmental stage.

Hayashi et al. (2004) showed that anti-DNA Ig knockin mice had impaired
BCR editing at multiple levels in the absence of Bash. Mice lacking Bash
also had excessive antibody responses to DNA carrier immunization.
Hayashi et al. (2004) concluded that BCR-signaled receptor editing
contributes to establishing B-cell tolerance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE (1 family)
BLNK, IVS1DS, A-T, +3

In a 20-year-old male with early-onset hypoglobulinemia and absent B
cells (613502), Minegishi et al. (1999) identified a homozygous
alteration of the first exon of the BLNK gene and its flanking intronic
sequence. Two noncontiguous basepair substitutions were identified. The
first was a C-to-A substitution of the third basepair position in codon
10, which encoded a silent proline substitution. The second alteration
was an A-to-T transversion at the +3 position of the splice donor site
for intron 1, 20 basepairs downstream from the alteration in codon 10.
SSCP analysis of DNA from 100 unrelated individuals did not reveal the
same pattern as that of the patient. Minegishi et al. (1999) derived
cDNA directly from this patient's bone marrow and used RT-PCR analysis
to examine the abundance of BLNK transcripts. No BLNK transcripts could
be amplified from the patient's bone marrow. The patient's mother and
father, who were heterozygous for both basepair substitutions in BLNK,
were healthy and had normal concentrations of serum immunoglobulins and
normal numbers of B cells. An older brother developed recurrent otitis
at 6 months of age and died at 16 months of age of pseudomonas sepsis
and neutropenia.

REFERENCE 1. Flemming, A.; Brummer, T.; Reth, M.; Jumaa, H.: The adaptor protein
SLP-65 acts as a tumor suppressor that limits pre-B cell expansion. Nature
Immun. 4: 38-43, 2003.

2. Fu, C.; Turck, C. W.; Kurosaki, T.; Chan, A. C.: BLNK: a central
linker protein in B cell activation. Immunity 9: 93-103, 1998.

3. Hayashi, K.; Nojima, T.; Goitsuka, R.; Kitamura, D.: Impaired
receptor editing in the primary B cell repertoire of BASH-deficient
mice. J. Immun. 173: 5980-5988, 2004.

4. Ishiai, M.; Kurosaki, M.; Pappu, R.; Okawa, K.; Ronko, I.; Fu,
C.; Shibata, M.; Iwamatsu, A.; Chan, A. C.; Kurosaki, T.: BLNK required
for cloning Syk to PLC-gamma-2 and Rac1-JNK in B cells. Immunity 10:
117-125, 1999.

5. Jumaa, H.; Bossaller, L.; Portugal, K.; Storch, B.; Lotz, M.; Flemming,
A.; Schrappe, M.; Postila, V.; Riikonen, P.; Pelkonen, J.; Niemeyer,
C. M.; Reth, M.: Deficiency of the adaptor SLP-65 in pre-B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Nature 423: 452-456, 2003.

6. Kohler, F.; Storch, B.; Kulathu, Y.; Herzog, S.; Kuppig, S.; Reth,
M.; Jumaa, H.: A leucine zipper in the N terminus confers membrane
association to SLP-65. Nature Immun. 6: 204-210, 2005.

7. Minegishi, Y.; Rohrer, J.; Coustan-Smith, E.; Lederman, H. M.;
Pappu, R.; Campana, D.; Chan, A. C.; Conley, M. E.: An essential
role for BLNK in human B cell development. Science 286: 1954-1957,
1999.

8. Pappu, R.; Cheng, A. M.; Li, B.; Gong, Q.; Chiu, C.; Griffin, N.;
White, M.; Sleckman, B. P.; Chan, A. C.: Requirement for B cell linker
protein (BLNK) in B cell development. Science 286: 1949-1954, 1999.

9. Sprangers, M.; Feldhahn, N.; Liedtke, S.; Jumaa, H.; Siebert, R.;
Muschen, M.: SLP65 deficiency results in perpetual V(D)J recombinase
activity in pre-B-lymphoblastic leukemia and B-cell lymphoma cells. Oncogene 25:
5180-5186, 2006.

10. Taguchi, T.; Kiyokawa, N.; Takenouch, H.; Matsui, J.; Tang, W.-R.;
Nakajima, H.; Suzuki, K.; Shiozawa, Y.; Saito, M.; Katagiri, Y. U.;
Takahashi, T.; Karasuyama, H.; Matsuo, Y.; Okita, H.; Fujimoto, J.
: Deficiency of BLNK hampers PLC-gamma-2 phosphorylation and Ca(2+)
influx induced by the pre-B-cell receptor in human pre-B cells. Immunology 112:
575-582, 2004.

11. Wienands, J.; Schweikert, J.; Wollscheid, B.; Jumaa, H.; Nielsen,
P. J.; Reth, M.: SLP-65: a new signaling component in B lymphocytes
which requires expression of the antigen receptor for phosphorylation. J.
Exp. Med. 188: 791-795, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/6/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/5/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/2/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/20/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 2/8/2000

EDITED carol: 05/01/2013
ckniffin: 5/1/2013
carol: 8/3/2010
ckniffin: 7/29/2010
mgross: 12/6/2006
joanna: 10/25/2006
mgross: 10/24/2006
terry: 10/5/2006
mgross: 5/4/2006
terry: 5/2/2006
mgross: 1/28/2005
joanna: 3/17/2004
alopez: 5/28/2003
terry: 5/28/2003
alopez: 1/9/2003
mgross: 11/20/2002
alopez: 7/18/2001
alopez: 2/8/2000

186780	TITLE *186780 CD247 ANTIGEN; CD247
;;CD3 ANTIGEN, ZETA SUBUNIT; CD3Z;;
CD3-ZETA;;
T-CELL ANTIGEN RECEPTOR COMPLEX, ZETA SUBUNIT OF CD3; TCRZ
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Weissman et al. (1986) used an antiserum raised against the mouse zeta
subunit of the T-cell antigen receptor to identify a previously
unrecognized component of the human T-cell antigen receptor. This human
protein is T-cell specific and biochemically similar to the murine zeta
polypeptide, which has a molecular weight of 16K. The zeta chain, which,
like the epsilon chain, is nonglycosylated, exists in the T-cell
receptor molecule as a disulfide-linked homodimer.

Weissman et al. (1988) cloned a cDNA encoding the zeta chain of the
murine T-cell antigen receptor. The predicted protein sequence suggested
a structure distinct from those of any of the previously described
receptor subunits.

As indicated by Clevers et al. (1988), the T-cell receptor alpha/beta
and gamma/delta heterodimers are noncovalently associated with the
CD3-gamma (186740), -delta (186790), -epsilon (186830), and -zeta
proteins, together forming the T-cell receptor-CD3 complex. Weissman et
al. (1988) used the cDNA for the murine zeta gene as a probe to isolate
cDNAs encoding the human CD3Z gene. Comparison of the human and murine
genes showed a high degree of conservation, including conservation in
the nucleotide sequence of the 5-prime and 3-prime untranslated regions.
No significant sequence and structural homology was found, however, with
the previously characterized invariant delta, gamma, and epsilon chains
of the T-cell receptor.

GENE FUNCTION

The zeta chain of the T-cell antigen receptor plays an important role in
coupling antigen recognition to several intracellular
signal-transduction pathways. Caplan et al. (1995) presented evidence
that the zeta chain, while expressed on the T-cell surface, is
associated with the cytoskeletal matrix. A 42-amino acid region in the
intracytoplasmic domain of the zeta chain proved crucial for maximal
interaction between zeta chain and the cytoskeleton.

CD4 (186940) binds to relatively invariant sites on class II major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules outside the peptide-binding
groove, which interacts with the T-cell receptor (TCR). CD4 enhances
T-cell sensitivity to antigen and binds to LCK (153390), which
phosphorylates CD3Z. Instead of clustering in a cap at the interface
with an antigen-presenting cell (APC), some signaling molecules involved
in T-cell recognition segregate into distinct areas to form a SMAC
(supramolecular activation cluster), contributing to the immunologic
synapse (see Grakoui et al. (1999)). Using T-cell lines transfected with
green fluorescent protein-fused CD4 or CD3Z and 3-dimensional video
microscopy, Krummel et al. (2000) showed that in response to
peptide-loaded APC, CD3Z and CD4 initially cluster in the contact area
between the T cell and APC coincident with intracellular calcium
mobilization. Stable immunologic synapse formation was modulated by
peptide concentration and compromised by blocking the calcium increase
or cytoskeletal rearrangement. The authors determined that CD3Z remains
at the center of the interface while CD4 moves to the periphery.
Blocking with anti-TCR prevented CD3Z accumulation and inhibited calcium
mobilization. The data suggested that instead of stabilizing TCR-MHC
complexes, CD4 functions to initiate or augment the early phase of
T-cell activation.

MAPPING

The CD3Z gene was localized by Weissman et al. (1988) to the centromeric
region of chromosome 1 by study of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization, emphasizing the fact that it is a distinct genetic
component of the T-cell receptor (the CD3D, CD3G, and CD3E genes are
clustered within 300 kb of each other on 11q23). The gene was assigned
to 1p22.1-q21.1. Baniyash et al. (1989) mapped the homologous gene in
the mouse to chromosome 1. Sturm et al. (1995) mapped the human OTF1
gene (164175) to 1q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The
physical linkage of the CD3Z gene to the OTF1 transcription unit
indicates that CD3Z is also located at 1q22-q23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006) described a 4-month-old boy with primary
T-cell immunodeficiency (610163) who was found to have a homozygous
germline Q70X mutation in the CD3Z gene (186780.0001). CD3-zeta is
necessary for the development and function of T cells. Some of the
patient's T cells had low levels of the T-cell receptor-CD3 complex and
carried the Q70X mutation on both alleles of the CD3Z gene, whereas
other T cells had normal levels of the complex and bore the Q70X
mutation on only 1 allele of CD3Z, plus 1 of 3 heterozygous somatic
mutations of CD3Z on the other allele (186780.0002-186780.0004),
allowing expression of poorly functional T-cell receptor-CD3 complexes.
Thus the patient had both inherited and somatic CD3Z mutations as the
basis of the T-cell deficiency.

Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006) noted that the finding of somatic mutations
of a germline mutation in the CD3Z gene recalled somatic mutations of
germline mutations of the adenosine deaminase gene (608958), the
interleukin-2 receptor gamma-c gene (IL2RG; 308380), the
recombination-activating gene-1 (RAG1; 179615), the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome protein (301000), and the NEMO gene (300248). These somatic
changes could cause the mutant gene to revert to a wildtype gene or to a
sequence compatible with expression of the corresponding protein. In the
patient of Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006), these somatic mutations occurring
in the initially mutated codon were probably not due to a mutation
hotspot related to genomic instability, since these variants were not
found in other cell types from the patient. Furthermore, the T cells
with normal levels of the T-cell receptor-CD3 complex were polyclonal,
and each of the 3 somatic variants of CD3Z was found in different
populations of T cells, each with a distinct rearrangement of V(beta)
genes. This result indicated that the somatic mutations in CD3Z probably
occurred before the VDJ recombination process in T-cell progenitors. The
somatic mutations partially corrected the CD3Z deficiency, providing an
example of the modulation of T-cell immunodeficiency by somatic
mutations and of the selection of clones with such mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Class I MHC molecules, known to be important for immune responses to
antigen, are expressed also by neurons that undergo activity-dependent,
long-term structural and synaptic modifications. Huh et al. (2000)
showed that in mice genetically deficient for cell surface class I MHC,
due to deletion of either TAP1 (170260) or beta-2-microglobulin
(109700), or for the class I MHC receptor component CD3Z, refinement of
connections between retina and central targets during development is
incomplete. In the hippocampus of adult mutants, N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor-dependent long-term potentiation is enhanced, and long-term
depression is absent. Specific class I MHC mRNAs are expressed by
distinct mosaics of neurons, reflecting a potential for diverse neuronal
functions. These results demonstrated an important role for these
molecules in the activity-dependent remodeling and plasticity of
connections in the developing and mature mammalian central nervous
system.

In mice chronically exposed to antigens of Porphyromonas gingivalis,
Bronstein-Sitton et al. (2003) observed that Ifng (147570)-dependent
Tcrz downregulation, due to lysosomal degradation, and impaired in vitro
T-cell function occurred in a way similar to that reported in a number
of infectious, autoimmune, and cancer pathologies. The in vitro findings
correlated with a deficient in vivo response, as assessed by reduced
immunity to influenza virus infection. Normal immune function and Tcrz
expression were regained after the cessation of chronic antigen
exposure.

By in situ hybridization of wildtype mouse retina, Xu et al. (2010)
showed that Cd3-zeta was preferentially expressed in the retinal
ganglion cell (RGC) layer. In Cd3-zeta -/- mice, the kinetics of RGC
dendritic elimination was markedly reduced, and the number of dendritic
protrusions was significantly increased during early postnatal
development. These defects could be mimicked in wildtype mice by
applying glutamate receptor (GLUR; see 138248) antagonists. Disruption
of RGC synaptic activity and dendritic motility was associated with a
failure of eye-specific segregation of RGC axon projections to the
central nervous system. Xu et al. (2010) concluded that CD3-zeta
regulates synaptic wiring and selectively impairs GLUR-mediated synaptic
activity in retina during development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DUE TO DEFECT IN CD3-ZETA
CD247, GLN70TER

In a 4-month-old boy of Caribbean origin with primary T-cell
immunodeficiency (610163), Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006) identified
homozygosity for a gln70-to-stop (Q70X) nonsense mutation in the CD3Z
gene. The premature stop codon was located within the first ITAM domain,
immediately upstream from the first YXXL motif, precluding expression of
all ITAM motifs and thus any interaction with the tyrosine kinase ZAP70
(176947). The boy's mother was heterozygous for the Q70X mutation. The
patient's other T cells had normal levels of the CD3 complex and bore
the Q70X mutation on only 1 allele of CD3Z, plus 1 of 3 heterozygous
somatic mutations of CD3Z on the other allele, allowing expression of
poorly functional T-cell receptor-CD3 complexes. The heterozygous
somatic mutations of CD3Z were Q70W (186780.0002), Q70L (186780), and
Q70Y (186780).

.0002
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DUE TO DEFECT IN CD3-ZETA, SOMATIC
CD3Z, GLN70TRP

Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006) described a child with primary T-cell
immunodeficiency (610163) who had a homozygous germline mutation (Q70X;
186780.0001) on some T cells, but on other T cells had heterozygosity
for the Q70X mutation in combination with 1 of 3 somatic mutations,
i.e., Q70W, Q70L (186780.0003), or Q70Y (186780.0004).

.0003
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DUE TO DEFECT IN CD3-ZETA, SOMATIC
CD3Z, GLN70LEU

Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006) described a child with primary T-cell
immunodeficiency (610163) who had a homozygous germline mutation (Q70X;
186780.0001) on some T cells, but on other T cells had heterozygosity
for the Q70X mutation in combination with 1 of 3 somatic mutations,
i.e., Q70W (186780.0002), Q70L, or Q70Y (186780.0004).

.0004
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DUE TO DEFECT IN CD3-ZETA, SOMATIC
CD3Z, GLN70TYR

Rieux-Laucat et al. (2006) described a child with primary T-cell
immunodeficiency (610163) who had a homozygous germline mutation (Q70X;
186780.0001) on some T cells, but on other T cells had heterozygosity
for the Q70X mutation in combination with 1 of 3 somatic mutations,
i.e., Q70W (186780.0002), Q70L (186780.0003), or Q70Y.

REFERENCE 1. Baniyash, M.; Hsu, V. W.; Seldin, M. F.; Klausner, R. D.: The
isolation and characterization of the murine T cell antigen receptor
zeta chain gene. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 13252-13257, 1989.

2. Bronstein-Sitton, N.; Cohen-Daniel, L.; Vaknin, I.; Ezernitchi,
A. V.; Leshem, B.; Halabi, A.; Houri-Hadad, Y.; Greenbaum, E.; Zakay-Rones,
Z.; Shapira, L.; Baniyash, M.: Sustained exposure to bacterial antigen
induces interferon-gamma-dependent T cell receptor zeta down-regulation
and impaired T cell function. Nature Immun. 4: 957-964, 2003.

3. Caplan, S.; Zeliger, S.; Wang, L.; Baniyash, M.: Cell-surface-expressed
T-cell antigen-receptor epsilon chain is associated with the cytoskeleton. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 4768-4772, 1995.

4. Clevers, H.; Alarcon, B.; Wileman, T.; Terhorst, C.: The T cell
receptor/CD3 complex: a dynamic protein ensemble. Annu. Rev. Immun. 6:
629-662, 1988.

5. Grakoui, A.; Bromley, S. K.; Sumen, C.; Davis, M. M.; Shaw, A.
S.; Allen, P. M.; Dustin, M. L.: The immunological synapse: a molecular
machine controlling T cell activation. Science 285: 221-227, 1999.

6. Huh, G. S.; Boulanger, L. M.; Du, H.; Riquelme, P. A.; Brotz, T.
M.; Shatz, C. J.: Functional requirement for class I MHC in CNS development
and plasticity. Science 290: 2155-2159, 2000.

7. Krummel, M. F.; Sjaastad, M. D.; Wulfing, C.; Davis, M. M.: Differential
clustering of CD4 and CD3-zeta during T cell recognition. Science 289:
1349-1352, 2000.

8. Rieux-Laucat, F.; Hivroz, C.; Lim, A.; Mateo, V.; Pellier, I.;
Selz, F.; Fischer, A.; Le Deist, F.: Inherited and somatic CD3-zeta
mutations in a patient with T-cell deficiency. New Eng. J. Med. 354:
1913-1921, 2006.

9. Sturm, R. A.; Eyre, H. J.; Baker, E.; Sutherland, G. R.: The human
OTF1 locus which overlaps the CD3Z gene is located at 1q22-q23. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 68: 231-232, 1995.

10. Weissman, A. M.; Baniyash, M.; Hou, D.; Samelson, L. E.; Burgess,
W. H.; Klausner, R. D.: Molecular cloning of the zeta chain of the
T cell antigen receptor. Science 239: 1018-1021, 1988.

11. Weissman, A. M.; Hou, D.; Orloff, D. G.; Modi, W. S.; Seuanez,
H.; O'Brien, S. J.; Klausner, R. D.: Molecular cloning and chromosomal
localization of the human T-cell receptor zeta chain: distinction
from the molecular CD3 complex. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 9709-9713,
1988.

12. Weissman, A. M.; Samelson, L. E.; Klausner, R. D.: A new subunit
of the human T-cell antigen receptor complex. Nature 324: 480-482,
1986.

13. Xu, H.; Chen, H.; Ding, Q.; Xie, Z.-H.; Chen, L.; Diao, L.; Wang,
P.; Gan, L.; Crair, M. C.; Tian, N.: The immune protein CD3-zeta
is required for normal development of neural circuits in the retina. Neuron 65:
503-515, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/14/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/24/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/5/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/24/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/7/1987

EDITED mgross: 06/20/2011
terry: 6/14/2011
terry: 8/24/2006
carol: 6/7/2006
terry: 5/24/2006
alopez: 10/16/2003
mgross: 10/3/2003
carol: 1/5/2001
carol: 8/29/2000
mgross: 8/24/2000
psherman: 8/24/1999
mark: 4/19/1997
mark: 6/16/1995
mimadm: 5/10/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 7/13/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

609211	TITLE *609211 MYOSIN, LIGHT CHAIN 12B, REGULATORY; MYL12B
;;MYOSIN REGULATORY LIGHT CHAIN 2; MRLC2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The activity of nonmuscle myosin II (see MYH9; 160775) is regulated by
phosphorylation of a regulatory light chain, such as MRLC2. This
phosphorylation results in higher MgATPase activity and the assembly of
myosin II filaments (Iwasaki et al., 2001).

CLONING

Grant et al. (1990) cloned MRLC2 from a placenta cDNA library. The
deduced protein contains 171 amino acids.

Using primers designed from chicken Mrlc, Iwasaki et al. (2001)
amplified MRLC2 from a HeLa cell cDNA library. The deduced 172-amino
acid protein contains thr18 and ser19, which are conserved
phosphorylation sites in myosin regulatory light chains.

GENE FUNCTION

Diphosphorylation of MRLCs on thr18 and ser19 results in higher MgATPase
activity and myosin filament formation than monophosphorylation at ser19
in vitro. By site-directed mutagenesis, Iwasaki et al. (2001) created
MRLC2 mutants that mimicked diphosphorylated, monophosphorylated, and
unphosphorylated forms of MRLC2. Overexpression of the diphosphorylated
form, and to a lesser degree the monophosphorylated form, caused the
formation of a large number of actin filament bundles in transfected
HeLa cells. Overexpression of the unphosphorylated form caused a
decrease in the number of actin filament bundles. Immunolocalization of
the mutant proteins in dividing cells revealed colocalization of the 2
phosphorylated forms with actin filaments in the peripheral region and
with the contractile ring, while the unphosphorylated form localized
diffusely throughout the cytoplasm. Iwasaki et al. (2001) concluded that
phosphorylation of MRLC2 is required for organization of stress fibers
in interphase cells and the contractile ring in dividing cells. They
suggested that diphosphorylated MRLC may be more effective in organizing
actin filaments than monophosphorylated MRLC.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MYL12B
gene to chromosome 18 (TMAP SHGC-12353).

REFERENCE 1. Grant, J. W.; Zhong, R. Q.; McEwen, P. M.; Church, S. L.: Human
nonsarcomeric 20,000 Da myosin regulatory light chain cDNA. Nucleic
Acids Res. 18: 5892 only, 1990.

2. Iwasaki, T.; Murata-Hori, M.; Ishitobi, S.; Hosoya, H.: Diphosphorylated
MRLC is required for organization of stress fibers in interphase cells
and the contractile ring in dividing cells. Cell Struct. Func. 26:
677-683, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/18/2005

EDITED alopez: 06/25/2009
mgross: 2/18/2005

606918	TITLE *606918 GOLGI AUTOANTIGEN, GOLGIN SUBFAMILY A, 5; GOLGA5
;;GOLGIN 84;;
RET-FUSED GENE 5; RFG5
PTC5 CHIMERIC ONCOGENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Coiled-coil proteins on the Golgi surface are of the resident and
transient types. These proteins maintain Golgi structure and participate
in budding transport, tethering, and docking of vesicles. GOLGB1
(602500), for example, tethers coatamer complex I vesicles to the Golgi,
facilitating vesicle transport within the Golgi stack. GOLGA5 is another
coiled-coil protein on the Golgi surface.

CLONING

By screening a sigmoid colon cancer cDNA library, Ishizaka et al. (1989)
identified a cDNA encoding a RET (164761) fusion product that they
designated RET-II. The predicted RET-II fusion protein has 899 amino
acids. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 2.8-kb transcript
in various cell lines.

By RT-PCR screening of papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTCs; 188550) of 2
patients exposed to radioactive fallout after the Chernobyl nuclear
power plant disaster, followed by 5-prime RACE, Klugbauer et al. (1998)
identified a RET rearrangement, PTC5, involving fusion of the RET
tyrosine kinase domain to RFG5. The PTC5 rearrangement is identical to
RET-II. EST database analysis identified what the authors considered to
be the full-length RFG5 sequence. The predicted 585-amino acid RFG5
protein has 4 coiled-coil domains in its middle and C-terminal portions,
but no transmembrane domain. Northern blot analysis detected expression
of a 2.8-kb transcript in all tissues tested. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed stronger expression of the PTC5 fusion protein in
thyroid tumor cells compared with normal cells.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a brain cDNA library with OCRL1 (300535)
as the probe, Bascom et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding GOLGA5,
which they called golgin-84. GOLGA5 is identical to RFG5. The deduced
731-amino acid coiled-coil, type II transmembrane protein has no signal
sequence and a cytoplasmic N terminus. Western blot analysis showed
expression of an 84-kD protein in fibroblast lysates, with greatest
abundance in mouse testis. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated
strongest expression in seminiferous tubules and Leydig cells in a
juxtanuclear Golgi localization. Double-label immunofluorescence
microscopy and brefeldin A treatment confirmed the Golgi localization.
Bascom et al. (1999) suggested that GOLGA5 plays a role in vesicle
tethering and docking.

GENE FUNCTION

Malsam et al. (2005) characterized the golgin-84-CASP (116896) tether.
The vesicles bound by this tether were strikingly different from those
bound by the p115 (603344)-golgin tether in that they lacked members of
the p24 family of putative cargo receptors and contained enzymes instead
of anterograde cargo. Microinjected golgin-84 or CASP also inhibited
Golgi-enzyme transport to the endoplasmic reticulum, further implicating
this tether in retrograde transport.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Bascom et al. (1999) mapped the GOLGA5 gene to
chromosome 14q.

REFERENCE 1. Bascom, R. A.; Srinivasan, S.; Nussbaum, R. L.: Identification
and characterization of golgin-84, a novel Golgi integral membrane
protein with a cytoplasmic coiled-coil domain. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
2953-2962, 1999. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem 274: 12950 only, 1999.

2. Ishizaka, Y.; Ochiai, M.; Tahira, T.; Sugimura, T.; Nagao, M.:
Activation of the ret-II oncogene without a sequence encoding a transmembrane
domain and transforming activity of two ret-II oncogene products differing
in carboxy-termini due to alternative splicing. Oncogene 4: 789-794,
1989. Note: Erratum: Oncogene 4: 1415 only, 1989.

3. Klugbauer, S.; Demidchik, E. P.; Lengfelder, E.; Rabes, H. M.:
Detection of a novel type of RET rearrangement (PTC5) in thyroid carcinomas
after Chernobyl and analysis of the involved RET-fused gene RFG5. Cancer
Res. 58: 198-203, 1998.

4. Malsam, J.; Satoh, A.; Pelletier, L.; Warren, G.: Golgin tethers
define subpopulations of COPI vesicles. Science 307: 1095-1098,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/8/2002

EDITED terry: 06/06/2012
alopez: 2/21/2006
terry: 2/10/2006
alopez: 4/18/2005
mgross: 5/8/2002

600405	TITLE *600405 REPLICATION FACTOR C, SUBUNIT 3; RFC3
;;RFC, 38-KD SUBUNIT;;
RFC5, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION See replication factor C, subunit 2 (RFC2; 600404).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Bowman et al. (2004) reported the crystal structure of the 5-protein
clamp loader complex (replication factor-C, RFC) of the yeast S.
cerevisiae, bound to the sliding clamp (proliferating cell nuclear
antigen, or PCNA; 176740). Tight interfacial coordination of the ATP
analog ATP-gamma-S by RFC resulted in a spiral arrangement of the ATPase
domains of the clamp loader above the PCNA ring. Placement of a model
for primed DNA within the central hole of PCNA revealed a striking
correspondence between the RFC spiral and the grooves of the DNA double
helix. Bowman et al. (2004) concluded that this model, in which the
clamp loader complex locks into primed DNA in a screwcap-like
arrangement, provides a simple explanation for the process by which the
engagement of primer-template junctions by the RFC:PCNA complex results
in ATP hydrolysis and release of the sliding clamp on DNA.

MAPPING

Okumura et al. (1995) mapped the RFC3 gene to 13q12.3-q13 by PCR
amplification of DNAs from a panel of somatic hybrids and by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Bowman, G. D.; O'Donnell, M.; Kuriyan, J.: Structural analysis
of a eukaryotic sliding DNA clamp-clamp loader complex. Nature 429:
724-730, 2004.

2. Okumura, K.; Nogami, M.; Taguchi, H.; Dean, F. B.; Chen, M.; Pan,
Z.-Q.; Hurwitz, J.; Shiratori, A.; Murakami, Y.; Ozawa, K.; Eki, T.
: Assignment of the 36.5-kDa (RFC5), 37-kDa (RFC4), 38-kDa (RFC3),
and 40-kDa (RFC2) subunit genes of human replication factor C to chromosome
bands 12q24.2-q24.3, 3q27, 13q12.3-q13, and 7q11.23. Genomics 25:
274-278, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1995

EDITED wwang: 01/12/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
terry: 12/29/2009
alopez: 6/22/2004
terry: 6/22/2004
terry: 10/6/1998
carol: 2/13/1995

613846	TITLE *613846 TECTONIC FAMILY, MEMBER 2; TCTN2
;;TECTONIC 2; TECT2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to TCTN1 (609863), Reiter
and Skarnes (2006) identified mouse and human TCTN2 and TCTN3 (613847).
The deduced mouse Tctn2 protein contains 700 amino acids. It has an
N-terminal signal peptide and a C-terminal transmembrane domain that is
conserved in Drosophila tectonic.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the TCTN2 gene to chromosome 12q24.31 based on an
alignment of the TCTN2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK023037) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Shaheen et al. (2011) performed RT-PCR to quantitate expression of Tctn2
in various mouse adult tissues. Tctn2 expression was identified in all
tissues, with significant expression in brain, kidney, and eye, organs
affected by the MKS phenotype. Studies of developmental expression in
the mouse detected significant expression at embryonic day 8.5 in the
neural tube, most notably in the rhombomere of the future hindbrain. By
embryonic day 10.5, Tctn2 mRNA was found throughout the mouse brain, the
length of the neural tube, and the growing edge of the limb buds, heart,
and eye. Furthermore, strong Tctn2 expression was observed in kidney
from embryonic day 14.5 mouse embryo.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Shaheen et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a splice site mutation
in the TCTN2 gene (613846.0001) in a family segregating Meckel-Gruber
syndrome-8 (MKS8; 613885).

ANIMAL MODEL

Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) found that Tctn2-null mouse embryos lacked
nodal cilia, and that cilia in neural tubes were scarce and
morphologically defective and failed to elongate axonemes. However,
basal bodies docked normally to the plasma membrane. Cilia numbers were
reduced in the limb bud mesenchyme, but cilia appeared normal. The
findings were similar to those of Tctn1 (609863)-null mice, indicating a
common function, and showed that Tctn1 and Tctn2 affect ciliogenesis in
a tissue-specific manner. Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) also demonstrated
that Tctn2 and Tctn1 interact with other proteins in a large complex
localized to the transition zone between the ciliary axoneme and the
basal body.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 8
TCTN2, IVS13, A-G, -2

In affected members of a consanguineous Arab family with Meckel-Gruber
syndrome (MKS8; 613885), Shaheen et al. (2011) identified homozygosity
for a splice site mutation in the TCTN2 gene at the -2 position of exon
14 (1506-2A-G) that disrupted splicing and created 2 aberrant
transcripts. The first transcript introduces 104 basepairs from intron
13-14 and would delete 196 original amino acids, introduce 2 novel amino
acids, and prematurely truncate the 697-amino acid protein at residue
504. The second transcript lacks exon 14 and would delete 195 original
amino acids, introduce 4 novel amino acids, and prematurely truncate the
protein at residue 507. The mutation segregated with the disease in the
family and was not observed in 192 ethnically matched controls.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Gonzalo, F. R.; Corbit, K. C.; Sirerol-Piquer, M. S.; Ramaswami,
G.; Otto, E. A.; Noriega, T. R.; Seol, A. D.; Robinson, J. F.; Bennett,
C. L.; Josifova, D. J.; Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.; Katsanis, N.; Hildebrandt,
F.; Reiter, J. F.: A transition zone complex regulates mammalian
ciliogenesis and ciliary membrane composition. Nature Genet. 43:
776-784, 2011.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/29/2011.

3. Reiter, J. F.; Skarnes, W. C.: Tectonic, a novel regulator of
the Hedgehog pathway required for both activation and inhibition. Genes
Dev. 20: 22-27, 2006.

4. Shaheen, R.; Faqeih, E.; Seidahmed, M. Z.; Sunker, A.; Alali, F.
E.; AlQahtani, K.; Alkuraya, F. S.: A TCTN2 mutation defines a novel
Meckel Gruber syndrome locus. Hum. Mutat. 32: 573-578, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/29/2011

EDITED alopez: 08/23/2011
ckniffin: 8/18/2011
carol: 6/22/2011
terry: 4/26/2011
alopez: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/8/2011
mgross: 3/29/2011

613846	TITLE *613846 TECTONIC FAMILY, MEMBER 2; TCTN2
;;TECTONIC 2; TECT2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to TCTN1 (609863), Reiter
and Skarnes (2006) identified mouse and human TCTN2 and TCTN3 (613847).
The deduced mouse Tctn2 protein contains 700 amino acids. It has an
N-terminal signal peptide and a C-terminal transmembrane domain that is
conserved in Drosophila tectonic.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the TCTN2 gene to chromosome 12q24.31 based on an
alignment of the TCTN2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK023037) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Shaheen et al. (2011) performed RT-PCR to quantitate expression of Tctn2
in various mouse adult tissues. Tctn2 expression was identified in all
tissues, with significant expression in brain, kidney, and eye, organs
affected by the MKS phenotype. Studies of developmental expression in
the mouse detected significant expression at embryonic day 8.5 in the
neural tube, most notably in the rhombomere of the future hindbrain. By
embryonic day 10.5, Tctn2 mRNA was found throughout the mouse brain, the
length of the neural tube, and the growing edge of the limb buds, heart,
and eye. Furthermore, strong Tctn2 expression was observed in kidney
from embryonic day 14.5 mouse embryo.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Shaheen et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a splice site mutation
in the TCTN2 gene (613846.0001) in a family segregating Meckel-Gruber
syndrome-8 (MKS8; 613885).

ANIMAL MODEL

Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) found that Tctn2-null mouse embryos lacked
nodal cilia, and that cilia in neural tubes were scarce and
morphologically defective and failed to elongate axonemes. However,
basal bodies docked normally to the plasma membrane. Cilia numbers were
reduced in the limb bud mesenchyme, but cilia appeared normal. The
findings were similar to those of Tctn1 (609863)-null mice, indicating a
common function, and showed that Tctn1 and Tctn2 affect ciliogenesis in
a tissue-specific manner. Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) also demonstrated
that Tctn2 and Tctn1 interact with other proteins in a large complex
localized to the transition zone between the ciliary axoneme and the
basal body.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 8
TCTN2, IVS13, A-G, -2

In affected members of a consanguineous Arab family with Meckel-Gruber
syndrome (MKS8; 613885), Shaheen et al. (2011) identified homozygosity
for a splice site mutation in the TCTN2 gene at the -2 position of exon
14 (1506-2A-G) that disrupted splicing and created 2 aberrant
transcripts. The first transcript introduces 104 basepairs from intron
13-14 and would delete 196 original amino acids, introduce 2 novel amino
acids, and prematurely truncate the 697-amino acid protein at residue
504. The second transcript lacks exon 14 and would delete 195 original
amino acids, introduce 4 novel amino acids, and prematurely truncate the
protein at residue 507. The mutation segregated with the disease in the
family and was not observed in 192 ethnically matched controls.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Gonzalo, F. R.; Corbit, K. C.; Sirerol-Piquer, M. S.; Ramaswami,
G.; Otto, E. A.; Noriega, T. R.; Seol, A. D.; Robinson, J. F.; Bennett,
C. L.; Josifova, D. J.; Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.; Katsanis, N.; Hildebrandt,
F.; Reiter, J. F.: A transition zone complex regulates mammalian
ciliogenesis and ciliary membrane composition. Nature Genet. 43:
776-784, 2011.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/29/2011.

3. Reiter, J. F.; Skarnes, W. C.: Tectonic, a novel regulator of
the Hedgehog pathway required for both activation and inhibition. Genes
Dev. 20: 22-27, 2006.

4. Shaheen, R.; Faqeih, E.; Seidahmed, M. Z.; Sunker, A.; Alali, F.
E.; AlQahtani, K.; Alkuraya, F. S.: A TCTN2 mutation defines a novel
Meckel Gruber syndrome locus. Hum. Mutat. 32: 573-578, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/29/2011

EDITED alopez: 08/23/2011
ckniffin: 8/18/2011
carol: 6/22/2011
terry: 4/26/2011
alopez: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/8/2011
mgross: 3/29/2011

612352	TITLE *612352 STAM-BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE 1; STAMBPL1
;;AMSH-LIKE PROTEIN; AMSHLP;;
AMSH-FAMILY PROTEIN; AMSHFP;;
KIAA1373
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned STAMBPL1, which they designated
KIAA1373. The cDNA contains several repetitive elements in its 3-prime
end, and the deduced 463-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with AMSH (STAMBP; 606247). RT-PCR ELISA revealed highest
STAMBPL1 expression in testis and ovary, with much lower expression in
whole adult brain. Among specific adult brain regions, STAMBPL1 was
detected in cerebellum only.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to AMSH, followed by
screening an activated peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA library, Kikuchi
et al. (2003) cloned STAMBPL1, which they called AMSHLP. The deduced
436-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 49.8 kD.
AMSHLP contains a putative nuclear localization signal, a sequence
similar to an SH3-binding motif, and an MPN (MPR, see 154540; PAD1,
607173; N-terminal) domain that includes a JAMM (JAB1, 604850/MPN domain
metalloenzyme) motif. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.5-kb AMSHLP
transcript in all human tissues examined, with highest expression in
testis. Minor transcripts of 5.3 and 5.5 kb were expressed in spleen and
weakly in thymus and heart. Western blot analysis detected a 50-kD
protein in all mouse and human cell lines examined. In transfected COS-7
cells, fluorescence-tagged AMSHLP was expressed diffusely in the
cytoplasm and in a punctate pattern surrounding the nuclear membrane.

Kitajima et al. (2003) cloned 2 splice variants of mouse Stambpl1, which
they called Amshfp-alpha and Amshfp-beta. Full-length Amshfp-alpha
contains 437 amino acids, while Amshfp-beta lacks the 166 N-terminal
amino acids present in Amshfp-alpha. Northern blot analysis detected
highest Amshfp-alpha expression in thymus, weaker expression in brain,
lung, spleen, stomach, intestine, colon, and ovary, and none in other
mouse tissues examined. Amshfp-beta was detected in testis only. In situ
hybridization showed that Amshfp-beta expression in adult mouse testis
was restricted to the haploid stage of testicular germ cells. No
Amshfp-beta expression was detected in juvenile or infertile mouse
testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Kikuchi et al. (2003) found that both the nuclear localization signal
and the MPN domain of AMSHLP are required for its nuclear localization.
Like AMSH, AMSHLP enhanced the activity of a MYC (190080) reporter gene
in response to IL2 (147680) stimulation in transfected mouse pre-B
cells. However, unlike AMSH, AMSHLP was unable to bind STAM family (see
601899) proteins.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Sato et al. (2008) reported the crystal structure of human AMSHLP DUB
(deubiquitinating enzyme) domain alone and in complex with a
lys63-linked diubiquitin at 1.2-angstrom and 1.6-angstrom resolutions,
respectively. The AMSHLP DUB domain consists of a zinc ion-coordinating
catalytic core and 2 characteristic insertions, Ins1 and Ins2. The
distal ubiquitin interacts with Ins1 and the core, whereas the proximal
ubiquitin interacts with Ins2 and the core. The core and Ins1 form a
catalytic groove that accommodates the lys63 side chain of the proximal
ubiquitin and the isopeptide-linked carboxy-terminal tail of the distal
ubiquitin.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the STAMBPL1
gene to chromosome 10. Kikuchi et al. (2003) mapped the STAMBPL1 gene to
chromosome 10q23 by genomic sequence analysis.

Kitajima et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Stambpl1 gene to chromosome
19C1.

REFERENCE 1. Kikuchi, K.; Ishii, N.; Asao, H.; Sugamura, K.: Identification
of AMSH-LP containing a Jab1/MPN domain metalloenzyme motif. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 306: 637-643, 2003.

2. Kitajima, K.; Matsumoto, K.; Tahara, M.; Takahashi, H.; Nakamura,
T.; Nakamura, T.: A newly identified AMSH-family protein is specifically
expressed in haploid stages of testicular germ cells. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 309: 135-142, 2003.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

4. Sato, Y.; Yoshikawa, A.; Yamagata, A.; Mimura, H.; Yamashita, M.;
Ookata, K.; Nureki, O.; Iwai, K.; Komada, M.; Fukai, S.: Structural
basis for specific cleavage of lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains. Nature 455:
358-362, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature 456: 274 only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/24/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/24/2008

EDITED alopez: 07/08/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
alopez: 10/24/2008

605306	TITLE *605306 C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 4, MEMBER A; CLEC4A
;;LECTIN, C-TYPE, SUPERFAMILY MEMBER 6; CLECSF6;;
DENDRITIC CELL IMMUNORECEPTOR; DCIR;;
LECTIN-LIKE IMMUNORECEPTOR; LLIR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dendritic cells (DCs) are sentinel leukocytes that take up and present
carbohydrate-bearing antigens by means of specialized surface receptors.
Type I calcium-dependent (C-type) lectin receptors, including macrophage
mannose receptor (MMR, or MRC1; 153618) and DEC205 (LY75; 604524),
possess multiple calcium-dependent extracellular carbohydrate
recognition domains (CRDs) in their N termini. A second family of C-type
lectins are type II proteins that have only 1 CRD at the C-terminal end,
such as the asialoglycoprotein receptors (ASPGRs; see 108360). By
searching an EST database for sequences in DC libraries with a motif
shared by the ASPGRs as the probe, Bates et al. (1999) identified a cDNA
encoding CLEC4A, which they called DCIR. The deduced 237-amino acid DCIR
transmembrane protein, which is 54% identical and 65% homologous to the
mouse sequence, lacks a signal sequence but contains a single CRD, a
double-cysteine motif at the start of the lectin domain, a potential
N-glycosylation site, and a 49-amino acid intracellular immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM). Northern blot analysis detected
strongest expression of 1.3- and 1.5-kb DCIR transcripts in peripheral
blood leukocytes, with moderate expression in spleen, lymph node, and
bone marrow, and lower expression in thymus, spinal cord, and trachea;
expression was not detected in any other tissues tested. RT-PCR analysis
showed that expression of DCIR was restricted to myelomonocytic cells
and nonactivated B cells, but not other circulating lymphocytes.
Immunohistologic analysis demonstrated that DCIR was expressed in tonsil
between the epithelium and around B-cell follicles, but not in germinal
centers.

Using subtractive cloning of a dendritic cell cDNA library and RACE,
Huang et al. (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding CLEC4A, which they termed
LLIR. RT-PCR analysis identified 2 splice variants, both of which lack
the transmembrane domain but retain the CRD. Western blot analysis
showed expression of a 60-kD protein in dendritic cells, B-cell lines,
and monocytoid lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analyses, Huang et al. (2001)
showed that the ITIM of CLEC4A could recruit SHP1 (PTPN6; 176883).

Using DCIR-specific small interfering RNA and a polyclonal antibody for
the carbohydrate recognition domain of DCIR, Lambert et al. (2008)
showed that DCIR, like other C-type lectin receptors, was a ligand for
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 (see 609423) and participated in
viral capture and transmission. DCIR-mediated transmission of HIV-1 was
due to intracellular storage of intact virions and also de novo virus
production by dendritic cells.

MAPPING

Using Southern blot and radiation hybrid panel analysis, Bates et al.
(1999) mapped the single-copy DCIR gene to chromosome 12p13, near the
natural killer cell gene complex.

REFERENCE 1. Bates, E. E. M.; Fournier, N.; Garcia, E.; Valladeau, J.; Durand,
I.; Pin, J.-J.; Zurawski, S. M.; Patel, S.; Abrams, J. S.; Lebecque,
S.; Garrone, P.; Saeland, S.: APCs express DCIR, a novel C-type lectin
surface receptor containing an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motif. J. Immun. 163: 1973-1983, 1999.

2. Huang, X.; Yuan, Z.; Chen, G.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, W.; Yu, Y.; Cao,
X.: Cloning and characterization of a novel ITIM containing lectin-like
immunoreceptor LLIR and its two transmembrane region deletion variants. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 281: 131-140, 2001.

3. Lambert, A. A.; Gilbert, C.; Richard, M.; Beaulieu, A. D.; Tremblay,
M. J.: The C-type lectin surface receptor DCIR acts as a new attachment
factor for HIV-1 in dendritic cells and contributes to trans- and
cis-infection pathways. Blood 112: 1299-1307, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/20/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/10/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/29/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/26/2009
terry: 1/20/2009
mgross: 3/16/2006
mgross: 5/10/2001
carol: 2/2/2001
mgross: 9/29/2000

608428	TITLE *608428 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XXVIC, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP26C1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Retinoids are potent regulators of cell proliferation, cell
differentiation, and morphogenesis. CYP26 family members, such as
CYP26C1, catabolize all-trans retinoic acid (RA) and contribute to the
control of RA levels in tissues and cells.

CLONING

By searching for genomic sequences similar to CYP26 family members,
followed by RT-PCR of adrenal mRNA, Taimi et al. (2004) cloned CYP26C1.
The deduced 522-amino acid protein contains a heme thiolate benchmark
motif characteristic of all cytochrome p450s. CYP26C1 shares 43% amino
acid identity with CYP26A1 (602239) and 51% amino acid identity with
CYP26B1 (605207). PCR analysis detected CYP26C1 expression in most
tissues at low levels.

GENE STRUCTURE

Taimi et al. (2004) determined that the CYP26C1 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Taimi et al. (2004) mapped the CYP26C1
gene to chromosome 10, within 13 kb of the CYP26A1 gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Taimi et al. (2004) found that expression of CYP26C1 in a keratinocyte
cell line increased approximately 15- and 50-fold following induction
with all-trans RA and 9-cis RA, respectively. Transiently transfected
cells expressing CYP26C1 converted all-trans RA to polar water-soluble
metabolites similar to those generated by CYP26A1 and CYP26B1; however,
CYP26C1 also recognized and metabolized 9-cis RA. CYP26C1 was much less
sensitive than the other CYP26 enzymes to inhibition with ketoconazole.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a sister and brother with focal facial dermal dysplasia (FFDD4;
614974) who were negative for mutation in the TWIST2 gene (607556),
Slavotinek et al. (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for a
duplication and a missense mutation in the CYP26C1 gene (608428.0001 and
608428.0002, respectively). Sanger sequencing in 12 more FFDD patients
revealed 3 patients with FFDD4 who were homozygous for the CYP26C1
duplication. Both mutations were shown to cause CYP26C1 loss of function
by in vitro expression studies.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FOCAL FACIAL DERMAL DYSPLASIA 4
CYP26C1, 7-BP DUP, NT844

In a sister and brother with focal facial dermal dysplasia-4 (FFDD4;
614974), Slavotinek et al. (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for
a 7-bp tandem duplication (844_851dupCCATGCA) in exon 4 of the CYP26C1
gene, causing a frameshift predicted to result in the incorporation of
128 different amino acids from wildtype residue 284 and then premature
termination before residue 412, and a 1433A-G transition in exon 6 that
results in an arg478-to-his (R478H; 608428.0002) substitution within the
L-helix domain. Their unaffected parents were each heterozygous for 1 of
the mutations, neither of which was found in 2 unaffected sibs.
Sequencing revealed homozygosity for the 7-bp duplication in 3
additional FFDD4 patients: a previously unreported Belgian girl, as well
as a Flemish girl and a Norwegian boy who were originally described by
Prescott et al. (2006). The R478H mutation was not found in the Exome
Variant Server containing data from more than 10,000 individuals.
However, the duplication, which was not present in the dbSNP or 1000
Genomes databases or in 200 control chromosomes of Hispanic ethnicity,
was detected in 1 (0.4%) of 318 Caucasian chromosomes and in 1 (0.3%) of
236 chromosomes from individuals with eye or diaphragmatic birth
defects, for an overall frequency of 2 (0.3%) in 754 chromosomes,
suggesting that the FFDD4 phenotype might be nonpenetrant or
underascertained. Transfection studies in COS-1 cells demonstrated that
both mutations caused loss of CYP26C1 function.

REFERENCE 1. Prescott, T.; Devriendt, K.; Hamel, B.; Pasch, M. C.; Peeters,
H.; Vander Poorten, V.; Talleras, O.: Focal preauricular dermal dysplasia:
distinctive congenital lesions with a bilateral and symmetric distribution. Europ.
J. Med. Genet. 49: 135-139, 2006.

2. Slavotinek, A. M.; Mehrotra, P.; Nazarenko, I.; Tang, P. L.-F.;
Lao, R.; Cameron, D.; Li, B.; Chu, C.; Chou, C.; Marqueling, A. L.;
Yahyavi, M.; Cordoro, K.; Frieden, I.; Glaser, T.; Prescott, T.; Morren,
M.-A.; Devriendt, K.; Kwok, P.; Petkovich, M.; Desnick, R. J.: Focal
facial dermal dysplasia, type IV, is caused by mutations in CYP26C1. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 22: 696-703, 2013.

3. Taimi, M.; Helvig, C.; Wisniewski, J.; Ramshaw, H.; White, J.;
Amad, M.; Korczak, B.; Petkovich, M.: A novel human cytochrome P450,
CYP26C1, involved in metabolism of 9-cis and all-trans isomers of
retinoic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 77-85, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/7/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2004

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
tpirozzi: 9/18/2013
carol: 7/8/2013
carol: 12/7/2012
mgross: 1/27/2004

180410	TITLE *180410 RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE, M1 SUBUNIT; RRM1
;;RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE, LARGE SUBUNIT;;
RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE, R1 SUBUNIT; R1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RRM1 gene encodes the large subunit (R1) of ribonucleotide
reductase, the heterodimeric enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting
step in deoxyribonucleotide synthesis.

CLONING

Pavloff et al. (1992) cloned human RRM1 and RRM2 (180390) cDNAs from a
breast carcinoma cDNA library. The deduced 792-amino acid RRM1 protein
has a molecular mass of 90 kD and shares about 98% sequence homology
with the mouse Rrm1 protein.

MAPPING

By immunoblotting of somatic cell hybrid extracts, Engstrom and Francke
(1985) mapped the gene for the R1 subunit of ribonucleotide reductase to
11pter-p11. This assignment was confirmed by Southern analysis of hybrid
cell DNAs, and the RRM1 locus was sublocalized to the distal band 11p15
by in situ hybridization (Brissenden et al., 1988).

Byrne and Smith (1991) identified a RFLP at the RRM1 locus, which is
useful in the mapping of 11p.

GENE STRUCTURE

Parker et al. (1994) used a fragment of human RRM1 cDNA to isolate a
genomic clone that encompassed the 5-prime flanking region of RRM1.
Primer extension and PCR experiments defined 6 potential cap sites.

Parker et al. (1995) characterized the TATA-less promoter region of the
human RRM1 gene and found 2 domains that were conserved with respect to
the mouse sequence. One of these sequences was shown to bind the
transcription factor SP1 (189906).

Pitterle et al. (1999) demonstrated that the RRM1 gene contains 19
exons, spans over 45 kb, and is oriented from telomere to centromere
with exon 19 nearest to D11S12.

GENE FUNCTION

In dividing cells, ribonucleotide reductase is essential for the
production of deoxyribonucleotides before DNA synthesis in S phase.
Neither of its 2 subunits, R1 or R2 (180390), are detectable in
quiescent cells. In cycling cells, RRM1 mRNA and protein are present
throughout the cell cycle (summary by Parker et al., 1994).

Byrne and Smith (1993) found that the RRM1 gene, which is located at
11p15.5, is not imprinted in Wilms tumor or in hepatoblastoma. They
demonstrated transcription of both alleles in 6 Wilms tumors, 1
hepatoblastoma, and samples from adjacent kidney and liver from
individuals who were constitutionally heterozygous for a TaqI
polymorphism.

Because the RRM1 gene is located in a region of loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) in lung tumors, Pitterle et al. (1999) screened all 19 RRM1 exons
in 12 pairs of normal and tumor DNA samples and identified no mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Brissenden, J. E.; Caras, I.; Thelander, L.; Francke, U.: The
structural gene for the M1 subunit of human ribonucleotide reductase
maps to chromosome 11, band p15, in human and to chromosome 7 in mouse. Exp.
Cell Res. 174: 302-308, 1988.

2. Byrne, J.; Smith, P.: Human polymorphic probe pE1.8 detects SacI
polymorphism in the ribonucleotide reductase M1 subunit gene. Hum.
Genet. 87: 376 only, 1991.

3. Byrne, J. A.; Smith, P. J.: The 11p15.5 ribonucleotide reductase
M1 subunit locus is not imprinted in Wilms' tumour and hepatoblastoma. Hum.
Genet. 91: 275-277, 1993.

4. Engstrom, Y.; Francke, U.: Assignment of the structural gene for
subunit M1 of human ribonucleotide reductase to the short arm of chromosome
11. Exp. Cell Res. 158: 477-483, 1985.

5. Parker, N. J.; Begley, C. G.; Fox, R. M.: Human R1 subunit of
ribonucleotide reductase (RRM1): 5-prime flanking region of the gene. Genomics 19:
91-96, 1994.

6. Parker, N. J.; Begley, C. G.; Fox, R. M.: Human gene for the large
subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (RRM1): functional analysis of
the promoter. Genomics 27: 280-285, 1995.

7. Pavloff, N.; Rivard, D.; Masson, S.; Shen, S.-H.; Mes-Masson, A.-M.
: Sequence analysis of the large and small subunits of human ribonucleotide
reductase. DNA Seq. 2: 227-234, 1992.

8. Pitterle, D. M.; Kim, Y.-C.; Jolicoeur, E. M. C.; Cao, Y.; O'Briant,
K. C.; Bepler, G.: Lung cancer and the human gene for ribonucleotide
reductase subunit M1 (RRM1). Mammalian Genome 10: 916-922, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/9/2008
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/17/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 03/16/2012
carol: 7/8/2008
carol: 6/9/2008
alopez: 3/22/2000
carol: 6/18/1998
joanna: 5/8/1998
mark: 9/17/1995
carol: 2/7/1994
carol: 6/25/1993
carol: 7/24/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/24/1991

600915	TITLE *600915 NESTIN; NES
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nestin is an intermediate filament protein that was first identified
with a monoclonal antibody by Hockfield and McKay (1985). It is
expressed predominantly in stem cells of the central nervous system in
the neural tube. Upon terminal neural differentiation, nestin is
downregulated and replaced by neurofilaments.

CLONING

Dahlstrand et al. (1992) cloned the human nestin gene from a genomic DNA
library, using a probe from the rat gene. The human gene encodes a
predicted protein of 1,618 amino acids. The alpha helical domain
demonstrates 82% identity to the rat protein, but other regions of the
sequence are less well conserved. Northern blot analysis of 21-week-old
fetal brain RNA detected a band of approximately 6 kb.

Yang et al. (2001) cloned mouse nestin cDNA, which encodes a deduced
polypeptide that shares 62% sequence identity with the human protein.

GENE FUNCTION

The finding that nestin is expressed in immature skeletal muscle cells
prompted Kobayashi et al. (1998) to study staining patterns of nestin
and desmin (DES; 125660) in rhabdomyosarcomas. They found that nestin
immunoreactivity was present in all of 29 examined typical
rhabdomyosarcomas, which also expressed desmin.

Yang et al. (2001) overexpressed mouse nestin cDNA as an enhanced GFP in
COS-7 cells and found that nestin immunoreactivity was present in the
filamentous cytoskeletal network.

REFERENCE 1. Dahlstrand, J.; Zimmerman, L. B.; McKay, R. D. G.; Lendahl, U.
: Characterization of the human nestin gene reveals a close evolutionary
relationship to neurofilaments. J. Cell Sci. 103: 589-597, 1992.

2. Hockfield, S.; McKay, R. D. G.: Identification of major cell classes
in the developing mammalian nervous system. J. Neurosci. 5: 3310-3328,
1985.

3. Kobayashi, M.; Sjoberg, G.; Soderhall, S.; Lendahl, U.; Sandstedt,
B.; Sejersen, T.: Pediatric rhabdomyosarcomas express the intermediate
filament nestin. Pediat. Res. 43: 386-392, 1998.

4. Yang, J.; Cheng, L.; Yan, Y.; Bian, W.; Tomooka, Y.; Shiurba, R.;
Jing, N.: Mouse nestin cDNA cloning and protein expression in the
cytoskeleton of transfected cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1520:
251-254, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/11/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/1999

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 11/3/1995

EDITED carol: 12/11/2002
carol: 3/15/1999
terry: 3/12/1999
mark: 4/7/1996
terry: 11/8/1995
mark: 11/3/1995

173870	TITLE *173870 POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) POLYMERASE 1; PARP1
;;POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) POLYMERASE; PPOL; PARP;;
POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) SYNTHETASE;;
ADP-RIBOSYLTRANSFERASE; ADPRT;;
ADPRT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The chromatin-associated enzyme poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (ADPRT; EC
2.4.2.30) uses NAD as substrate to catalyze both the covalent transfer
of ADP-ribose to a variety of nuclear protein acceptors and subsequently
the transfer of an additional 60 to 80 ADP-ribose units to the initial
moiety. Nuclear proteins that become predominantly poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated
include nucleosomal core histones, histone H1 (see 142711), HMG proteins
(see 163910), and topoisomerases I (126420) and II (see 126430). ADP
ribosyltransferase is required for cellular repair. Inhibitors of this
enzyme potentiate the lethal effects of noxious agents. During repair,
NAD+ is consumed and the NAD+ content of the cell decreases.
Concomitantly, nuclear proteins are ADP-ribosylated. The enzyme is
induced by single-strand breaks in DNA which serve as cosubstrate for
the reaction.

CLONING

Alkhatib et al. (1987) isolated cDNA clones for this enzyme from a human
hepatoma lambda library and studied its expression. Using synthetic
oligonucleotide probes based on the partial amino acid sequence of
poly(ADP-ribose), Kurosaki et al. (1987) isolated and sequenced cDNA
clones for the enzyme. The open reading frame encodes a protein of 1,013
amino acid residues with a molecular mass of 113,203 Da.

GENE FUNCTION

Loetscher et al. (1987) proposed that poly(ADP-ribose) may signal
altered metabolic conditions to the chromatin. They were led to this
proposal from the finding that the constitutive level of
posttranslational poly(ADP-ribose) modification of chromatin proteins in
mammalian cells is related to the availability of NAD, which varies in
different physiologic and pathologic states.

ADP-ribosylation is a eukaryotic posttranslational modification of
proteins that is strongly induced by the presence of DNA strand breaks
and plays a role in DNA repair and the recovery of cells from DNA
damage. Grube and Burkle (1992) found a strong positive correlation (r =
0.84; P much less than 0.001) between poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, or
PARP, activity and life span, with human cells displaying, for example,
about 5 times the activity of rat cells. The cells studied were
mononuclear leukocytes. Grube and Burkle (1992) suggested that higher
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity may contribute to the efficient
maintenance of genome integrity.

Yu et al. (2002) demonstrated that PARP1 activation is required for
translocation of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF; 300169) from the
mitochondria to the nucleus and that AIF is necessary for
PARP1-dependent cell death. N-methyl-N-prime-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine,
hydrogen peroxide, and NMDA induce AIF translocation and cell death,
which is prevented by PARP inhibitors or genetic knockout of PARP1, but
is caspase independent. Microinjection of an antibody to AIF protects
against PARP1-dependent cytotoxicity. Yu et al. (2002) concluded that
their data support a model in which PARP1 activation signals AIF release
from mitochondria, resulting in a caspase-independent pathway of
programmed cell death.

Using cultured human cells from malignant cell lines, Nicholson et al.
(1995) demonstrated that PARP is proteolytically cleaved at the onset of
apoptosis by caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636), which they called apopain. In
addition, they showed that inhibition of apopain-mediated PARP cleavage
attenuates apoptosis in vitro.

Tomoda et al. (1991) found that in contrast to reactive proliferative
diseases, malignant lymphomas showed increased expression of
poly(ADP-ribose) synthetase as demonstrated by level of mRNA.

Cohen-Armon et al. (2004) found that poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 is
activated in neurons that mediate several forms of long-term memory in
Aplysia. Because poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of nuclear proteins is a
response to DNA damage in virtually all eukaryotic cells, it is
surprising that activation of the polymerase occurs during learning and
is required for long-term memory. Cohen-Armon et al. (2004) suggested
that the fast and transient decondensation of chromatin structure by
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation enables the transcription needed to form
long-term memory without strand breaks in DNA.

Vasquez et al. (2001) included the PARP gene in their list of candidate
genes for enhancing gene targeting. Gene targeting by homologous
recombination, which was developed by Smithies et al. (1985), Thomas et
al. (1986), and Thomas and Capecchi (1987), has proven highly valuable
in studies of gene structure and function and offers a potential tool
for gene-therapeutic applications. A limitation constraining this
technology is the low rate of homologous recombination in mammalian
cells and the high rate of random (nontargeted) integration of the
vector DNA. Vasquez et al. (2001) considered possible ways to overcome
these limitations in the framework of the current understanding of
recombination mechanisms and machinery. Several studies suggested that
transient alteration of the levels of recombination proteins, by
overexpression or interference with expression, may be able to increase
homologous recombination or decrease random integration.

Several PARPs localize to the spindle in vertebrate cells, suggesting
that PARPs and/or poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) have a role in spindle
function. Chang et al. (2004) showed that PAR is enriched in the spindle
and is required for spindle function. PAR hydrolysis or perturbation led
to rapid disruption of spindle structure, and hydrolysis during spindle
assembly blocked the formation of bipolar spindles. PAR exhibited
localization dynamics that differed from known spindle proteins and were
consistent with a low rate of turnover in the spindle. Thus, Chang et
al. (2004) concluded that PAR is a nonproteinaceous, nonchromosomal
component of the spindle required for bipolar spindle assembly and
function.

Kim et al. (2004) described nucleosome binding properties of PARP1 that
promoted the formation of compact, transcriptionally repressed chromatin
structures. PARP1 bound in a specific manner to nucleosomes and
modulated chromatin structure through NAD(+)-dependent automodification,
without modifying core histones or promoting the disassembly of
nucleosomes. The automodification activity of PARP1 was potently
stimulated by nucleosomes, causing the release of PARP1 from chromatin.
The NAD(+)-dependent activities of PARP1 were reversed by
poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG; 603501) and were inhibited by
ATP. In vivo, PARP1 incorporation was associated with transcriptionally
repressed chromatin domains that were spatially distinct from both
histone H1-repressed domains and actively transcribed regions. Kim et
al. (2004) concluded that PARP1 functions both as a structural component
of chromatin and as a modulator of chromatin structure through its
intrinsic enzymatic activity.

Pavri et al. (2005) determined that PARP1 was necessary for retinoic
acid (RA)-dependent transcription in HeLa cells, and transcription
required the direct interaction of PARP1 with the mediator complex (see
MED6; 602984). The interaction did not require the C-terminal catalytic
domain of PARP1. By chromatin immunoprecipitation of a mouse embryonic
carcinoma cell line, Pavri et al. (2005) found that Parp1 localized to
the RA-responsive promoter of the mouse Rarb2 gene (RARB; 180220). Parp1
was necessary for the activation of the mediator complex and for
transcription from the Rarb2 promoter. Pavri et al. (2005) also found
that Parp1 functioned at a step prior to the association of TFIID (see
313650) and mediator with promoter sequences.

Bryant et al. (2005) showed that PARP inhibitors trigger gamma-H2AX (see
601772) and RAD51 (179617) foci formation. They proposed that, in the
absence of PARP1, spontaneous single-strand breaks collapse replication
forks and trigger homologous recombination for repair. Furthermore,
Bryant et al. (2005) showed that BRCA2 (600185)-deficient cells, as a
result of their deficiency in homologous recombination, are acutely
sensitive to PARP inhibitors, presumably because resultant collapsed
replication forks are no longer repaired. Thus, PARP1 activity is
essential in homologous recombination-deficient BRCA2 mutant cells.
Bryant et al. (2005) exploited this requirement in order to kill
BRCA2-deficient tumors by PARP inhibition alone. Treatment with PARP
inhibitors is likely to be highly tumor specific, because only the
tumors (which are BRCA2-null) in BRCA2 heterozygous patients are
defective in homologous recombination. Bryant et al. (2005) concluded
that the use of an inhibitor of a DNA repair enzyme alone to selectively
kill a tumor, in the absence of an exogenous DNA-damaging agent,
represents a new concept in cancer treatment.

Farmer et al. (2005) showed that BRCA1 (113705) or BRCA2 dysfunction
unexpectedly and profoundly sensitizes cells to the inhibition of PARP
enzymatic activity, resulting in chromosomal instability, cell cycle
arrest, and subsequent apoptosis. This seems to be because the
inhibition of PARP leads to the persistence of DNA lesions normally
repaired by homologous recombination. Farmer et al. (2005) concluded
that their results illustrate how different pathways cooperate to repair
damage, and suggest that the targeted inhibition of particular DNA
repair pathways may allow the design of specific and less toxic
therapies for cancer.

Andrabi et al. (2006) and Yu et al. (2006) demonstrated that the product
of PARP1 activity, poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymer, mediates
PARP1-induced cell death. Andrabi et al. (2006) showed PAR polymer alone
could induce cell death in primary mouse cortical neurons in a caspase-
and Parp1-independent manner. Degradation of PAR polymer by PAR
glycohydrolase (PARG; 603501) or phosphodiesterase-1 (see PDE1A, 171890)
prevented PAR polymer-induced cell death in cultured neurons, and
increased Parg expression in mice reduced damage caused by ischemia
following middle cerebral artery occlusion. Yu et al. (2006) showed that
PAR polymer was the cell death signal that induced the release of Aif
from mitochondria mouse cortical neurons and induced its translocation
to nuclei. They also showed that Parg prevented Parp1-dependent Aif
release. Furthermore, cells with reduced levels of Aif were resistant to
Parp1-dependent cell death and PAR polymer cytotoxicity.

Apoptosis controls the final numbers of neurons during brain
development. Midorikawa et al. (2006) found that mouse Kif4 (300521), a
microtubule-based molecular motor, regulated apoptosis of juvenile
neurons by interacting directly with Parp1. The C-terminal domain of
Kif4 suppressed Parp1 enzymatic activity. When neurons were stimulated
by membrane depolarization, calcium signaling mediated by Camk2 (see
114078) induced dissociation of Kif4 from Parp1, resulting in
upregulation of Parp1 activity, which supported neuron survival. After
dissociation from Parp1, Kif4 entered the cytoplasm from the nucleus and
moved to the distal part of neurites in a microtubule-dependent manner.
Midorikawa et al. (2006) concluded that KIF4 controls the
activity-dependent survival of postmitotic neurons by regulating PARP1
activity in brain development.

Krishnakumar et al. (2008) used genomic and gene-specific approaches to
show that 2 factors, histone H1 and PARP1, exhibit a reciprocal pattern
of chromatin binding at many RNA polymerase II-transcribed promoters.
PARP1 was enriched and H1 was depleted at these promoters. This pattern
of binding was associated with actively transcribed genes. Furthermore,
Krishnakumar et al. (2008) showed that PARP1 acts to exclude H1 from a
subset of PARP1-stimulated promoters, suggesting a functional interplay
between PARP1 and H1 at the level of nucleosome binding. Thus,
Krishnakumar et al. (2008) concluded that although H1 and PARP1 have
similar nucleosome-binding properties and effects on chromatin structure
in vitro, they have distinct roles in determining gene expression in
vivo.

'Synthetic lethality' as a treatment for cancer refers to an event in
which tumor cell death results from lethal synergy of 2 otherwise
nonlethal events. Fong et al. (2009) used this model to treat breast
cancer cells that have homozygous loss of the tumor suppressor genes
BRCA1 (113705) or BRCA2 (600185) with a PARP inhibitor, resulting in the
induction of selective tumor cytotoxicity and the sparing of normal
cells. The method aims at inhibiting PARP-mediated single-strand DNA
repair in cells with deficient homologous-recombination double-strand
DNA repair, which leads to unrepaired DNA breaks, the accumulation of
DNA defects, and cell death. Heterozygous BRCA mutant cells retain
homologous-recombination function and are not affected by PARP
inhibition. In vitro, BRCA1-deficient and BRCA2-deficient cells were up
to 1,000-fold more sensitive to PARP inhibition than wildtype cells, and
tumor growth inhibition was also demonstrated in BRCA2-deficient
xenografts. Fong et al. (2009) reported a phase 1 clinical trial of an
orally active PARP inhibitor olaparib (AZD2281 or KU-0059436) in 60
patients with mainly breast or ovarian cancer (612555; 604370),
including 22 BRCA mutation carriers and 1 who was likely a mutation
carrier but declined genetic testing. Durable objective antitumor
activity was observed only in confirmed carriers of a BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation; no objective antitumor responses were observed in patients
without known BRCA mutations. Twelve (63%) of 19 BRCA carriers with
ovarian, breast, or prostate cancers showed a clinical benefit from
treatment with olaparib, with radiologic or tumor-marker responses or
meaningful disease stabilization. The drug had an acceptable side-effect
profile and did not have the toxic effects commonly associated with
conventional chemotherapy. Fong et al. (2009) concluded that PARP
inhibition has antitumor activity in BRCA mutation carriers.

In mammalian cells subjected to oxidative stress, Mao et al. (2011)
showed that SIRT6 (606211) is recruited to the sites of DNA
double-strand breaks and stimulates double-strand break repair, through
both nonhomologous end joining and homologous recombination. Mao et al.
(2011) concluded that their results indicated that SIRT6 physically
associates with PARP1 and mono-ADP-ribosylates PARP1 on lysine residue
521, thereby stimulating PARP1 poly-ADP-ribosylase activity and
enhancing double-strand break repair under oxidative stress.

Doege et al. (2012) described an early and essential stage of somatic
cell reprogramming, preceding the induction of transcription at
endogenous pluripotency loci such as NANOG (607937) and ESRRB (602167).
By day 4 after transduction with pluripotency factors OCT4 (164177),
SOX2 (184429), KLF4 (602253), and MYC (190080) (together referred to as
OSKM), 2 epigenetic modification factors necessary for induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) generation, namely, PARP1 and TET2
(612839), were recruited to the NANOG and ESRRB loci. These epigenetic
modification factors seem to have complementary roles in the
establishment of early epigenetic marks during somatic cell
reprogramming: PARP1 functions in the regulation of 5-methylcytosine
(5mC) modification, whereas TET2 is essential for the early generation
of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) by the oxidation of 5mC. Although 5hmC
has been proposed to serve primarily as an intermediate in 5mC
demethylation to cytosine in certain contexts, Doege et al. (2012)
concluded that their data, and also studies of TET2-mutant human tumor
cells, argued in favor of a role for 5hmC as an epigenetic mark distinct
from 5mC. Consistent with this, PARP1 and TET2 are each needed for the
early establishment of histone modifications that typify an activated
chromatin state at pluripotency loci, whereas PARP1 induction further
promotes accessibility to the OCT4 reprogramming factor. Doege et al.
(2012) concluded that their findings suggested that PARP1 and TET2
contribute to an epigenetic program that directs subsequent
transcriptional induction at pluripotency loci during somatic cell
reprogramming.

MAPPING

McBride et al. (1987) concluded that a large functional PARP gene of
more than 15 to 20 kb is located on chromosome 1q and that sequences on
chromosomes 13 and 14 most likely represent processed pseudogenes. These
localizations were achieved by probing of the DNA from panels of somatic
cell hybrids.

Herzog et al. (1988) cloned a cDNA for ADPRT and localized the gene to
1q21-q22 by in situ hybridization. Herzog et al. (1989) mapped the ADPRT
gene to 1q41-q42 by in situ hybridization. Using high resolution in situ
hybridization techniques, Zabel et al. (1989) localized PPOL to
1q41-q42. With the conditions used, only 1 additional site of
hybridization, 14q22, could be detected; this probably represented a
pseudogene which had previously been identified and called ADPRTP2. By
nonisotopic in situ hybridization, Baumgartner et al. (1992) confirmed
localization of the functional gene to 1q42. Two other hybridization
peaks, one at 13q34 and one at 14q24, suggested the location of
pseudogenes.

- PARP Pseudogene

A processed pseudogene or a gene with extensive identity to the ADPRT
gene was studied by Bhatia et al. (1990), who mapped it to 13q33-qter.
The gene was deleted in a polymorphism that was 3 times higher in
frequency among blacks than Caucasians. Bhatia et al. (1990) suggested
that this deletion might be a predisposing factor in several forms of
malignancy.

Lyn et al. (1993) studied the 2-allele (A/B) polymorphism of the gene on
13q34. An elevated B-allele frequency was found in germline DNA in
blacks with multiple myeloma (254500), prostate cancer (176807), and
colon cancer (114500). They found that the A allele has a close sequence
similarity (91.8%) to the PPOL cDNA coded by 1q42 and is intronless,
suggesting that the gene on 13q is a processed pseudogene. They
presented data indicating that the polymorphism reflects a 193-bp
duplication within the processed-pseudogene sequence, with absence of
this duplicated region being characteristic of the B genotype. Doll et
al. (1996) confirmed the association between prostate cancer in black
Americans and an allele of the pseudogene locus (which they symbolized
PADPRP) on chromosome 13. Two genes in the region 13q33-q34 were viewed
as potential candidates for prostate cancer: ERCC5 (133530) and RAP2A
(179540).

GENE STRUCTURE

Auer et al. (1989) demonstrated that the PARP gene is 43 kb long and
split into 23 exons.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Langelier et al. (2012) reported the crystal structure of a DNA
double-strand break in complex with human PARP1 domains essential for
activation (Zn1, Zn3, WGR-CAT). PARP1 engages DNA as a monomer, and the
interaction with DNA damage organizes PARP1 domains into a collapsed
conformation that could explain the strong preference for
automodification. The Zn1, Zn3, and WGR domains collectively bind to
DNA, forming a network of interdomain contacts that links the DNA damage
interface to the catalytic domain (CAT). The DNA damage-induced
conformation of PARP1 results in structural distortions that destabilize
the CAT. Langelier et al. (2012) concluded that an increase in CAT
protein dynamics underlies the DNA-dependent activation mechanism of
PARP1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schweiger et al. (1987) suggested that the defect in Fanconi anemia (FA;
227650) is one of impaired ADP-ribosylation. Several independent
observations have suggested that ADPRT might be the site of the mutation
in Fanconi anemia; however, Flick et al. (1992) could find no
abnormality in cells from an FA patient of complementation group A (cell
line GM6914).

ANIMAL MODEL

Streptozotocin (STZ) selectively destroys insulin-producing beta islet
cells of the pancreas, providing a model of type I diabetes (see
222100). PARP is a nuclear enzyme whose overactivation by DNA strand
breaks depletes its substrate NAD+ and then ATP, leading to cellular
death from energy depletion. Pieper et al. (1999) demonstrated DNA
damage and a major activation of PARP in pancreatic islets of
STZ-treated mice. These mice displayed a 5-fold increase in blood
glucose and major pancreatic islet damage. In mice with homozygous
targeted deletion of Parp, blood glucose and pancreatic islet structure
were normal, indicating virtually total protection from STZ diabetes.
Partial protection occurred in heterozygous animals. Thus, PARP
activation may participate in the pathophysiology of type I diabetes,
for which PARP inhibitors might afford therapeutic benefit.

Using 2 different techniques, d'Adda di Fagagna et al. (1999) showed
that mice lacking PARP display telomere shortening compared with
wildtype mice. Telomere shortening was seen in different genetic
backgrounds and in different tissues from embryos and adult mice. In
vitro telomerase activity, however, was not altered in Adprt1 -/- mouse
fibroblasts. Furthermore, cytogenetic analysis of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts showed that lack of PARP was associated with severe
chromosomal instability, characterized by increased frequency of
chromosome fusions and aneuploidy. The absence of PARP does not affect
the presence of single-strand overhangs, naturally present at the end of
telomeres. This study, therefore, revealed an unanticipated role of PARP
in telomere length regulation and provided insight into its functions in
maintaining genomic integrity.

Depletion of PARP increases the frequency of recombination, gene
amplification, sister chromatid exchanges, and micronuclei formation in
cells exposed to genotoxic agents, implicating PARP in the maintenance
of genomic stability. By flow cytometric analysis, Simbulan-Rosenthal et
al. (1999) demonstrated an unstable tetraploid population in
immortalized fibroblasts derived from PARP -/- mice. There were partial
chromosomal gains in other regions. Neither the chromosomal gains nor
the tetraploid population were apparent in PARP -/- cells stably
transfected with PARP cDNA, indicating negative selection of cells with
these genetic alterations after reintroduction of PARP cDNA. These
results implicated PARP in the maintenance of genomic stability.

Steroid response and stress-activated genes such as Hsp70 (see 140550)
undergo puffing, a local loosening of polytene chromatin structure
associated with gene induction, in Drosophila larval salivary glands.
Tulin and Spradling (2003) found that puffs acquired elevated levels of
ADP-ribose modified proteins and that PARP was required to produce
normal-sized puffs and normal amounts of Hsp70 after heat exposure.
Tulin and Spradling (2003) proposed that chromosomal PARP molecules
become activated by developmental or environmental cues and strip nearby
chromatin proteins off DNA to generate a puff. Such local loosening may
facilitate transcription and may transiently make protein complexes more
accessible to modification, promoting chromatin remodeling during
development.

To understand the biologic significance of PARP1 cleavage, Petrilli et
al. (2004) generated a PARP1 knockin mouse model in which the caspase
cleavage site of PARP1, DEVD(214), was mutated to render the protein
resistant to caspases during apoptosis. The Parp1 knockin mice were
highly resistant to endotoxic shock and to intestinal and renal
ischemia/reperfusion, which were associated with reduced inflammatory
responses in the target tissues and cells due to the compromised
production of specific inflammatory mediators. Despite normal binding of
nuclear factor kappa-B (see 164011) to DNA, NFKB-mediated transcription
activity was impaired in the presence of caspase-resistant PARP1.
Petrilli et al. (2004) concluded that the PARP1 cleavage event is
physiologically relevant to the regulation of the inflammatory response
in vivo.

Using flow cytometric analysis, Ambrose et al. (2008) demonstrated
increased T-cell and normal B-cell numbers in Parp1 -/- mice. Basal Ig
levels were abnormal due to reduced levels of IgG2a and increased levels
of IgA and IgG2b. T cell-dependent antibody responses were reduced, but
T cell-independent responses were normal. In vitro, activated Parp1 -/-
B cells proliferated and secreted IgM normally, but they exhibited
decreased switching to IgG2a and increased IgA secretion. Ambrose et al.
(2008) concluded that PARP1 has essential roles in normal T
cell-dependent antibody responses and in regulation of isotype
expression.

Werner syndrome (WS; 277700) is a rare disorder characterized by the
premature onset of a number of age-related diseases and is caused by
mutation in the RECQL2 (604611) gene, which is believed to be involved
in different aspects of transcription, replication, and/or DNA repair.
PARP1 is also involved in DNA repair and is known to affect
transcription of several genes. Deschenes et al. (2005) examined the
expression profile of mouse embryonic cells lacking both Recql2 and
Parp1 using microarray and RT-PCR analysis. All mutant cells exhibited
altered expression of genes normally responding to oxidative stress.
More than 50% of misregulated genes identified in double-mutant mouse
cells were not altered in mouse cells with either the Recql2 or Parp1
mutation alone. The impact on gene expression profile when both Recql2
and Parp1 were mutated was greater than a simple addition of individual
mutant genotype. In addition, double-mutant cultured mouse cells showed
major misregulation of genes involved in apoptosis, cell cycle control,
embryonic development, metabolism, and signal transduction.
Double-mutant mouse embryos showed increased apoptosis and developmental
defects with decreased survival in utero. Surviving adult double-mutant
mice exhibited high levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA
oxidative damage and increased intracellular protein phosphorylation in
heart and liver compared to wildtype.

By flow cytometric analysis of thymus, spleen, and lymph nodes from
Parp1 -/- mice, Nasta et al. (2010) detected increased Cd4
(186940)-positive/Cd25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive/Foxp3 (300292)-positive
regulatory T lymphocytes (Tregs). The increased Tregs in the periphery
resulted in impaired CD4 cell proliferation and IL2 (147680) production,
which could be restored by depletion of Cd25-positive cells. Treg
inhibitory function of Parp1 -/- cells was comparable to wildtype,
suggesting that PARP1 affects Treg differentiation rather than function.
Naive CD4 cells from Parp1 -/- mice expressed higher levels of Foxp3 and
converted more cells to Foxp3-positive inducible Tregs following
stimulation than their wildtype counterparts. Conversion to Th17 (see
IL17; 603149) cells expressing Rorgt (602943) was not affected by Parp1
deficiency. Nasta et al. (2010) proposed that PARP1 modulation during an
immune response may induce greater numbers of functional Tregs.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cherney et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Alkhatib, H. M.; Chen, D.; Cherney, B.; Bhatia, K.; Notario, V.;
Giri, C.; Stein, G.; Slattery, E.; Roeder, R. G.; Smulson, M. E.:
Cloning and expression of cDNA for human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 1224-1228, 1987.

2. Ambrose, H. E.; Willimott, S.; Beswick, R. W.; Dantzer, F.; Menissier
de Murcia, J.; Yelamos, J.; Wagner, S. D.: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
(Parp-1)-deficient mice demonstrate abnormal antibody responses. Immunology 127:
178-186, 2008.

3. Andrabi, S. A.; Kim, N. S.; Yu, S.-W.; Wang, H.; Koh, D. W.; Sasaki,
M.; Klaus, J. A.; Otsuka, T.; Zhang, Z.; Koehler, R. C.; Hurn, P.
D.; Poirier, G. G.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Poly(ADP-ribose)
(PAR) polymer is a death signal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18308-18313,
2006.

4. Auer, B.; Nagl, U.; Herzog, H.; Schneider, R.; Schweiger, M.:
Human nuclear NAD+ ADP-ribosyltransferase(polymerizing): organization
of the gene. DNA 8: 575-580, 1989.

5. Baumgartner, M.; Schneider, R.; Auer, B.; Herzog, H.; Schweiger,
M.; Hirsch-Kauffmann, M.: Fluorescence in situ mapping of the human
nuclear NAD+ ADP-ribosyltransferase gene (ADPRT) and two secondary
sites to human chromosomal bands 1q42, 13q34, and 14q24. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 61: 172-174, 1992.

6. Bhatia, K. G.; Cherney, B. W.; Huppi, K.; Magrath, I. T.; Cossman,
J.; Sausville, E.; Barriga, F.; Johnson, B.; Gause, B.; Bonney, G.;
Neequayi, J.; DeBernardi, M.; Smulson, M.: A deletion linked to a
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase gene on chromosome 13q33-qter occurs frequently
in the normal black population as well as in multiple tumor DNA. Cancer
Res. 50: 5406-5413, 1990.

7. Bryant, H. E.; Schultz, N.; Thomas, H. D.; Parker, K. M.; Flower,
D.; Lopez, E.; Kyle, S.; Meuth, M.; Curtin, N. J.; Helleday, T.:
Specific killing of BRCA2-deficient tumours with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase. Nature 434: 913-916, 2005. Note: Addendum: Nature 447:
346 only, 2007.

8. Chang, P.; Jacobson, M. K.; Mitchison, T. J.: Poly(ADP-ribose)
is required for spindle assembly and structure. Nature 432: 645-649,
2004.

9. Cherney, B. W.; McBride, O. W.; Chen, D.; Alkhatib, H.; Bhatia,
K.; Hensley, P.; Smulson, M. E.: cDNA sequence, protein structure,
and chromosomal location of the human gene for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 8370-8374, 1987.

10. Cohen-Armon, M.; Visochek, L.; Katzoff, A.; Levitan, D.; Susswein,
A. J.; Klein, R.; Valbrun, M.; Schwartz, J. H.: Long-term memory
requires polyADP-ribosylation. Science 304: 1820-1822, 2004.

11. d'Adda di Fagagna, F.; Hande, M. P.; Tong, W.-M.; Lansdorp, P.
M.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Jackson, S. P.: Functions of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
in controlling telomere length and chromosomal stability. Nature
Genet. 23: 76-80, 1999.

12. Deschenes, F.; Massip, L.; Garand, C.; Lebel, M.: In vivo misregulation
of genes involved in apoptosis, development and oxidative stress in
mice lacking both functional Werner syndrome protein and poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3293-3308, 2005.

13. Doege, C. A.; Inoue, K.; Yamashita, T.; Rhee, D. B.; Travis, S.;
Fujita, R.; Guarnieri, P.; Bhagat, G.; Vanti, W. B.; Shih, A.; Levine,
R. L.; Nik, S.; Chen, E. I.; Abeliovich, A.: Early-stage epigenetic
modification during somatic cell reprogramming by Parp1 and Tet2. Nature 488:
652-655, 2012.

14. Doll, J. A.; Suarez, B. K.; Donis-Keller, H.: Association between
prostate cancer in black Americans and an allele of the PADPRP pseudogene
locus on chromosome 13. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 425-428,
1996.

15. Farmer, H.; McCabe, N.; Lord, C. J.; Tutt, A. N. J.; Johnson,
D. A.; Richardson, T. B.; Santarosa, M.; Dillon, K. J.; Hickson, I.;
Knights, C.; Martin, N. M. B.; Jackson, S. P.; Smith, G. C. M.; Ashworth,
A.: Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic
strategy. Nature 434: 917-921, 2005.

16. Flick, K.; Schneider, R.; Auer, B.; Hirsch-Kauffmann, M.; Schweiger,
M.: No abnormalities in the NAD(+) ADP-ribosyltransferase (polymerizing)
gene of transformed cells from a Fanconi's anemia patient. (Letter) Hum.
Genet. 89: 690-691, 1992.

17. Fong, P. C.; Boss, D. S.; Yap, T. A.; Tutt, A.; Wu, P.; Mergui-Roelvink,
M.; Mortimer, P.; Swaisland, H.; Lau, A.; O'Connor, M. J.; Ashworth,
A.; Carmichael, J.; Kaye, S. B.; Schellens, J. H. M.; de Bono, J.
S.: Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in tumors from BRCA
mutation carriers. New Eng. J. Med. 361: 123-134, 2009.

18. Grube, K.; Burkle, A.: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity in
mononuclear leukocytes of 13 mammalian species correlates with species-specific
life span. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 11759-11763, 1992.

19. Herzog, H.; Zabel, B.; Schneider, R.; Auer, B.; Hirsch-Kauffmann,
M.; Schweiger, M.: Human NAD(+):protein ADP ribosyltransferase (ADPRT):
synthesis of active enzyme in E. coli, sequence of its cDNA from HeLa
cells and chromosomal localization. Biol. Chem. Hoppe Seyler 369:
836-837, 1988.

20. Herzog, H.; Zabel, B. U.; Schneider, R.; Auer, B.; Hirsch-Kauffmann,
M.; Schweiger, M.: Human nuclear NAD(+) ADP-ribosyltransferase: localization
of the gene on chromosome 1q41-q42 and expression of an active human
enzyme in Escherichia coli. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 3514-3518,
1989.

21. Kim, M. Y.; Mauro, S.; Gevry, N.; Lis, J. T.; Kraus, W. L.: NAD(+)-dependent
modulation of chromatin structure and transcription by nucleosome
binding properties of PARP-1. Cell 119: 803-814, 2004.

22. Krishnakumar, R.; Gamble, M. J.; Frizzel, K. M.; Berrocal, J.
G.; Kininis, M.; Kraus, W. L.: Reciprocal binding of PARP-1 and histone
H1 at promoters specifies transcriptional outcomes. Science 319:
819-821, 2008.

23. Kurosaki, T.; Ushiro, H.; Mitsuuchi, Y.; Suzuki, S.; Matsuda,
M.; Matsuda, Y.; Katunuma, N.; Kangawa, K.; Matsuo, H.; Hirose, T.;
Inayama, S.; Shizuta, Y.: Primary structure of human poly(ADP-ribose)
synthetase as deduced from cDNA sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 15990-15997,
1987.

24. Langelier, M.-F.; Planck, J. L.; Roy, S.; Pascal, J. M.: Structural
basis for DNA damage-dependent poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation by human PARP-1. Science 336:
728-732, 2012.

25. Loetscher, P.; Alvarez-Gonzalez, R.; Althaus, F. R.: Poly(ADP-ribose)
may signal changing metabolic conditions to the chromatin of mammalian
cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 1286-1289, 1987.

26. Lyn, D.; Cherney, B. W.; Lalande, M.; Berenson, J. R.; Lichtenstein,
A.; Lupold, S.; Bhatia, K. G.; Smulson, M.: A duplicated region is
responsible for the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase polymorphism, on chromosome
13, associated with a predisposition to cancer. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 52:
124-134, 1993.

27. Mao, Z.; Hine, C.; Tian, X.; Van Meter, M.; Au, M.; Vaidya, A.;
Seluanov, A.; Gorbunova, V.: SIRT6 promotes DNA repair under stress
by activating PARP1. Science 332: 1443-1446, 2011.

28. McBride, O. W.; Cherney, B.; Takourdin, C.; Smulson, M. E.: Human
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase sequences are located on chromosomes 1,
13, and 14. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 659-660, 1987.

29. Midorikawa, R.; Takei, Y.; Hirokawa, N.: KIF4 motor regulates
activity-dependent neuronal survival by suppressing PARP-1 enzymatic
activity. Cell 125: 371-383, 2006.

30. Nasta, F.; Laudisi, F.; Sambucci, M.; Rosado, M. M.; Pioli, C.
: Increased Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
deficiency. J. Immun. 184: 3470-3477, 2010.

31. Nicholson, D. W.; Ali, A.; Thornberry, N. A.; Vaillancourt, J.
P.; Ding, C. K.; Gallant, M.; Gareau, Y.; Griffin, P. R.; Labelle,
M.; Lazebnik, Y. A.; Munday, N. A.; Raju, S. M.; Smulson, M. E.; Yamin,
T.-T.; Yu, V. L.; Miller, D. K.: Identification and inhibition of
the ICE/CED-3 protease necessary for mammalian apoptosis. Nature 376:
37-43, 1995.

32. Pavri, R.; Lewis, B.; Kim, T.-K.; Dilworth, F. J.; Erdjument-Bromage,
H.; Tempst, P.; de Murcia, G.; Evans, R.; Chambon, P.; Reinberg, D.
: PARP-1 determines specificity in a retinoid signaling pathway via
direct modulation of Mediator. Molec. Cell 18: 83-96, 2005.

33. Petrilli, V.; Herceg, Z.; Hassa, P. O.; Patel, N. S. A.; Di Paola,
R.; Cortes, U.; Dugo, L.; Filipe, H.-M.; Thiemermann, C.; Hottiger,
M. O.; Cuzzocrea, S.; Wang, Z.-Q.: Noncleavable poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1 regulates the inflammation response in mice. J. Clin.
Invest. 114: 1072-1081, 2004.

34. Pieper, A. A.; Brat, D. J.; Krug, D. K.; Watkins, C. C.; Gupta,
A.; Blackshaw, S.; Verma, A.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Snyder, S. H.: Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-deficient mice are protected from streptozotocin-induced
diabetes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 3059-3064, 1999.

35. Schweiger, M.; Auer, B.; Burtscher, H. J.; Hirsch-Kauffmann, M.;
Klocker, H.; Schneider, R.: DNA repair in human cells: biochemistry
of the hereditary diseases Fanconi's anaemia and Cockayne syndrome. Europ.
J. Biochem. 165: 235-242, 1987.

36. Simbulan-Rosenthal, C. M.; Haddad, B. R.; Rosenthal, D. S.; Weaver,
Z.; Coleman, A.; Luo, R.; Young, H. M.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Ried, T.; Smulson,
M. E.: Chromosomal aberrations in PARP -/- mice: genome stabilization
in immortalized cells by reintroduction of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
cDNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 13191-13196, 1999.

37. Smithies, O.; Gregg, R. G.; Boggs, S. S.; Koralewski, M. A.; Kucherlapati,
R. S.: Insertion of DNA sequences into the human chromosomal beta-globin
locus by homologous recombination. Nature 317: 230-234, 1985.

38. Thomas, K. R.; Capecchi, M. R.: Site-directed mutagenesis by
gene targeting in mouse embryo-derived stem cells. Cell 51: 503-512,
1987.

39. Thomas, K. R.; Folger, K. R.; Capecchi, M. R.: High frequency
targeting of genes to specific sites in the mammalian genome. Cell 44:
419-428, 1986.

40. Tomoda, T.; Kurashige, T.; Moriki, T.; Yamamoto, H.; Fujimoto,
S.; Taniguchi, T.: Enhanced expression of poly(ADP-ribose) synthetase
gene in malignant lymphoma. Am. J. Hemat. 37: 223-227, 1991.

41. Tulin, A.; Spradling, A.: Chromatin loosening by poly(ADP)-ribose
polymerase (PARP) at Drosophila puff loci. Science 299: 560-562,
2003.

42. Vasquez, K. M.; Marburger, K.; Intody, Z.; Wilson, J. H.: Manipulating
the mammalian genome by homologous recombination. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 98: 8403-8410, 2001.

43. Yu, S.-W.; Andrabi, S. A.; Wang, H.; Kim, N. S.; Poirier, G. G.;
Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L.: Apoptosis-inducing factor mediates
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymer-induced cell death. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 18314-18319, 2006.

44. Yu, S.-W.; Wang, H.; Poitras, M. F.; Coombs, C.; Bowers, W. J.;
Federoff, H. J.; Poirier, G. G.; Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L.: Mediation
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1-dependent cell death by apoptosis-inducing
factor. Science 297: 259-263, 2002.

45. Zabel, B. U.; Herzog, H.; Schneider, R.; Auer, B.; Hirsch-Kauffmann,
M.; Schweiger, M.: Chromosomal sublocalization of the gene for human
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (NAD+ ADP-ribosyltransferase) at 1q41-42.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1115, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/30/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/29/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/8/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/10/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/21/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/19/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/19/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/19/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/30/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/26/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/20/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/12/1987

EDITED alopez: 09/19/2012
terry: 9/18/2012
alopez: 6/1/2012
terry: 5/30/2012
alopez: 7/7/2011
terry: 7/1/2011
mgross: 11/30/2010
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 11/4/2010
terry: 10/29/2010
terry: 9/17/2010
wwang: 3/11/2010
mgross: 3/8/2010
wwang: 8/28/2009
ckniffin: 8/10/2009
wwang: 8/7/2009
terry: 7/21/2009
carol: 2/27/2008
carol: 7/12/2007
terry: 5/30/2007
alopez: 2/4/2007
mgross: 4/7/2006
alopez: 9/20/2005
terry: 9/19/2005
mgross: 6/6/2005
terry: 5/4/2005
mgross: 2/4/2005
wwang: 2/1/2005
wwang: 1/26/2005
terry: 1/19/2005
carol: 11/19/2004
alopez: 9/2/2004
terry: 8/30/2004
alopez: 2/4/2003
terry: 2/3/2003
cwells: 7/29/2002
terry: 7/24/2002
mcapotos: 10/9/2001
mcapotos: 9/26/2001
alopez: 12/6/1999
terry: 11/29/1999
alopez: 11/18/1999
alopez: 8/31/1999
terry: 8/30/1999
mgross: 4/23/1999
mgross: 4/22/1999
terry: 4/20/1999
dkim: 12/15/1998
joanna: 4/7/1997
mark: 3/16/1997
mark: 2/23/1996
terry: 2/19/1996
terry: 5/11/1994
carol: 3/1/1993
carol: 1/12/1993
carol: 12/17/1992
carol: 10/16/1992
carol: 9/16/1992

189972	TITLE *189972 GENERAL TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR IIH, POLYPEPTIDE 1; GTF2H1
;;GTF2H, 62-KD SUBUNIT;;
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR IIH, 62-KD SUBUNIT;;
TFIIH, 62-KD SUBUNIT;;
TFB1
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FUNCTION

Phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNA
polymerase II (POLR2A; 180660) is believed to control the transition
from transcription initiation to elongation. The general transcription
factor TFIIH contains a kinase activity capable of phosphorylating this
domain (Lu et al., 1992). Factors that promote the association of RNA
polymerase II with the preinitiation complex stimulate this activity.
TFIIE, which is required for the stable association of TFIIH with the
preinitiation complex, affects the processivity of TFIIH kinase. TFIIH
is a multisubunit factor consisting of at least 5 polypeptides of 92
(133510), 62, 43 (601748), 40, and 35 (601750) kD (Flores et al., 1992).
A 52-kD subunit (601760) has also been identified as a component of the
TFIIH 'core,' along with p89, p62, p44, and p34 (Marinoni et al., 1997).
Lu et al. (1992) expressed the belief that TFIIH is the human
counterpart of the yeast general transcription factor b. See also 133530
and Habraken et al. (1996).

Shiekhattar et al. (1995) purified TFIIH and found that it contained
material that reacted with antibodies to cyclin-dependent kinase 7
(CDK7; 601955) and cyclin H (601953). The authors confirmed the presence
of the CDK-activating kinase complex as a distinct component of TFIIH,
suggesting a link, by the phosphorylation of the cell division cycle 2
(116940) or CDK2 (116953) genes, between TFIIH and the processes of
transcription, DNA repair, and cell cycle progression.

Mammalian CDK8 (603184) and cyclin C (123838) are components of the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme complex, where they function as a protein
kinase that phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II. The CDK8/cyclin C protein complex is also found in
a number of mammalian 'Mediator'(see 602984)-like protein complexes,
which repress activated transcription independently of the C-terminal
domain in vitro. Akoulitchev et al. (2000) demonstrated that CDK8/cyclin
C can regulate transcription by targeting the CDK7/cyclin H subunits of
TFIIH. CDK8 phosphorylates mammalian cyclin H at serine-5 and serine-304
both in vitro and in vivo, in the vicinity of its functionally unique N-
and C-terminal alpha-helical domains. This phosphorylation represses
both the ability of TFIIH to activate transcription and its C-terminal
kinase activity. In addition, mimicking CDK8 phosphorylation of cyclin H
in vivo has a dominant-negative effect on cell growth. Akoulitchev et
al. (2000) concluded that their results linked the Mediator complex and
the basal transcription machinery by a regulatory pathway involving 2
cyclin-dependent kinases. This pathway appears to be unique to higher
organisms.

High levels of gene transcription by RNA polymerase II depend on high
rates of transcription initiation and reinitiation. Initiation requires
recruitment of the complete transcription machinery to a promoter, a
process facilitated by activators and chromatin remodeling factors.
Reinitiation is thought to occur through a different pathway. After
initiation, a subset of the transcription machinery remains at the
promoter, forming a platform for assembly of a second transcription
complex. Yudkovsky et al. (2000) described the isolation of a
reinitiation intermediate in yeast that includes transcription factors
TFIID, TFIIA (see 600520), TFIIH, TFIIE, and Mediator. This intermediate
can act as a scaffold for formation of a functional reinitiation
complex. Formation of this scaffold is dependent on ATP and TFIIH. In
yeast, the scaffold is stabilized in the presence of the activator
Gal4-VP16, but not Gal4-AH, suggesting a new role for some activators
and Mediator in promoting high levels of transcription.

Hoogstraten et al. (2002) generated cell lines expressing functional
GFP-tagged TFIIH. TFIIH was homogeneously distributed throughout the
nucleus with nucleolar accumulations. The authors provided in vivo
evidence for involvement of TFIIH in RNA polymerase I transcription.
Photobleaching revealed that TFIIH moved freely and was engaged in RNA
polymerase I and II transcription for approximately 25 seconds and
approximately 6 seconds, respectively. TFIIH readily switched between
transcription and repair sites, where it was immobilized for 4 minutes,
without large-scale alterations in composition. These findings supported
a model of diffusion and random collision of individual components that
permits a quick and versatile response to changing conditions.

Trichothiodystrophy (TTD; 601675) is a rare hereditary multisystem
disorder associated with defects in nucleotide excision repair (NER) as
a consequence of mutation in XPD (126340), XPB (133510), or TTDA
(608780), 3 genes that are related to TFIIH. Botta et al. (2002) showed
that all the mutations found in TTD cases, irrespective of whether they
were homozygotes, hemizygotes, or compound heterozygotes, caused a
substantial and specific reduction (by up to 70%) in the cellular
concentration of TFIIH. However, the degree of reduction in TFIIH did
not correlate with the severity of the pathologic phenotype, suggesting
that the severity of the clinical features in TTD cannot be related
solely to the effects of mutations on the stability of TFIIH. Mild
reductions (up to 40%) in TFIIH content were also found in some, but not
all, cell strains from patients with xeroderma pigmentosum (see 278700).
Botta et al. (2002) concluded that the severity of the clinical features
in TTD patients and the clinical outcome of differentially mutated XPD
proteins may depend both on the effects that each mutation has on the
stability of TFIIH as well as on the transcriptional activity of the
residual TFIIH complexes.

GENE FAMILY

Initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II is a complex process
requiring, in addition to the polymerase itself, 7 auxiliary factors.
Entry of the polymerase into the transcription cycle is mediated by
transcription factor TFIIF (see 189968) and requires a DNA-protein
complex composed of the TATA-binding protein subunit of TFIID (313650)
in association with the TATA motif and TFIIB (189963), the so-called DB
complex. The largest subunit of mammalian RNA polymerase II (POLR2A;
180660) contains a heptapeptide repeat, YSPTSPS in the single-letter
amino acid code, occurring 52 times at its C terminus. Because the
heptapeptide contains serine, threonine, and tyrosine, it is prone to
phosphorylation. As a result, RNA polymerase II occurs in 2 forms in
vivo: a highly phosphorylated II(O) form and a nonphosphorylated II(A)
form. The nonphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II is recruited by
TFIIF to the DB complex. This complex is then recognized by TFIIE
(189962), TFIIH, and TFIIJ, which enter the transcription cycle in that
order, to generate a transcription-competent complex (summary by Lu et
al., 1992).

Giglia-Mari et al. (2004) tabulated the 10 subunits of TFIIH. They
referred to GTF2H1 as TFB1.

MAPPING

Heng et al. (1994) mapped the GTF2H1 gene to 11p15.1-p14 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization.

By PCR analysis on hybrid DNAs and the YACs, Fantes et al. (1995) placed
the GTF2H1 gene in their interval XX between the LDHA/C (150000; 150150)
and the SAA (104750) genes. Furthermore, restriction mapping placed
GTF2H1 within 50 kb of LDHA.

Fantes et al. (1995) described a detailed physical map of 11p, extending
from the distal part of 11p13 through the entirety of 11p14 to proximal
11p15.1. The primary level of mapping was based on chromosome
breakpoints that divided the region into 20 intervals. At higher
resolution, YACs covered approximately 12 Mb of the region. The map
incorporated 18 known genes, including precise localization of the
GTF2H1 gene encoding the 62-kD subunit of TFIIH.

REFERENCE 1. Akoulitchev, S.; Chuikov, S.; Reinberg, D.: TFIIH is negatively
regulated by cdk8-containing mediator complexes. Nature 407: 102-106,
2000.

2. Botta, E.; Nardo, T.; Lehmann, A. R.; Egly, J.-M.; Pedrini, A.
M.; Stefanini, M.: Reduced level of the repair/transcription factor
TFIIH in trichothiodystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2919-2928,
2002.

3. Fantes, J. A.; Oghene, K.; Boyle, S.; Danes, S.; Fletcher, J. M.;
Bruford, E. A.; Williamson, K.; Seawright, A.; Schedl, A.; Hanson,
I.; Zehetner, G.; Bhogal, R.; Lehrach, H.; Gregory, S.; Williams,
J.; Little, P. F. R.; Sellar, G. C.; Hoovers, J.; Mannens, M.; Weissenbach,
J.; Junien, C.; van Heyningen, V.; Bickmore, W. A.: A high-resolution
integrated physical, cytogenetic, and genetic map of human chromosome
11: distal p13 to proximal p15.1. Genomics 25: 447-461, 1995.

4. Flores, O.; Lu, H.; Reinberg, D.: Factors involved in specific
transcription by mammalian RNA polymerase II: identification and characterization
of factor IIH. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 2786-2793, 1992.

5. Giglia-Mari, G.; Coin, F.; Ranish, J. A.; Hoogstraten, D.; Theil,
A.; Wijgers, N.; Jaspers, N. G. J.; Raams, A.; Argentini, M.; van
der Spek, P. J.; Botta, E.; Stefanini, M.; Egly, J.-M.; Aebersold,
R.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Vermeulen, W.: A new, tenth subunit of
TFIIH is responsible for the DNA repair syndrome trichothiodystrophy
group A. Nature Genet. 36: 714-719, 2004.

6. Habraken, Y.; Sung, P.; Prakash, S.; Prakash, L.: Transcription
factor TFIIH and DNA endonuclease Rad2 constitute yeast nucleotide
excision repair factor 3: implications for nucleotide excision repair
and Cockayne syndrome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10718-10722, 1996.

7. Heng, H. H. Q.; Xiao, H.; Shi, X.-M.; Greenblatt, J.; Tsui, L.-C.
: Genes encoding general initiation factors for RNA polymerase II
transcription are dispersed in the human genome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
61-64, 1994.

8. Hoogstraten, D.; Nigg, A. L.; Heath, H.; Mullenders, L. H. F.;
van Driel, R.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Vermeulen, W.; Houtsmuller,
A. B.: Rapid switching of TFIIH between RNA polymerase I and II transcription
and DNA repair in vivo. Molec. Cell 10: 1163-1174, 2002.

9. Lu, H.; Zawel, L.; Fisher, L.; Egly, J.-M.; Reinberg, D.: Human
general transcription factor IIH phosphorylates the C-terminal domain
of RNA polymerase II. Nature 358: 641-645, 1992.

10. Marinoni, J.-C.; Roy, R.; Vermeulen, W.; Miniou, P.; Lutz, Y.;
Weeda, G.; Seroz, T.; Gomez, D. M.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Egly, J.-M.
: Cloning and characterization of p52, the fifth subunit of the core
of the transcription/DNA repair factor TFIIH. EMBO J. 16: 1093-1102,
1997.

11. Shiekhattar, R.; Mermelstein, F.; Fisher, R. P.; Drapkin, R.;
Dynlacht, B.; Wessling, H. C.; Morgan, D. O.; Reinberg, D.: Cdk-activating
kinase complex is a component of human transcription factor TFIIH. Nature 374:
283-287, 1995.

12. Yudkovsky, N.; Ranish, J. A.; Hahn, S.: A transcription reinitiation
intermediate that is stabilized by activator. Nature 408: 225-229,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/1/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/1/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/8/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 8/22/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 4/17/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/16/1992

EDITED alopez: 03/07/2012
alopez: 11/1/2010
terry: 11/1/2010
alopez: 3/12/2010
alopez: 7/8/2004
terry: 7/7/2004
tkritzer: 4/8/2004
terry: 4/1/2004
mgross: 5/5/2003
terry: 5/1/2003
alopez: 11/8/2000
alopez: 9/6/2000
carol: 5/23/2000
alopez: 10/7/1997
mark: 4/18/1997
alopez: 4/17/1997
mark: 4/14/1997
jamie: 12/6/1996
carol: 3/6/1995
carol: 5/7/1993
carol: 12/22/1992
carol: 12/16/1992

184755	TITLE *184755 STEROL CARRIER PROTEIN 2; SCP2
;;STEROL CARRIER PROTEIN X; SCPX
DESCRIPTION Sterol carrier protein-2 (SC2) is a peroxisomal enzyme with thiolase
activity that is required for the breakdown of branched-chain fatty
acids (summary by Ferdinandusse et al., 2006).

Sterol carrier protein-2 was the second peroxisomal thiolase to be
identified; see ACAA1 (604054).

CLONING

Yamamoto et al. (1991) used rat SCP2 cDNA to isolate a homologous human
liver SCP2 cDNA. SCP2 encodes a deduced 143-amino acid protein that
shares 89% sequence identity with the rat protein. SCP2 contains a
20-residue N-terminal leader sequence before the mature 13.2-kD
polypeptide, which contains a C-terminal tripeptide related to the
peroxisome targeting sequence. Northern blot analysis identified 2 mRNA
transcripts of 1.8 and 3.2 kb in liver; in fibroblasts and placenta, the
1.8-kb transcript was most abundant.

GENE FUNCTION

Yamamoto et al. (1991) noted that in steroid hormone producing cells
SCP2 is thought to facilitate the transport of cholesterol to
mitochondria, where the first committed step in steroidogenesis takes
place. Yamamoto et al. (1991) demonstrated that coexpression of the SCP2
cDNA with expression vectors for cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme
and adrenodoxin resulted in a 2.5-fold enhancement of progestin
synthesis over that obtained with expression of the steroidogenic enzyme
system alone.

Sterol carrier protein-2 is present in low levels in Zellweger syndrome
(see 214100), in which the cells are deficient in peroxisomes (van
Amerongen et al., 1987).

MAPPING

Yamamoto et al. (1991) used sequences in the 3-prime untranslated region
of the SCP2 cDNA to design PCR primers for use in mapping studies of
human/rodent somatic cell hybrids. In this way, they demonstrated that
the gene is located on the segment 1pter-p21 (He et al., 1991).

Vesa et al. (1994) refined the chromosomal assignment of SCP2 to 1p32 by
analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel by both PCR and hybridization
methods applied to cell lines with various rearrangements of chromosome
1.

By interspecific backcross analysis, Welch et al. (1996) mapped the Scp2
gene to mouse chromosome 4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with leukoencephalopathy, dystonia, and motor neuropathy
who was found to have deficiency of SCP2, Ferdinandusse et al. (2006)
identified a homozygous 1-nucleotide insertion (545_546insA;
184755.0001) in the SCP2 gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY WITH DYSTONIA AND MOTOR NEUROPATHY
SCP2, 1-BP INS, 545A

In a man with leukoencephalopathy with dystonia and motor neuropathy
(613724) and his similarly affected brother, Ferdinandusse et al. (2006)
found homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion of an adenine after nucleotide
position 545 (545_546insA) of the SCP2 gene, leading to a frameshift and
premature stop codon (I184fsX7).

REFERENCE 1. Ferdinandusse, S.; Kostopoulos, P.; Denis, S.; Rusch, H.; Overmars,
H.; Dillmann, U.; Reith, W.; Haas, D.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Duran, M.;
Marziniak, M.: Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal sterol
carrier protein X (SCPx) cause leukencephalopathy with dystonia and
motor neuropathy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 1046-1052, 2006.

2. He, Z.; Yamamoto, R.; Furth, E. E.; Schantz, L. J.; Naylor, S.
L.; George, H.; Billheimer, J. T.; Strauss, J. F., III: cDNAs encoding
members of a family of proteins related to human sterol carrier protein
2 and assignment of the gene to human chromosome 1p21-pter. DNA Cell
Biol. 10: 559-569, 1991.

3. van Amerongen, A.; Helms, J. B.; van der Krift, T. P.; Schutgens,
R. B. H.; Wirtz, K. W. A.: Purification of nonspecific lipid transfer
protein (sterol carrier protein 2) from human liver and its deficiency
in livers from patients with cerebro-hepato-renal (Zellweger) syndrome. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 919: 149-155, 1987.

4. Vesa, J.; Hellsten, E.; Barnoski, B. L.; Emanuel, B. S.; Billheimer,
J. T.; Mead, S.; Cowell, J. K.; Strauss, J. F., III; Peltonen, L.
: Assignment of sterol carrier protein X/sterol carrier protein 2
to 1p32 and its exclusion as the causative gene for infantile neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 341-346, 1994.

5. Welch, C. L.; Xia, Y.-R.; Billheimer, J. T.; Strauss, J. F., III;
Lusis, A. J.: Assignment of the mouse sterol carrier protein gene
(Scp2) to chromosome 4. Mammalian Genome 7: 624-625, 1996.

6. Yamamoto, R.; Kallen, C. B.; Babalola, G. O.; Rennert, H.; Billheimer,
J. T.; Strauss, J. F., III: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding
human sterol carrier protein 2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 463-467,
1991.

7. Yamamoto, R.; Naylor, S. L.; George, H.; Billheimer, J. T.; Strauss,
J. F., III: Assignment of the gene encoding sterol carrier protein
2 to human chromosome 1pter-p21. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1866-1867, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/8/1991

EDITED terry: 02/18/2011
terry: 2/3/2011
carol: 2/3/2011
joanna: 7/27/2010
alopez: 5/19/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
carol: 3/24/2006
ckniffin: 12/7/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
alopez: 6/14/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
dkim: 7/23/1998
dkim: 7/16/1998
terry: 11/14/1996
mark: 3/4/1996
terry: 2/21/1996
carol: 1/15/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 8/8/1991

605051	TITLE *605051 CANNABINOID RECEPTOR 2; CNR2
;;CB2 RECEPTOR; CB2;;
CX5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In addition to its renowned psychoactive properties, marijuana, or its
major active cannabinoid ingredient, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol,
exerts analgesic, antiinflammatory, immunosuppressive, anticonvulsive,
and antiemetic effects as well as the alleviation of intraocular
pressure in glaucoma. The G protein-coupled cannabinoid receptor-1
(CNR1; 114610), which is expressed in brain but not in the periphery,
apart from low levels in testis, does not readily account for the
nonpsychoactive effects of cannabinoids. Using PCR with degenerate
primers to screen a promyelocytic leukemia cell cDNA library, Munro et
al. (1993) obtained a cDNA encoding CNR2, which the authors called CX5.
Sequence analysis predicted that the deduced 360-amino acid
7-transmembrane-spanning protein has 44% amino acid identity with CNR1
overall and 68% identity with the transmembrane residues proposed to
confer ligand specificity. Binding analysis determined than CNR2 encodes
a high-affinity receptor for cannabinoids, with higher affinity than
CNR1 for cannabinol. Northern blot analysis revealed that the expression
of 2.5- and 5.0-kb transcripts in the HL60 myeloid cell line increases
on myeloid, or granulocyte, differentiation. Using the rat CX5 homolog,
Munro et al. (1993) found that the 2.5-kb transcript is expressed in
spleen but not in brain, kidney, lung, thymus, liver, or nasal
epithelium. In situ hybridization analysis demonstrated expression in
splenic marginal zones. PCR analysis detected CNR2 expression in
purified splenic macrophages but not in CD5+ T cells. Munro et al.
(1993) speculated that the location of CNR2 suggests that its endogenous
ligand should have an immunomodulatory role.

MAPPING

Karsak et al. (2005) stated that the CNR2 gene maps to chromosome 1p36.

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CNR2
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG90).

GENE FUNCTION

Van Sickle et al. (2005) reported the expression of CB2 receptor mRNA
and protein localization on brainstem neurons. These functional CB2
receptors in the brainstem were activated by a CB2 receptor agonist,
2-arachidonoylglycerol, and by elevated endogenous levels of
endocannabinoids, which also act at CB1 receptors. Van Sickle et al.
(2005) concluded that CB2 receptors represent an alternative site of
action of endocannabinoids that opens the possibility of nonpsychotropic
therapeutic interventions using enhanced endocannabinoid levels in
localized brain areas.

By real-time RT-PCR of mouse diaphyseal bone marrow-derived stromal
cells, Ofek et al. (2006) found that Cb2 expression progressively
increased during osteoblastic differentiation in parallel with the
expression of osteoblastic marker genes. Immunohistochemical analysis of
distal femoral metaphyseal sections showed Cb2 in osteoblasts,
osteocytes, and osteoclasts. A CB2-specific agonist without psychotropic
effects enhanced endocortical osteoblast number and activity and
restrained trabecular osteoclastogenesis by inhibiting proliferation of
osteoclast precursors and Rankl (602642) expression in bone
marrow-derived osteoblasts/stromal cells. The same agonist attenuated
ovariectomy-induced bone loss and stimulated cortical thickness by
suppressing osteoclast number and stimulating endocortical bone
formation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the CNR2
gene and bone mineral density, see BMND3 (606928).

ANIMAL MODEL

Steffens et al. (2005) investigated the effects of THC in a mouse model
of established atherosclerosis. Oral administration of THC (1 mg/kg(-1)
per day) resulted in significant inhibition of disease progression. This
effective dose is lower than the dose usually associated with
psychotropic effects of THC. Furthermore, Steffens et al. (2005)
detected CB2 receptor (the main cannabinoid receptor expressed on immune
cells) in both human and mouse atherosclerotic plaques. Lymphoid cells
isolated from THC-treated mice showed diminished proliferation capacity
and decreased interferon-gamma (147570) secretion. Macrophage
chemotaxis, which is a crucial step for the development of
atherosclerosis, was also inhibited in vitro by THC. All these effects
were completely blocked by a specific CB2 receptor antagonist. Steffens
et al. (2005) concluded that oral treatment with a low dose of THC
inhibited atherosclerosis progression in the apolipoprotein E (107741)
knockout mouse model, through pleiotropic immunomodulatory effects on
lymphoid and myeloid cells, and that THC or cannabinoids with activity
at the CB2 receptor may be valuable targets for treating
atherosclerosis.

Ofek et al. (2006) found Cb2 -/- mice were healthy, fertile, and of size
and weight indistinguishable from age-matched wildtype controls.
However, both male and female Cb2 -/- mice had low bone mass due to
accelerated age-related trabecular bone loss and cortical expansion,
although cortical thickness remained unaltered. There was also increased
activity of trabecular osteoblasts, increased osteoclast number, and
markedly decreased number of diaphyseal osteoblast precursors. Ofek et
al. (2006) concluded that CB2 is essential for the maintenance of normal
bone mass.

Rousseaux et al. (2007) found that the probiotic bacterial strain
Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM induced a sustained increase of opioid
receptor mu-1 (OPRM1; 600018) and CNR2 mRNA expression in human
intestinal epithelial cells. In vivo experiments in mice and rats
revealed that oral administration of L. bacillus NCFM induced colonic
expression of OPRM1 and CNR2 and, in studies in rats, decreased normal
visceral perception with a 20% increase in the pain threshold as
elicited by colorectal distention. In a rat model of chronic colonic
hypersensitivity that mimics irritable bowel syndrome, oral
administration of NCFM resulted in an antinocioceptive effect of the
same magnitude as that caused by the subcutaneous administration of 1 mg
per kg of morphine. NCFM-induced analgesia was significantly inhibited
by peritoneal administration of a CNR2-selective antagonist but not by
an opioid receptor antagonist. Rousseaux et al. (2007) concluded that
direct contact of NCFM with epithelial cells can induce OPRM1 and CNR2
expression and can contribute to modulation and restoration of the
normal perception of visceral pain.

In an animal model for cutaneous contact hypersensitivity, Karsak et al.
(2007) found that mice lacking both known cannabinoid receptors
displayed exacerbated allergic inflammation. In contrast, fatty acid
amide hydrolase (FAAH; 602935)-deficient mice, which have increased
levels of endocannabinoid anandamide, displayed reduced allergic
responses in the skin. Cannabinoid receptor antagonists exacerbated
allergic inflammation, whereas receptor agonists attenuated
inflammation. Karsak et al. (2007) concluded that their results
demonstrated a protective role of the endocannabinoid system in contact
allergy in the skin and suggested a target for therapeutic intervention.

REFERENCE 1. Karsak, M.; Cohen-Solal, M.; Freudenberg, J.; Ostertag, A.; Morieux,
C.; Kornak, U.; Essig, J.; Erxlebe, E.; Bab, I.; Kubisch, C.; de Vernejoul,
M.-C.; Zimmer, A.: Cannabinoid receptor type 2 gene is associated
with human osteoporosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3389-3396, 2005.

2. Karsak, M.; Gaffal, E.; Date, R.; Wang-Eckhardt, L.; Rehnelt, J.;
Petrosino, S.; Starowicz, K.; Steuder, R.; Schlicker, E.; Cravatt,
B.; Mechoulam, R.; Buettner, R.; Werner, S.; Di Marzo, V.; Tuting,
T.; Zimmer, A.: Attenuation of allergic contact dermatitis through
the endocannabinoid system. Science 316: 1494-1497, 2007.

3. Munro, S.; Thomas, K. L.; Abu-Shaar, M.: Molecular characterization
of a peripheral receptor for cannabinoids. Nature 365: 61-65, 1993.

4. Ofek, O.; Karsak, M.; Leclerc, N.; Fogel, M.; Frenkel, B.; Wright,
K.; Tam, J.; Attar-Namdar, M.; Kram, V.; Shohami, E.; Mechoulam, R.;
Zimmer, A.; Bab, I.: Peripheral cannabinoid receptor, CB2, regulates
bone mass. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 696-701, 2006.

5. Rousseaux, C.; Thuru, X.; Gelot, A.; Barnich, N.; Neut, C.; Dubuquoy,
L.; Dubuquoy, C.; Merour, E.; Geboes, K.; Chamaillard, M.; Ouwehand,
A.; Leyer, G.; Carcano, D.; Colombel, J.-F.; Ardid, D.; Desreumaux,
P.: Lactobacillus acidophilus modulates intestinal pain and induces
opioid and cannabinoid receptors. Nature Med. 13: 35-37, 2007.

6. Steffens, S.; Veillard, N. R.; Arnaud, C.; Pelli, G.; Burger, F.;
Staub, C.; Karsak, M.; Zimmer, A.; Frossard, J.-L.; Mach, F.: Low
dose oral cannabinoid therapy reduces progression of atherosclerosis
in mice. Nature 434: 782-786, 2005. Note: Erratum: Nature 435: 528
only, 2005.

7. Van Sickle, M. D.; Duncan, M.; Kingsley, P. J.; Mouihate, A.; Urbani,
P.; Mackie, K.; Stella, N.; Makriyannis, A.; Piomelli, D.; Davison,
J. S.; Marnett, L. J.; Di Marzo, V.; Pittman, Q. J.; Patel, K. D.;
Sharkey, K. A.: Identification and functional characterization of
brainstem cannabinoid CB2 receptors. Science 310: 329-332, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/27/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/3/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/20/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/2/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/14/2000

EDITED alopez: 03/11/2013
wwang: 7/28/2010
terry: 7/27/2010
wwang: 9/17/2009
terry: 9/3/2009
alopez: 6/26/2007
terry: 6/20/2007
wwang: 4/2/2007
wwang: 2/23/2007
wwang: 3/24/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
alopez: 10/26/2005
terry: 10/25/2005
tkritzer: 6/6/2005
terry: 6/2/2005
carol: 6/15/2000

600009	TITLE *600009 INTERFERON-ALPHA-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 27; IFI27
;;INTERFERON-STIMULATED GENE 12; ISG12;;
ISG12A
DESCRIPTION Rasmussen et al. (1993) isolated a new cDNA, which they called p27, from
estradiol-treated human breast carcinoma cells. It encoded a putative
highly hydrophobic protein of 122 amino acids that had a 33% overall
sequence similarity to the product of the interferon-induced protein
IFI-6-16 (IFI616; 147572). The latter gene is transcriptionally induced
by interferons of the alpha and beta type. Rasmussen et al. (1993)
mapped the IFI27 gene to 14q32 by isotopic in situ hybridization. They
showed that it also is induced by interferon-alpha in human cell lines
of different origin and that expression is independent of the presence
of estradiol receptor in the cells.

REFERENCE 1. Rasmussen, U. B.; Wolf, C.; Mattei, M.-G.; Chenard, M.-P.; Bellocq,
J.-P.; Chambon, P.; Rio, M.-C.; Basset, P.: Identification of a new
interferon-alpha-inducible gene (p27) on human chromosome 14q32 and
its expression in breast carcinoma. Cancer Res. 53: 4096-4101, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1994

EDITED mgross: 08/14/2007
carol: 5/24/1999
alopez: 6/19/1998
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 6/28/1994

601066	TITLE *601066 OXIDASE, CYTOCHROME c, ASSEMBLY 1-LIKE; OXA1L
;;CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE ASSEMBLY 1-LIKE;;
OXA1-LIKE GENE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cytochrome c oxidase is a complex of proteins that is essential for
cellular energy metabolism. It functions by transferring electrons from
reduced cytochrome c to molecular oxygen. Mammalian cytochrome c oxidase
consists of 13 subunits. The 3 largest subunits are encoded by the
mitochondrial genome while the remainder are produced by nuclear genes
and imported into the mitochondria. One key component required for
cytochrome c oxidase assembly, identified first in yeast, is the oxa1
gene. Bonnefoy et al. (1994) transformed an oxa- yeast strain with a
HeLa cell expression vector cDNA library and isolated a clone which
complemented the oxa- mutation. The cDNA, designated OXA1Hs by them,
encodes a predicted 435-amino acid protein that is 33% identical to the
yeast gene. Northern blots showed that the 2-kb mRNA was expressed at
relatively high levels in all cell lines tested.

Rotig et al. (1997) determined the OXA1L genomic sequence. Sequence
analysis revealed an additional upstream in-frame translation initiation
codon. Using RT-PCR, the authors demonstrated that this region is
transcribed. The resulting open reading frame encodes a predicted
495-amino acid protein with a putative N-terminal mitochondrial
presequence.

Saaf et al. (1998) noted that the C-terminal membrane domain of OXA1 is
conserved from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. They determined that the 60-kD
OXA1 homolog of E. coli has 6 transmembrane segments. Mitochondrial OXA1
lacks an N-terminal transmembrane domain but otherwise has a similar
hydrophobicity profile to the E. coli protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rotig et al. (1997) found that the OXA1L gene contains 10 exons and
spans 5 kb.

MAPPING

Molina-Gomes et al. (1995) mapped the OXA1L gene to 14q11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Bonnefoy, N.; Kermorgant, M.; Groudinsky, O. P.; Slonimski, P.
P.; Dujardin, G.: Cloning of a human gene involved in cytochrome
oxidase assembly by functional complementation of an oxa1- mutation
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 11978-11982,
1994.

2. Molina-Gomes, D.; Bonnefoy, N.; Nguyen, V. C.; Viegas-Pequignot,
E.; Rotig, A.; Dujardin, G.: The OXA1L gene that controls cytochrome
oxidase assembly maps to the 14q11.2 region of the human genome. Genomics 30:
396-398, 1995.

3. Rotig, A.; Parfait, B.; Heidet, L.; Dujardin, G.; Rustin, P.; Munnich,
A.: Sequence and structure of the human OXA1L gene and its upstream
elements. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1361: 6-10, 1997.

4. Saaf, A.; Monne, M.; de Gier, J.-W.; von Heijne, G.: Membrane
topology of the 60-kDa Oxa1p homologue from Escherichia coli. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 30415-30418, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/2/1999

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/12/1996

EDITED alopez: 04/06/2010
alopez: 1/23/2002
alopez: 6/2/1999
terry: 3/17/1999
joanna: 2/15/1996
mark: 2/12/1996

601693	TITLE *601693 UNCOUPLING PROTEIN 2; UCP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The mitochondrial protein called uncoupling protein (UCP1; 113730) plays
an important role in generating heat and burning calories by creating a
pathway that allows dissipation of the proton electrochemical gradient
across the inner mitochondrial membrane in brown adipose tissue, without
coupling to any other energy-consuming process. Fleury et al. (1997)
noted that this pathway has been implicated in the regulation of body
temperature, body composition, and glucose metabolism. However,
UCP1-containing brown adipose tissue is unlikely to be involved in
weight regulation in adult large-size animals and in humans living in a
thermoneutral environment, i.e., one in which an animal does not have to
increase oxygen consumption or energy expenditure to lose or gain heat
to maintain body temperature, as there is little brown adipose tissue
present in the adults. Fleury et al. (1997) discovered a gene that codes
for a novel uncoupling protein they designated UCP2, which has 59% amino
acid identity to UCP1. It was found to have properties consistent with a
role in diabetes and obesity (see 601665). In comparison with UCP1, UCP2
had a greater effect on the mitochondrial membrane potential when
expressed in yeast. Compared to UCP1, UCP2 is widely expressed in adult
human tissues, including tissue rich in macrophages, and it is
upregulated in white fat in response to fat feeding.

Flier and Lowell (1997) characterized the work reported by Fleury et al.
(1997) as a 'major breakthrough towards understanding the molecular
basis for energy expenditure.' They considered these findings likely to
have important implications for the causes and treatment of human
obesity.

GENE FUNCTION

Bouchard et al. (1997) studied the linkage relationships between 3
microsatellite markers that encompass the UCP2 gene location on 11q13
with resting metabolic rate (RMR), body mass index, percentage body fat,
and fat mass in 640 individuals from 155 pedigrees in the Quebec family
study. Suggestive evidence of linkage led them to conclude that the 3
markers encompassing the UCP2 locus and spanning a 5-cM region on 11q13
are linked to resting energy expenditure in adult humans. The evidence
was strong enough, in their opinion, to warrant a search for DNA
sequence variation in the gene itself.

Millet et al. (1997) observed an increase in the levels of UCP2 and UCP3
(602044) mRNA in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue from both lean and
obese individuals undergoing fasting. They suggested that the increase
indicates a role for these proteins in the metabolic adaptation to
fasting. The similar induction of gene expression observed during
fasting in lean and obese subjects show that there is no major
alteration of UCP2 and UCP3 gene regulation in adipose tissue and
skeletal muscle of obese subjects. UCP2 is widely expressed in human
tissues, whereas UCP3 expression seems to be restricted to skeletal
muscle, an important site of thermogenesis in humans.

Hepatic hematopoiesis is prominent during fetal life and ceases around
birth. Brauner et al. (2001) characterized hepatic hematopoiesis in
humans around birth and identified cells expressing UCP2. Hematopoiesis
was evaluated histologically in the liver of 22 newborns (mostly very
premature neonates), who died between 45 minutes and 140 days after
birth, and 1 fetus. UCP2 expression was characterized by Northern blots,
immunoblotting, immunohistochemistry, and by in situ hybridization. The
number of hematopoietic cells started to decrease rapidly at birth,
irrespective of gestational age (23 to 40 weeks) of neonates. A similar
decline was observed for UCP2 expression, which was relatively high in
fetal liver. UCP2 was detected only in myeloid cells (mainly in Kupffer
cells), but not in hepatocytes, although sepsis or other pathologies
occurred in the critically ill newborns. Kupffer cells represent the
major site of mitochondrial UCP2 expression in the human newborn. UCP2
may be essential for the differentiation and function of macrophages and
serve as a marker for these cells in human liver during the perinatal
period.

UCP1 diverts energy from ATP synthesis to thermogenesis in the
mitochondria of brown adipose by catalyzing a regulated leak of protons
across the inner membrane. UCP2 and UCP3 are present at much lower
abundance than UCP1, and the uncoupling with which they are associated
is not significantly thermogenic. Mild uncoupling would, however,
decrease the mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
which are important mediators of oxidative damage. Echtay et al. (2002)
demonstrated that superoxide increases mitochondrial proton conductance
through effects on UCP1, UCP2, and UCP3. Superoxide-induced uncoupling
requires fatty acids and is inhibited by purine nucleotides.
Superoxide-induced uncoupling correlates with the tissue expression of
UCPs and appears in mitochondria from yeast expressing UCP1. Skeletal
muscle mitochondria express only UCP3h; therefore superoxide-induced
uncoupling is absent in the skeletal muscle of UCP3 knockout mice.
Echtay et al. (2002) concluded that the interaction of superoxide with
UCPs may be a mechanism for decreasing the concentrations of ROS inside
mitochondria.

Neuronal cell death usually occurs after a certain period of ischemia,
suggesting that neurons are able to sustain sublethal damage up to a
threshold level, presumably through endogenous protective pathways.
Using subtractive cDNA libraries and cDNA array analysis of CA1 fields
of rat hippocampi at multiple times after ischemic preconditioning,
Mattiasson et al. (2003) identified UCP2 as an inducible neuroprotective
protein. In mice overexpressing human UCP2, brain damage was diminished
after experimental stroke and traumatic brain injury, and neurologic
recovery was enhanced. In cultured cortical neurons, UCP2 reduced cell
death and inhibited caspase-3 (600636) activation induced by oxygen and
glucose deprivation. In isolated mitochondria, UCP2 shifted the release
of ROS from the mitochondrial matrix to the extramitochondrial space.
Mattiasson et al. (2003) suggested that UCP2 is neuroprotective by
activating cellular redox signaling or by inducing mild mitochondrial
uncoupling that prevents the release of apoptogenic proteins.

Sullivan et al. (2003) noted that, in rats, the immature brain is
remarkably resistant to seizure-induced excitotoxic cell death compared
to adults. They found that seizures did not increase the formation of
ROS in neonatal brain because of the presence of high levels of UCP2,
which mediates uncoupling in mitochondria (see also Echtay et al.,
2002). UCP2 expression and function were increased in neonatal brain by
the fat-rich diet of maternal milk, and Sullivan et al. (2003) found
that dietary restriction of free fatty acids rendered immature rat
limbic neurons vulnerable to seizure-induced neuronal injury.

Wisloff et al. (2005) hypothesized that artificial selection of rats
based on low and high intrinsic exercise capacity would yield models
that also contrast for cardiovascular disease risk. After 11
generations, rats with low aerobic capacity scored higher on
cardiovascular risk factors that constitute the metabolic syndrome. The
decrease in aerobic capacity was associated with decreases in the
amounts of transcription factors required for mitochondrial biogenesis
and in the amounts of oxidative enzymes in skeletal muscle. Wisloff et
al. (2005) found that the amount of PPARG (601487), PPARG
coactivator-1-alpha (PPARGC1A; 604517), ubiquinol-cytochrome c
oxidoreductase core 2 subunit (UQCRC2; 191329), cytochrome c oxidase
subunit I (MTCO1; 516030), uncoupling protein-2 (UCP2), and ATP synthase
H(+)-transporting mitochondrial F1 complex (F1-ATP synthase; see 108729)
were markedly reduced in the low capacity runner rats in comparison with
the high capacity runners. The uniform decline in these proteins was
consistent with the hypothesis that reduced aerobic metabolism plays a
causal role in the development of the differences between the low
capacity runner and high capacity runner rats. Wisloff et al. (2005)
concluded that impairment of mitochondrial function may link reduced
fitness to cardiovascular and metabolic disease.

Parton et al. (2007) disrupted glucose sensing in glucose-excited
proopiomelanocortin (POMC; 176830) neurons via transgenic expression of
a mutant Kir6.2 subunit (encoded by the Kcnj11 gene, 600937) that
prevents ATP-mediated closure of potassium-ATP channels. They showed
that this genetic manipulation impaired the whole body response to a
systemic glucose load, demonstrating a role for glucose sensing by POMC
neurons in the overall physiologic control of blood glucose. Parton et
al. (2007) also found that glucose sensing by POMC neurons became
defective in obese mice on a high-fat diet, suggesting that loss of
glucose sensing by neurons has a role in the development of type 2
diabetes. The mechanism for obesity-induced loss of glucose sensing in
POMC neurons involves UCP2, a mitochondrial protein that impairs
glucose-stimulated production. UCP2 negatively regulates glucose sensing
in POMC neurons. Parton et al. (2007) found that genetic deletion of
UCP2 prevented obesity-induced loss of glucose sensing, and that acute
pharmacologic inhibition of UCP2 reverses loss of glucose sensing.
Parton et al. (2007) concluded that obesity-induced, UCP2-mediated loss
of glucose sensing in glucose-excited neurons might have a pathogenic
role in the development of type 2 diabetes.

Andrews et al. (2008) showed that ghrelin (605353) initiates robust
changes in hypothalamic mitochondrial respiration in mice that are
dependent on UCP2. Activation of this mitochondrial mechanism is
critical for ghrelin-induced mitochondrial proliferation and electric
activation of NPY (162640)/AgRP (602311) neurons, for ghrelin-triggered
synaptic plasticity of POMC neurons, and for ghrelin-induced food
intake. The UCP2-dependent action of ghrelin on NPY/AgRP neurons is
driven by a hypothalamic fatty acid oxidation pathway involving AMPK
(see 602739), CPT1 (600528), and free radicals that are scavenged by
UCP2. Andrews et al. (2008) concluded that their results revealed a
signaling modality connecting mitochondria-mediated effects of G
protein-coupled receptors on neuronal function and associated behavior.

By immunohistochemical analysis of dispersed and intact mouse pancreatic
islets and mouse pancreatic cell lines, Diao et al. (2008) found that
alpha cells expressed significantly higher levels of Ucp2 than did beta
cells. Alpha cells also showed greater Ucp2-dependent mitochondrial
uncoupling compared with beta cells, which was accompanied by a lower
oxidative phosphorylation efficiency. Conversely, reducing Ucp2 activity
in alpha cells was associated with higher mitochondrial membrane
potential generated by glucose oxidation and with increased ATP
synthesis, indicating more efficient metabolic coupling. In vitro,
suppression of Ucp2 activity led to reduced glucagon secretion in
response to low glucose; however, in vivo, fasting glucagon levels were
normal in Ucp2-knockout mice. Ucp2 also appeared to be cytoprotective of
islet cells, with Ucpp2-knockout alpha cells being more sensitive than
wildtype cells to toxic stimuli.

Park et al. (2011) showed that the mitochondrial membrane potential of
the phagocyte critically controls engulfment capacity, with lower
potential enhancing engulfment and vice versa. The mitochondrial
membrane protein Ucp2, which acts to lower the mitochondrial membrane
potential, was upregulated in phagocytes engulfing apoptotic cells. Loss
of Ucp2 reduced phagocytic capacity, whereas Ucp2 overexpression
enhanced engulfment. Mutational and pharmacologic studies indicated a
direct role for Ucp2-mediated mitochondrial function in phagocytosis.
Macrophages from Ucp2-deficient mice were impaired in phagocytosis in
vitro, and Ucp2-deficient mice showed profound in vivo defects in
clearing dying cells in the thymus and testes. Park et al. (2011)
concluded that the mitochondrial membrane potential and Ucp2 are key
molecular determinants of apoptotic cell clearance.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pecqueur et al. (1999) determined that the UCP2 gene contains 8 exons
and spans 8 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are not translated. The promoter region
does not contain a TATA box or a CAAT box, but it is GC rich, unlike
UCP1.

MAPPING

Fleury et al. (1997) mapped the UCP2 gene to human 11q13 by using 2
independent sequence tagged sites derived from human UCP2 clones. They
also mapped the mouse homolog Ucp2 to murine chromosome 7, tightly
linked to the 'tubby' mutation (601197), in an area of homology of
synteny to 11q13. Furthermore, the chromosomal mapping of UCP2 was
coincident with quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for obesity in at least 3
independent mouse models, one congenic strain, and human
insulin-dependent diabetes locus-4 (600319).

Pecqueur et al. (1999) determined that the UCP2 gene is located 7 kb
downstream of the UCP3 gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The UCP2-UCP3 gene cluster maps to 11q13 in humans. Walder et al. (1998)
explored the possibility that polymorphisms in these genes may
contribute to obesity through effects on energy metabolism. DNA
sequencing showed 3 polymorphisms informative for association studies:
an ala-to-val substitution in exon 4 of UCP2, a 45-bp insertion/deletion
in the 3-prime untranslated region of exon 8 of UCP2, and a C-to-T
silent polymorphism in exon 3 of UCP3. Initially, 82 young (mean age =
30 +/- 7 years), unrelated, full-blooded, nondiabetic Pima Indians were
typed for these polymorphisms by direct sequencing. The 3 sites were in
linkage disequilibrium with each other (P = less than 0.00001). The UCP2
variants were associated with metabolic rate during sleep. Heterozygotes
for UCP2 variants had higher metabolic rates than homozygotes. The UCP3
variant was not significantly associated with metabolic rate or obesity.
In a further 790 full-blooded Pima Indians, there was no significant
association between the insertion/deletion polymorphism and body mass
index (BMI). However, when only individuals more than 45 years of age
were considered, heterozygotes (subjects with the highest sleeping
metabolic rate) had the lowest BMI (P = 0.04). Walder et al. (1998)
concluded that UCP2 (or UCP3) contributes to variation in metabolic rate
in young Pima Indians which may contribute to overall body fat content
later in life.

Esterbauer et al. (2001) showed that a common G/A polymorphism in the
UCP2 promoter region is associated with enhanced adipose tissue mRNA
expression in vivo and results in increased transcription of a reporter
gene in the human adipocyte cell line PAZ-6. In analyzing 340 obese and
256 never-obese middle-aged subjects, they found a modest but
significant reduction in obesity prevalence associated with the
less-common allele. They confirmed this association in a
population-based sample of 791 middle-aged subjects from the same
geographic area (Salzburg, Austria). Despite its modest effect, but
because of its high frequency (approximately 63%), the more-common risk
allele conferred a relatively large population-attributable risk
accounting for 15% of the obesity in the population studied.

ANIMAL MODEL

Enerback et al. (1997) determined the role of UCP in the regulation of
body mass by targeted inactivation of the UCP gene in mice. They found
that UCP-deficient mice consumed less oxygen after treatment with a
beta-3-adrenergic receptor agonist and that they were sensitive to cold,
indicating that thermoregulation was defective. However, this deficiency
caused neither hyperphagia nor obesity in mice fed on either a standard
or a high-fat diet. Enerback et al. (1997) proposed that the loss of UCP
may be compensated by UCP2, a homolog of UCP that is ubiquitously
expressed and is induced in the brown fat of UCP-deficient mice.

As Ucp2 is widely expressed in mammalian tissues, uncouples respiration,
and resides within a region of genetic linkage to obesity, a role in
energy dissipation had been proposed. Arsenijevic et al. (2000)
demonstrated, however, that mice lacking Ucp2 following targeted gene
disruption were not obese and had a normal response to cold exposure or
high-fat diet. Expression of Ucp2 is normally robust in spleen, lung,
and isolated macrophages, suggesting a role for Ucp2 in immunity or
inflammatory responsiveness. In this connection, Arsenijevic et al.
(2000) found that Ucp2 -/- mice were completely resistant to infection
with Toxoplasma gondii, in contrast with the lethality observed in
wildtype littermates. Macrophages from the Ucp2-null mice generated more
ROS than wildtype mice in response to T. gondii, and had a 5-fold
greater toxoplasmacidal activity in vitro compared with wildtype mice,
which was absent in the presence of a quencher of ROS. Their results
indicated a role for Ucp2 in the limitation of ROS and
macrophage-mediated immunity.

Zhang et al. (2001) assessed the role of UCP2 in regulating insulin
secretion. Ucp2-deficient mice had higher islet ATP levels and increased
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, establishing that UCP2 negatively
regulates insulin secretion. Of pathophysiologic significance, Ucp2 was
markedly upregulated in islets of ob/ob mice, a model of obesity-induced
diabetes. Ob/ob mice lacking Ucp2 had restored first-phase insulin
secretion, increased serum insulin levels, and greatly decreased levels
of glycemia. These results established UCP2 as a key component of
beta-cell glucose sensing and as a critical link between obesity,
beta-cell dysfunction, and type II diabetes.

Failure to secrete adequate amounts of insulin in response to increasing
concentrations of glucose is an important feature of type II diabetes.
UCP2, by virtue of its mitochondrial proton leak activity and consequent
negative effect on ATP production, impairs glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion. Superoxide, when added to isolated mitochondria, activates
UCP2-mediated proton leak (Echtay et al., 2002). Because obesity and
chronic hyperglycemia increase mitochondrial superoxide production, as
well as UCP2 expression in pancreatic beta cells, Krauss et al. (2003)
hypothesized that a superoxide-UCP2 pathway could contribute importantly
to obesity- and hyperglycemia-induced beta cell dysfunction. They
demonstrated that in mice, endogenously produced mitochondrial
superoxide activated Ucp2-mediated proton leak, thus lowering ATP levels
and impairing glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Furthermore,
hyperglycemia- and obesity-induced loss of glucose responsiveness was
prevented by reduction of mitochondrial superoxide production or gene
knockout of Ucp2. Importantly, reduction of superoxide had no beneficial
effect in the absence of Ucp2, and superoxide levels were increased
further in the absence of Ucp2, demonstrating that the adverse effects
of superoxide on beta cell glucose sensing are caused by activation of
UCP2. Krauss et al. (2003) concluded that superoxide-mediated activation
of UCP2 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of beta cell
dysfunction and type II diabetes.

Conti et al. (2006) engineered transgenic mice to overexpress Ucp2 in
hypocretin neurons (Hcrt-Ucp2) and reported that these mice had elevated
hypothalamic temperature. The effects of local temperature elevation on
the central thermostat resulted in a 0.3- to 0.5-degree Celsius
reduction of the core body temperature. Fed ad libitum, Hcrt-UCP2
transgenic mice had the same caloric intake as their wildtype
littermates but had increased energy efficiency and a greater median
life span (12% increase in males; 20% increase in females). Thus, Conti
et al. (2006) concluded that modest sustained reduction of core body
temperature prolonged life span independent of altered diet or calorie
restriction.

Emre et al. (2007) showed that streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes was
strongly accelerated in Ucp2-knockout mice compared with wildtype mice.
STZ-treated Ucp2-knockout mice showed increased intraislet lymphocyte
and macrophage infiltration, increased Il1b (147720) and nitric oxide
production from macrophages, and increased nitric oxide/ROS-induced
damage compared with STZ-treated wildtype mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OBESITY, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
UCP2, -866G-A

Esterbauer et al. (2001) found an association between obesity (see
BMIQ4, 607447) and a common G/A polymorphism (dbSNP rs659366) in the
UCP2 promoter region at position -866. The G/G and G/A genotypes were
more frequent in the obese group than in the never-obese group.

Bulotta et al. (2005) studied the distribution of the -866G/A UCP2 SNP
in 746 type 2 diabetes patients and 327 healthy unrelated Caucasians
from Italy. Compared with -866G/G carriers, a progressively reduced (P =
0.01) risk of type 2 diabetes was observed in -866G/A and -866A/A
subjects, with the latter showing an approximately 50% risk reduction
(OR = 0.51; 95% CI 0.3-0.8; P = 0.003). Conversely, the -866G/G genotype
was associated with increased risk (OR = 1.31; 95% CI, 1.01-1.71).
Overall, the population risk attributable to the UCP2 -866G/G genotype
was about 12%. Bulotta et al. (2005) also tested for an effect of the
P12A variant of the PPARG2 gene (601487.0002) on diabetes risk given by
the UCP2 SNP. After stratifying for the PPARG2 polymorphism, the
increased risk conferred by the UCP2 G/G genotype was still evident
among P12/P12 homozygous subjects (n = 801; OR = 1.38 ; 95% CI,
1.04-1.83), but seemed to disappear among carriers of the A12 allele (n
= 137; OR = 0.87; 95% CI, 0.40-1.91).

REFERENCE 1. Andrews, Z. B.; Liu, Z.-W.; Wallingford, N.; Erion, D. M.; Borok,
E.; Friedman, J. M.; Tschop, M. H.; Shanabrough, M.; Cline, G.; Shulman,
G. I.; Coppola, A.; Gao, X.-B.; Horvath, T. L.; Diano, S.: UCP2 mediates
ghrelin's action on NPY/AgRP neurons by lowering free radicals. Nature 454:
846-851, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature 459: 736 only, 2009.

2. Arsenijevic, D.; Onuma, H.; Pecqueur, C.; Raimbault, S.; Manning,
B. S.; Miroux, B.; Couplan, E.; Alves-Guerra, M.-C.; Goubern, M.;
Surwit, R.; Bouillard, F.; Richard, D.; Collins, S.; Ricquier, D.
: Disruption of the uncoupling protein-2 gene in mice reveals a role
in immunity and reactive oxygen species production. Nature Genet. 26:
435-439, 2000.

3. Bouchard, C.; Perusse, L.; Chagnon, Y. C.; Warden, C.; Ricquier,
D.: Linkage between markers in the vicinity of the uncoupling protein
2 gene and resting metabolic rate in humans. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6:
1887-1889, 1997.

4. Brauner, P.; Nibbelink, M.; Flachs, P.; Vitkova, I.; Kopecky, P.;
Mertelikova, I.; Janderova, L.; Penicaud, L.; Casteilla, L.; Plavka,
R.; Kopecky, J.: Fast decline of hematopoiesis and uncoupling protein
2 content in human liver after birth: location of the protein in Kupffer
cells. Pediat. Res. 49: 440-447, 2001.

5. Bulotta, A.; Ludovico, O.; Coco, A.; Di Paola, R.; Quattrone, A.;
Carella, M.; Pellegrini, F.; Prudente, S.; Trischitta, V.: The common
-866G/A polymorphism in the promoter region of the UCP-2 gene is associated
with reduced risk of type 2 diabetes in Caucasians from Italy. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 1176-1180, 2005.

6. Conti, B.; Sanchez-Alavez, M.; Winsky-Sommerer, R.; Morale, M.
C.; Lucero, J.; Brownell, S.; Fabre, V.; Huitron-Resendiz, S.; Henriksen,
S.; Zorrilla, E. P.; de Lecea, L.; Bartfai, T.: Transgenic mice with
a reduced core body temperature have an increased life span. Science 314:
825-828, 2006.

7. Diao, J.; Allister, E. M.; Koshkin, V.; Lee, S. C.; Bhattacharjee,
A.; Tang, C.; Giacca, A.; Chan, C. B.; Wheeler, M. B.: UCP2 is highly
expressed in pancreatic alpha-cells and influences secretion and survival. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 12057-12062, 2008.

8. Echtay, K. S.; Roussel, D.; St-Pierre, J.; Jekabsons, M. B.; Cadenas,
S.; Stuart, J. A.; Harper, J. A.; Roebuck, S. J.; Morrison, A.; Pickering,
S.; Clapham, J. C.; Brand, M. D.: Superoxide activates mitochondrial
uncoupling proteins. Nature 415: 96-99, 2002.

9. Emre, Y.; Hurtaud, C.; Karaca, M.; Nubel, T.; Zavala, F.; Ricquier,
D.: Role of uncoupling protein UCP2 in cell-mediated immunity: how
macrophage-mediated insulitis is accelerated in a model of autoimmune
diabetes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 19085-19090, 2007.

10. Enerback, S.; Jacobsson, A.; Simpson, E. M.; Guerra, C.; Yamashita,
H.; Harper, M.-E.; Kozak, L. P.: Mice lacking mitochondrial uncoupling
protein are cold-sensitive but not obese. Nature 387: 90-93, 1997.

11. Esterbauer, H.; Schneitler, C.; Oberkofler, H.; Ebenbichler, C.;
Paulweber, B.; Sandhofer, F.; Ladurner, G.; Hell, E.; Strosberg, A.
D.; Patsch, J. R.; Krempler, F.; Patsch, W.: A common polymorphism
in the promoter of UCP2 is associated with decreased risk of obesity
in middle-aged humans. Nature Genet. 28: 178-183, 2001.

12. Fleury, C.; Neverova, M.; Collins, S.; Raimbault, S.; Champigny,
O.; Levi-Meyrueis, C.; Bouillaud, F.; Seldin, M. F.; Surwit, R. S.;
Ricquier, D.; Warden, C. H.: Uncoupling protein-2: a novel gene linked
to obesity and hyperinsulinemia. Nature Genet. 15: 269-272, 1997.

13. Flier, J. S.; Lowell, B. B.: Obesity research springs a proton
leak. Nature Genet. 15: 223-224, 1997.

14. Krauss, S.; Zhang, C.-Y.; Scorrano, L.; Dalgaard, L. T.; St-Pierre,
J.; Grey, S. T.; Lowell, B. B.: Superoxide-mediated activation of
uncoupling protein 2 causes pancreatic beta cell dysfunction. J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 1831-1842, 2003.

15. Mattiasson, G.; Shamloo, M.; Gido, G.; Mathi, K.; Tomasevic, G.;
Yi, S.; Warden, C. H.; Castilho, R. F.; Melcher, T.; Gonzalez-Zulueta,
M.; Nikolich, K.; Wieloch, T.: Uncoupling protein-2 prevents neuronal
death and diminishes brain dysfunction after stroke and brain trauma. Nature
Med. 9: 1062-1068, 2003.

16. Millet, L.; Vidal, H.; Andreelli, F.; Larrouy, D.; Riou, J.-P.;
Ricquier, D.; Laville, M.; Langin, D.: Increased uncoupling protein-2
and -3 mRNA expression during fasting in obese and lean humans. J.
Clin. Invest. 100: 2665-2670, 1997.

17. Park, D.; Han, C. Z.; Elliott, M. R.; Kinchen, J. M.; Trampont,
P. C.; Das, S.; Collins, S.; Lysiak, J. J.; Hoehn, K. L.; Ravichandran,
K. S.: Continued clearance of apoptotic cells critically depends
on the phagocyte Ucp2 protein. Nature 477: 220-224, 2011.

18. Parton, L. E.; Ye, C. P.; Coppari, R.; Enriori, P. J.; Choi, B.;
Zhang, C.-Y.; Xu, C.; Vianna, C. R.; Balthasar, N.; Lee, C. E.; Elmquist,
J. K.; Cowley, M. A.; Lowell, B. B.: Glucose sensing by POMC neurons
regulates glucose homeostasis and is impaired in obesity. Nature 449:
228-232, 2007.

19. Pecqueur, C.; Cassard-Doulcier, A.-M.; Raimbault, S.; Miroux,
B.; Fleury, C.; Gelly, C.; Bouillaud, F.; Ricquier, D.: Functional
organization of the human uncoupling protein-2 gene and juxtaposition
to the uncoupling protein-3 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 255:
40-46, 1999.

20. Sullivan, P. G.; Dube, C.; Dorenbos, K.; Steward, O.; Baram, T.
Z.: Mitochondrial uncoupling protein-2 protects the immature brain
from excitotoxic neuronal death. Ann. Neurol. 53: 711-717, 2003.

21. Walder, K.; Norman, R. A.; Hanson, R. L.; Schrauwen, P.; Neverova,
M.; Jenkinson, C. P.; Easlick, J.; Warden, C. H.; Pecqueur, C.; Raimbault,
S.; Ricquier, D.; Harper, M.; Silver, K.; Shuldiner, A. R.; Solanes,
G.; Lowell, B. B.; Chung, W. K.; Leibel, R. L.; Pratley, R.; Ravussin,
E.: Association between uncoupling protein polymorphisms (UCP2-UCP3)
and energy metabolism/obesity in Pima Indians. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7:
1431-1435, 1998.

22. Wisloff, U.; Najjar, S. M.; Ellingsen, O.; Haram, P. M.; Swoap,
S.; Al-Share, Q.; Fernstrom, M.; Rezaei, K.; Lee, S. J.; Koch, L.
G.; Britton, S. L.: Cardiovascular risk factors emerge after artificial
selection for low aerobic capacity. Science 307: 418-420, 2005.

23. Zhang, C.-Y.; Baffy, G.; Perret, P.; Krauss, S.; Peroni, O.; Grujic,
D.; Hagen, T.; Vidal-Puig, A.; Boss, O.; Kim, Y.-B.; Zheng, X. X.;
Wheeler, M. B.; Shulman, G. I.; Chan, C. B.; Lowell, B. B.: Uncoupling
protein-2 negatively regulates insulin secretion and is a major link
between obesity, beta cell dysfunction, and type 2 diabetes. Cell 105:
745-755, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/29/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/3/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/3/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/3/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/16/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/28/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/28/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/15/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/2/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/2/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/24/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/26/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/22/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/29/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/2/1997

EDITED alopez: 09/22/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
terry: 12/1/2009
mgross: 11/5/2009
terry: 10/29/2009
alopez: 7/16/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
alopez: 3/3/2009
carol: 10/1/2008
alopez: 9/12/2008
terry: 9/3/2008
joanna: 9/2/2008
mgross: 6/5/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
alopez: 10/18/2007
terry: 10/16/2007
alopez: 12/7/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
alopez: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/2/2005
joanna: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 2/13/2004
terry: 2/10/2004
alopez: 9/2/2003
cwells: 8/19/2003
ckniffin: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 7/30/2003
ckniffin: 7/28/2003
mgross: 11/15/2002
alopez: 1/3/2002
terry: 1/2/2002
mgross: 7/2/2001
alopez: 5/29/2001
terry: 5/24/2001
alopez: 5/8/2001
terry: 4/26/2001
terry: 11/22/2000
mgross: 4/8/1999
dkim: 12/9/1998
carol: 9/21/1998
terry: 9/17/1998
mark: 1/19/1998
terry: 1/15/1998
jenny: 11/12/1997
terry: 11/4/1997
mark: 8/20/1997
mark: 5/29/1997
mark: 3/3/1997
mark: 3/2/1997

601728	TITLE +601728 PHOSPHATASE AND TENSIN HOMOLOG; PTEN
;;PTEN1;;
MUTATED IN MULTIPLE ADVANCED CANCERS 1; MMAC1;;
PHOSPHATASE AND TENSIN HOMOLOG DELETED ON CHROMOSOME 10
PTEN HAMARTOMA TUMOR SYNDROME, INCLUDED; PHTS, INCLUDED;;
PTEN HAMARTOMA TUMOR SYNDROME WITH GRANULAR CELL TUMOR, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PTEN gene encodes a ubiquitously expressed tumor suppressor
dual-specificity phosphatase that antagonizes the PI3K signaling pathway
through its lipid phosphatase activity and negatively regulates the MAPK
pathway through its protein phosphatase activity (summary by Pezzolesi
et al., 2007).

CLONING

As tumors progress to more advanced stages, they acquire an increasing
number of genetic alterations. Li et al. (1997) noted that one
alteration that occurs at high frequency in a variety of human tumors is
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 10q23. Although rarely seen in low-grade
glial tumors and early-stage prostate cancers, LOH at 10q23 occurs in
approximately 70% of glioblastomas (the most advanced form of glial
tumor) and approximately 60% of advanced prostate cancers. This pattern
of LOH and the finding that wildtype chromosome 10 suppresses the
tumorigenicity of glioblastoma cells in mice suggested to Li et al.
(1997) that 10q23 encodes a tumor suppressor gene. By mapping of
homozygous deletions on 10q23, they isolated a candidate tumor
suppressor gene that they called PTEN for 'phosphatase and tensin
homolog deleted on chromosome ten.' Sequence analysis of the predicted
403-amino acid open reading frame (ORF) revealed a protein tyrosine
phosphatase domain and a large region of homology (approximately 175
amino acids) to chicken tensin (600076; a protein that interacts with
actin filaments at focal adhesions) and bovine auxilin. In preliminary
screens, Li et al. (1997) detected mutations of PTEN in 31% (13 of 42)
of glioblastoma cell lines and xenografts, 100% (4 of 4) of prostate
cancer cell lines, 6% (4 of 65) of breast cancer cell lines and
xenografts, and 17% (3 of 18) of primary glioblastomas. The homologies
displayed by the structure of PTEN suggested to the investigators that
it may suppress tumor cell growth by antagonizing protein tyrosine
kinases and may regulate tumor cell invasion and metastasis through
interactions at focal adhesions.

By exon trapping, the same gene was independently isolated by Steck et
al. (1997), who designated it MMAC1 (mutated in multiple advanced
cancers-1). They began their search for the gene from deletions
involving 10q23-q24, which occur in the majority of cases of human
glioblastoma multiformes. Homozygous deletions in 4 glioma cells lines
further refined the location. The MMAC1 gene spans these deletions and
encodes a widely expressed 5.5-kb mRNA with a 403-amino acid ORF. The
predicted MMAC1 protein contains sequence motifs with significant
homology to the catalytic domain of protein phosphatases and to the
cytoskeletal proteins tensin and auxilin. MMAC1 coding-region mutations
were observed in a number of glioma, prostate, kidney, and breast
carcinoma cell lines or tumor specimens. Steck et al. (1997) also cloned
mouse and dog homologs of MMAC1.

Using RT-PCR, Sharrard and Maitland (2000) cloned full-length PTEN and 2
transcripts encoding C-terminally truncated proteins of 345 and 171
amino acids, respectively. All 3 transcripts were expressed in normal
lymphocytes and in normal prostatic epithelium cell lines. Glioblastoma
and prostate cancer cell lines showed lower and more variable
expression.

By comparative genomic analysis in human, mouse, and rat, Pezzolesi et
al. (2007) identified a highly conserved sequence upstream of the PTEN
promoter with 80% sequence identity. This region contained a canonic
E-box sequence (CACGTG) located at position -2181 to -2176,
approximately 800 bp upstream of the PTEN core promoter and more than
1.1 kb upstream of its minimal promoter region (located at -958 to
-821). In vitro assays suggested that this motif is recognized by
members of the basic region-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper (bHLH-LZ)
transcription factor family, USF1 (191523) and USF2 (600390). Reporter
assays showed that the E-box sequence is involved in mediating PTEN
transcriptional activation. Germline deletions involving this region
were found in 4 of 30 patients with Cowden syndrome, suggesting that
alterations at cis-regulatory elements can contribute to disease
pathogenesis.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lee et al. (1999) described the 2.1-angstrom crystal structure of human
PTEN bound to L(+)-tartrate. The PTEN structure reveals a phosphatase
domain that is similar to protein phosphatases but also has an enlarged
active site important for the accommodation of the phosphoinositide
substrate. The structure also reveals that PTEN has a C2 domain. The
PTEN C2 domain bound phospholipid membranes in vitro, and mutation of
basic residues that could mediate this reduced the membrane affinity of
PTEN and its ability to suppress the growth of glioblastoma tumor cells.
The phosphatase and C2 domains associate across an extensive interface,
suggesting that the C2 domain may serve to productively position the
catalytic domain on the membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sharrard and Maitland (2000) showed the PTEN gene contains 9 exons plus
a variable exon 5b that is skipped in the major PTEN transcript. The
3-prime end of exon 8 is subject to alternative splicing.

MAPPING

Steck et al. (1997) mapped the PTEN gene to chromosome 10q23.3. Hansen
and Justice (1998) mapped the Pten gene to mouse chromosome 19.

- Pseudogene

For information of a processed pseudogene of PTEN located on chromosome
9p13.3, see 613531.

GENE FUNCTION

In S. cerevisiae, the cdc14 gene is essential for cell cycle
progression. Analysis of the cdc14 point of action suggests that the
protein acts in late nuclear division, and may play a role in
preparation for DNA replication during the subsequent cell cycle. Li et
al. (1997) identified PTEN, CDC14A (603504), and CDC14B (603505) as
human cdc14 homologs. However, sequence analysis revealed that PTEN is
more closely related to a different yeast open reading frame, YNL128W.
Plasmids expressing PTEN failed to complement a cdc14 mutant yeast
strain. Recombinant PTEN exhibited the kinetic properties of
dual-specific phosphatases (see 602038) in vitro.

Li and Sun (1998) showed that PTEN expression potently suppressed the
growth and tumorigenicity of human glioblastoma cells. The growth
suppression activity of PTEN was mediated by its ability to block cell
cycle progression in the G1 phase. The studies suggested that the PTEN
tumor suppressor modulates G1 cell cycle progression through negatively
regulating the PI3K (see 171834)/Akt (164730) signaling pathway, and
that 1 critical target of this signaling process is the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27(KIP1) (600778).

Hypoxia and growth factors are critical modulators of angiogenesis. By
immunoblot analysis, Zundel et al. (2000) determined that expression of
wildtype PTEN in a glioblastoma cell line with mutant PTEN blocked
hypoxia- and IGF1 (147440)-induced AKT1 phosphorylation and kinase
activity. PTEN expression, unlike serum deprivation and hypoxia, failed
to completely inhibit DNA synthesis as measured by tritiated-thymidine
incorporation. Glioblastoma cell lines were highly resistant to
induction of apoptosis by hypoxia, serum deprivation, and irradiation
with or without PTEN expression, suggesting the presence of additional
antiapoptotic mutations in these tumors. Northern blot analysis showed
that PTEN expression blocked the expression of endogenous VEGF (192240),
COX1 (176805), PGK1 (311800), and PFK (see, e.g., 610681),
hypoxia-inducible genes implicated in angiogenesis. In contrast to AKT,
PTEN expression also completely suppressed the stabilization of HIF1A
(603348) by hypoxia. Zundel et al. (2000) proposed that loss of PTEN
contributes to tumor expansion through the deregulation of AKT activity
and HIF1-regulated gene expression.

Dahia et al. (1999) analyzed PTEN in a series of primary acute leukemias
and non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) as well as in cell lines. The majority
of cell lines studied carried PTEN abnormalities: 40% carried mutations
or hemizygous deletions. One-third of cell lines had low PTEN transcript
levels, and 60% of these had low or absent PTEN protein. A smaller
number of primary hematologic malignancies, in particular NHLs, carried
PTEN mutations. PTEN and phosphorylated Akt levels were inversely
correlated in the large majority of examined samples, suggesting that
PTEN regulates phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphates and may play a
role in apoptosis.

Tamura et al. (1998) found that overexpression of PTEN inhibited cell
migration, whereas antisense PTEN enhanced migration. Integrin-mediated
cell spreading and the formation of focal adhesions were downregulated
by wildtype PTEN but not by PTEN with an inactive phosphatase domain.
PTEN interacted with the focal adhesion kinase FAK (600758) and reduced
its tyrosine phosphorylation. Overexpression of FAK partially
antagonized the effects of PTEN. Thus, PTEN phosphatase may function as
a tumor suppressor by negatively regulating cell interactions with the
extracellular matrix.

Cantley and Neel (1999) reviewed the reports indicating that PTEN
negatively controls the PI3K signaling pathway for regulation of cell
growth and survival by dephosphorylating the 3 position of
phosphoinositides.

Gimm et al. (2000) studied the temporal and spatial pattern of PTEN
expression during human development using a specific monoclonal
antibody. They observed mainly high-level PTEN expression in tissues
(e.g., skin, thyroid, and central nervous system) known to be involved
in Cowden syndrome (CS; 158350) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome
(BRRS; 153480). In addition, expression was noted in peripheral nervous
system, autonomic nervous system, and upper gastrointestinal tract.

Mutter et al. (2000) examined PTEN expression in normal human
endometrium during response to changing physiologic levels of steroid
hormones. PTEN RNA levels, assessed by RT-PCR, increased several fold in
secretory compared to proliferative endometrium. Early in the menstrual
cycle under the dominant influence of estrogens, the proliferative
endometrium showed ubiquitous cytoplasmic and nuclear PTEN expression.
By the midsecretory phase, epithelial PTEN was exhausted, but increased
dramatically in the cytoplasm of stromal cells undergoing decidual
change. The authors concluded that stromal and epithelial compartments
contribute to the hormone-driven changes in endometrial PTEN expression
and that abnormal hormonal conditions may, in turn, disrupt normal
patterns of PTEN expression in this tissue.

Stambolic et al. (2001) investigated the human genomic PTEN locus and
identified a p53 (191170)-binding element directly upstream of the PTEN
gene. Deletion and mutation analyses showed that this element is
necessary for inducible transactivation of PTEN by p53. A
p53-independent element controlling constitutive expression of PTEN was
also identified. In contrast to p53 mutant cell lines, induction of p53
in primary and tumor cell lines with wildtype p53 increased PTEN mRNA
levels. PTEN was required for p53-mediated apoptosis in immortalized
mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Di Cristofano and Pandolfi (2000) reviewed the multiple roles of PTEN in
tumor suppression.

Weng et al. (1999) demonstrated that overexpression of PTEN in MCF-7
breast cancer cells causes G1 arrest followed by cell death. Weng et al.
(2001) demonstrated increased PTEN-mediated cell death of MCF-7 breast
cancer cells cultured in low levels of growth factors. The caspase-9
(602234)-specific inhibitor ZVAD blocked PTEN-induced cell death without
altering the effect of PTEN on cell cycle distribution. Overexpression
of dominant-negative Akt (164730), a downstream protein kinase, induced
more cell death but had less effect on the cell cycle than
overexpression of PTEN. The authors suggested that in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells, the apoptotic cells induced by the overexpression of PTEN
are not derived from the G1-arrested cells. Further, they hypothesized
that the effect of PTEN on cell death is mediated through the PI3K/Akt
pathway, whereas PTEN-mediated cell cycle arrests depend on both
PI3K/Akt-dependent and -independent pathways.

Among 10 thyroid cancer cell lines, Weng et al. (2001) found a single
follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC; 188470) line with a hemizygous PTEN
deletion and a splice variant in the remaining allele. Four lines,
including the FTC line, expressed PTEN mRNA at low levels. Transient
expression of PTEN in 7 thyroid cancer cell lines resulted in G1 arrest
in 2 well-differentiated papillary thyroid cancer lines (PTCs), and both
G1 arrest and cell death in the remaining 5 lines, consisting of 3 FTCs,
1 poorly differentiated PTC, and 1 undifferentiated thyroid cancer. The
level of phosphorylated Akt was inversely correlated with the endogenous
level of PTEN protein, and overexpression of PTEN blocked Akt
phosphorylation in all cells analyzed. The authors suggested that
downregulation of PTEN expression at the mRNA level may play a role in
PTEN inactivation in thyroid cancer, and that PTEN may exert its
tumor-suppressive effect on thyroid cancer through the inhibition of
cell cycle progression alone, or both cell cycle progression and cell
death.

Weng et al. (2001) further demonstrated that overexpression of wildtype
PTEN leads to the suppression of cell growth through the blockade of
cell cycle progression, an increase in the abundance of p27 (600778), a
decrease in the protein levels of cyclin D1 (168461), and the inhibition
of Akt phosphorylation. In contrast, expression of the phosphatase-dead
mutation cys124 to ser (C124S; 601728.0023) promoted cell growth and had
the opposite effect on the abundance of p27, cyclin D1 levels, and the
phosphorylation of Akt. The gly129-to-glu mutation (G129E; 601728.0001),
which retains only protein phosphatase activity, behaved like C124S
except that the former caused decreased cyclin D1 levels similar to
wildtype PTEN. The authors concluded that PTEN exerts its growth
suppression through lipid phosphatase-dependent and -independent
activities and, most likely, via the coordinate effect of both protein
phosphatase and lipid phosphatase activities.

In another study, Weng et al. (2001) showed that PTEN appears to play a
unique role in the insulin signaling pathway in a breast cancer model.
Ectopic expression of wildtype PTEN in epithelial breast cancer cells
resulted in universal inhibition of Akt phosphorylation in response to
stimulation by diverse growth factors and selective inhibition of MEK
(600982)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK; 600997)
phosphorylation stimulated by insulin (176730) or insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF1; 147440). The latter was accompanied by a decrease in the
phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS1; 147545) and the
association of IRS1 with Grb2 (108355)/Sos (182530), without affecting
the phosphorylation status of the insulin receptor and Shc (600560), nor
Shc/Grb2 complex formation. The MEK inhibitor PD980059, but not the PI3K
inhibitor wortmannin, abolished the effect of PTEN on insulin-stimulated
cell growth. The authors hypothesized that PTEN may block MAPK
phosphorylation in response to insulin stimulation by inhibiting the
phosphorylation of IRS1 and IRS1/Grb2/Sos complex formation, which may
lead to downregulation of cyclin D1, inhibition of cell cycle
progression, and suppression of cell growth.

Mutation in the PTEN gene accompanies progression of brain tumors from
benign to the most malignant forms. Tumor progression, particularly in
aggressive and malignant tumors, is associated with the induction of
angiogenesis, a process termed the angiogenic switch. Wen et al. (2001)
reported data indicating that PTEN regulates tumor-induced angiogenesis
and the progression of gliomas to a malignant phenotype via the
regulation of phosphoinositide-dependent signals.

Wishart et al. (2001) reviewed PTEN and myotubularin (300415)
phosphoinositide phosphatases. Phosphoinositides play an integral role
in a diverse array of cellular signaling processes. Although
considerable effort has been directed toward characterizing the kinases
that produce inositol lipid second messengers, the study of phosphatases
that oppose these kinases had been limited. Research has been focused on
the identification of novel lipid phosphatases such as PTEN and
myotubularin, their physiologic substrates, signaling pathways, and
links to human diseases. Wishart et al. (2001) pointed out the
usefulness of bioinformatics in conjunction with genetic analyses in
model organisms in the elucidation of roles of these enzymes in
regulating phosphoinositide-mediated cellular signaling.

Shallow gradients of chemoattractants, sensed by G protein-linked
signaling pathways, elicit localized binding of PH domains specific for
PI(3,4,5)P3 at sites on the membrane where rearrangements of the
cytoskeleton and pseudopod extension occur. Iijima and Devreotes (2002)
showed that disruption of PTEN in Dictyostelium discoideum dramatically
prolonged and broadened the PH domain relocation and actin
polymerization responses, causing the cells lacking PTEN to follow a
circuitous route toward the attractant. Exogenously expressed PTEN-GFP
localized to the surface membrane at the rear of the cell. Membrane
localization required a putative PI(4,5)P2-binding motif and was
required for chemotaxis. These results suggested that specific
phosphoinositides direct actin polymerization to the leading edge of the
cell and that regulation of PTEN plays a critical role in gradient
sensing and directional migration.

Funamoto et al. (2002) investigated the mechanisms of leading edge
formation in chemotaxing Dictyostelium cells. They demonstrated that
while PI3K transiently translocated to the plasma membrane in response
to chemoattractant stimulation and to the leading edge in chemotaxing
cells, PTEN, a negative regulator of PI3K pathways, exhibited a
reciprocal pattern of localization. By uniformly localizing PI3K along
the plasma membrane, Funamoto et al. (2002) showed that chemotaxis
pathways were activated along the lateral sides of cells and that PI3K
could initiate pseudopod formation, providing evidence for a direct
instructional role of PI3K in leading edge formation. These findings
provided evidence that differential subcellular localization and
activation of PI3K and PTEN is required for proper chemotaxis.

Vaults are large cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins composed largely of MVP
(605088) and vault RNA (VTRNA1-1; 612695). Using a yeast 2-hybrid
screen, Yu et al. (2002) showed that PTEN interacted with MPV.
Endogenous PTEN associated with vault particles isolated from HeLa
cells. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed the interaction between
PTEN and MVP. Deletion analysis mapped the interacting regions to the C2
domain of PTEN and the EF-hand motifs of MVP. The interaction was
independent of tyrosine phosphorylation, but required calcium,
consistent with a calcium-induced conformational change in the MVP
EF-hand motifs.

Waite and Eng (2002) provided a comprehensive review of PTEN and
discussed the concept of the PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome (PHTS). They
reviewed data that led them to conclude that juvenile polyposis syndrome
(174900) is not a PHTS.

By analyzing PTEN-deficient tumor cell lines, Nakamura et al. (2000)
determined that PTEN deficiency leads to aberrant localization of FKHR
(136533) to the cytoplasm. Restoration of PTEN expression restored FKHR
to the nucleus and restored transcriptional activation. The authors
found evidence that FKHR is an effector of PTEN-associated functions, in
that FKHR induced apoptosis in cells that undergo PTEN-mediated
apoptosis, and FKHR mediated G1 arrest in cells that undergo
PTEN-mediated cell cycle arrest.

Modur et al. (2002) found that both FKHR and FKHRL1 (602681) were highly
expressed in normal prostate. They also noted that, in a PTEN-deficient
prostate carcinoma cell line, FKHR and FKHRL1 were cytoplasmically
sequestered and inactive, and expression of TRAIL (603598), a
proapoptotic effector, was decreased. Modur et al. (2002) determined
that TRAIL is a direct target of FKHRL1, and they hypothesized that the
loss of PTEN contributes to increased tumor cell survival through
decreased transcriptional activity of FKHR and FKHRL1 followed by
decreased TRAIL expression and apoptosis.

Weng et al. (2002) demonstrated that overexpression of wildtype PTEN in
the MCF-7 breast cancer line resulted in a phosphatase
activity-dependent decrease in the phosphorylation of ETS2 (164740), a
transcription factor whose DNA-binding ability is controlled by
phosphorylation. Exposure of MCF-7 cells to insulin, IGF1, epidermal
growth factor (EGF; 131530) can lead to the phosphorylation of ETS2. The
MEK (MAP2K1; 176872) inhibitor PD590089 abrogated insulin-stimulated
phosphorylation of ETS2. In contrast, the PI3K inhibitor LY492002 had no
effect on insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of ETS2. Overexpression of
PTEN abrogated activation of the uPA Ras-responsive enhancer (PLAU1;
191840), a target of ETS2 action, in a phosphatase-dependent manner,
irrespective of the presence or absence of insulin. The authors
suggested that PTEN may block insulin-stimulated ETS2 phosphorylation
through inhibition of the ERK members of the MAP kinase family
independently of PI3K, and that the PTEN effect on the phosphorylation
status of ETS2 may be mediated through PTEN's protein phosphatase
activity.

Germline mutations in BMPR1A (601299), the gene encoding the type 1A
receptor of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP), have been found in rare
families with Cowden syndrome, or Cowden-like syndrome (601299.0005),
suggesting that there may be a link between BMP signaling and PTEN.
Waite and Eng (2003) found that exposure to BMP2 (112261) increased PTEN
protein levels in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7. The increase in
PTEN protein was rapid and was not due to an increase in new protein
synthesis, suggesting that BMP2 stimulation inhibited PTEN protein
degradation. BMP2 treatment of MCF-7 cells decreased the association of
PTEN with 2 proteins in the degradative pathway, UBE2L3 (603721) and
UBE2E3 (604151). The authors suggested that BMP2 exposure may regulate
PTEN protein levels by decreasing PTEN's association with the
degradative pathway, which may explain how BMPR1A may act as a minor
susceptibility gene for PTEN-mutation-negative Cowden syndrome.

Goberdhan and Wilson (2003) reviewed the functions of PTEN.

Inactivation of PTEN and overexpression of VEGF are 2 of the most common
events observed in high-grade malignant gliomas (see 137800).
Gomez-Manzano et al. (2003) showed that transfer of PTEN to glioma cells
under normoxic conditions decreased the level of secreted VEGF protein
by 42 to 70% at the transcriptional level. Assays suggested that PTEN
acts on VEGF most likely via downregulation of the transcription factor
HIF1-alpha and by inhibition of PI3K. Increased PTEN expression also
inhibited the growth and migration of glioma-activated endothelial cells
in culture.

Raftopoulou et al. (2004) demonstrated that PTEN inhibits cell migration
through its C2 domain, independent of its lipid phosphatase activity.
This activity depends on the protein phosphatase activity of PTEN and on
the dephosphorylation at a single residue, threonine-383. Raftopoulou et
al. (2004) suggested that the ability of PTEN to control cell migration
through its C2 domain is likely to be an important feature of its tumor
suppressor activity.

Nagata et al. (2004) showed that PTEN not only antagonizes tumorigenesis
but also sensitizes breast cancers to targeted therapy with trastuzumab
(Herceptin), a humanized monoclonal antibody against ERBB2 (164870). The
authors provided data that clarified the antitumoral mechanism of
trastuzumab and helped clarify the mechanism underlying resistance. They
showed that, on binding to the ERBB2 receptor, trastuzumab stabilizes
and activates the PTEN tumor suppressor and consequently downregulates
the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. When the expression of PTEN is reduced
or abrogated, this chain of events is interrupted and the antitumoral
effects of trastuzumab are impaired. Nagata et al. (2004) confirmed, in
a small group of patients, that the presence of low levels of PTEN
correlated with unresponsiveness to trastuzumab treatment. Pandolfi
(2004) discussed ways to make use of this information with drugs that
augment PTEN levels and other strategies.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening, in vitro protein binding assays with
recombinant proteins, and coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous proteins,
Okahara et al. (2004) demonstrated a direct interaction between the
C-terminal domain of PTEN and GLTSCR2 (605691). The interaction required
amino acids 338 through 348 of GLTSCR2 and a C-terminal segment of PTEN
that did not include the PDZ domain. Downregulation of GLTSCR2 in breast
carcinoma cells by RNA interference enhanced the degradation of PTEN
with concomitant decrease in PTEN phosphorylation. PTEN C-terminal
tumor-associated mutants, which are highly susceptible to protein
degradation, were unable to bind GLTSCR2 and showed reduced
phosphorylation. Okahara et al. (2004) concluded that GTSCR2 interacts
directly with PTEN and promotes its phosphorylation and stability.

Sanchez et al. (2005) found that the inhibitory effect of sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P) on mammalian cell migration required PTEN as a
signaling intermediate downstream of EDG5 (605111) and Rho GTPase
activation. S1P activation of EDG5 stimulated complex formation between
EDG5 and PTEN in the membrane compartment, and EDG5 signaling increased
PTEN phosphorylation and its phosphatase activity in membrane fractions.
Sanchez et al. (2005) concluded that EDG5 regulates PTEN by a Rho
GTPase-dependent pathway to inhibit cell migration.

Chen et al. (2005) showed that conditional inactivation of Trp53
(191170) in the mouse prostate failed to produce a tumor phenotype,
whereas complete Pten inactivation in the prostate triggered nonlethal
invasive prostate cancer after long latency. Strikingly, combined
inactivation of Pten and Trp53 elicited invasive prostate cancer as
early as 2 weeks after puberty and was invariably lethal by 7 months of
age. Importantly, acute Pten inactivation induced growth arrest through
the p53-dependent cellular senescence pathway both in vitro and in vivo,
which could be fully rescued by combined loss of Trp53. In addition,
Chen et al. (2005) detected evidence of cellular senescence in specimens
from early-stage human prostate cancer. Chen et al. (2005) concluded
that their results demonstrated the relevance of cellular senescence in
restricting tumorigenesis in vivo and supported a model for cooperative
tumor suppression in which p53 is an essential failsafe protein of
Pten-deficient tumors.

In MCF7 human breast cancer cells, Waite et al. (2005) showed that
stimulation with phytoestrogens, such as resveratrol, quercetin and
genistein, resulted in an increase in PTEN protein levels. Phytoestrogen
stimulation also resulted in decreased Akt1 (164730) phosphorylation and
an increase in p27 (CDKN1B; 600778) protein levels, indicating active
PTEN lipid phosphatase activity. In contrast, MAPK1 (176948)
phosphorylation and cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461) levels, which are
regulated by PTEN activity, were not altered. PTEN mRNA levels were
slightly increased in cells stimulated by phytoestrogens, suggesting
that the mechanism for increased PTEN protein expression may be
dependent upon transcription. Waite et al. (2005) hypothesized that a
mechanism for the protective effect of phytoestrogens against breast
cancer may be partially through increased PTEN expression.

Valiente et al. (2005) showed that the C-terminal tail of human PTEN
bound to the PDZ domains of rat Magi2 (606382), Magi3, and Dlg (DLG1;
601014), mouse Sast (MAST1; 612256) and Mast205 (MAST2; 612257), and
human MAST3 (612258). Interaction of PTEN with Magi2 increased PTEN
protein stability, and interaction of PTEN with the MAST kinases
facilitated phosphorylation of PTEN by these kinases.

Mehenni et al. (2005) identified PTEN as an LKB1 (STK11;
602216)-interacting protein. Several LKB1 point mutations associated
with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS; 175200) disrupted the interaction with
PTEN, suggesting that loss of this interaction might contribute to PJS.
Although PTEN and LKB1 are predominantly cytoplasmic and nuclear,
respectively, their interaction led to a cytoplasmic relocalization of
LKB1. PTEN was found to be a substrate of the kinase LKB1 in vitro. As
PTEN is a dual phosphatase mutated in autosomal inherited disorders with
phenotypes similar to those of PJS, such as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome (BRRS; 153480) and Cowden disease (158350), Mehenni et al.
(2005) suggested a functional link between the proteins involved in
different hamartomatous polyposis syndromes and emphasized the central
role played by LKB1 as a tumor suppressor in the small intestine.

Agrawal et al. (2005) characterized the transcriptional and biochemical
outcomes of 5 distinct splice site mutations in the PTEN gene, leading
to the skipping of exon 3, 4, or 6, among patients with classic CS,
BRRS, and CS- or BRRS-like features. The splice site mutations leading
to the deletion of exon 3, 4, or 6 resulted in reduced dual phosphatase
activities of PTEN. Deletion of exon 4 was associated with severely
reduced lipid phosphatase activity, whereas exon 3 skipping resulted in
markedly reduced protein phosphatase activity. In addition, exon 3
deleted transcript and protein were stable and localized to the nucleus
more efficiently than the wildtype PTEN. In contrast, exon 4 skipping
resulted in unstable transcripts and severely truncated unstable PTEN
protein lacking its phosphatase domain.

Yilmaz et al. (2006) conditionally deleted the Pten tumor suppressor
gene in adult hematopoietic cells. This led to myeloproliferative
disease within days and transplantable leukemias within weeks. Pten
deletion also promoted hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) proliferation.
However, this led to HSC depletion via a cell-autonomous mechanism,
preventing these cells from stably reconstituting irradiated mice. In
contrast to leukemia-initiating cells, HSCs were therefore unable to
maintain themselves without Pten. These effects were mostly mediated by
mTOR (601231) as they were inhibited by rapamycin. Rapamycin not only
depleted leukemia-initiating cells but also restored normal HSC
function. Yilmaz et al. (2006) concluded that mechanistic differences
between normal stem cells and cancer stem cells can thus be targeted to
deplete cancer stem cells without damaging normal stem cells.

Zhang et al. (2006) showed that inactivation of Pten in bone marrow HSCs
causes their short-term expansion but long-term decline, primarily owing
to an enhanced level of HSC activation. Pten-deficient HSCs engrafted
normally in recipient mice, but had an impaired ability to sustain
hematopoietic reconstitution, reflecting the dysregulation of their cell
cycle and decreased retention in the bone marrow niche. Mice with
Pten-mutant bone marrow also had an increased representation of myeloid
and T-lymphoid lineages and developed myeloproliferative disorder.
Notably, the cell populations that expanded in PTEN mutants matched
those that become dominant in the acute myeloid/lymphoid leukemia that
develops in later stages of myeloproliferative disorder (MPD). Thus,
Zhang et al. (2006) concluded that PTEN has essential roles in
restricting the activation of HSCs, in lineage fate determination, and
in the prevention of leukemogenesis.

Zhao et al. (2006) showed that electric fields, of a strength equal to
those detected endogenously, direct cell migration during wound healing
as a prime directional cue. Manipulation of endogenous wound electric
fields affects wound healing in vivo. Electric stimulation triggers
activation of Src and inositol-phospholipid signaling, which polarizes
in the direction of cell migration. Notably, genetic disruption of
phosphatidylinositol-3-hydroxykinase gamma (PIK3CG; 601232) decreased
electric field-induced signaling and abolished directed movements of
healing epithelium in response to electric signals. Deletion of PTEN
enhanced signaling and electrotactic responses. Zhao et al. (2006)
concluded that their data identified genes essential for electrical
signal-induced wound healing and showed that PIK3CG and PTEN control
electrotaxis.

Okumura et al. (2006) showed that PCAF (602303), a histone
acetyltransferase that regulates gene transcription, interacted
physically and functionally with PTEN. PCAF acetylated PTEN on lys125
and lys128 within the catalytic cleft essential for phosphoinositol
phosphate specificity, and this acetylation depended on the presence of
growth factors. Reduction of endogenous PCAF in human embryonic kidney
cells using short hairpin RNA resulted in loss of PTEN acetylation in
response to growth factors, and restored PTEN- mediated downregulation
of PI3K signaling and induction of G1 cell cycle arrest.
Acetylation-resistant PTEN mutants retained the ability to regulate PI3K
and induce cell cycle arrest following PCAF overexpression.

Takahashi et al. (2006) found that PTEN interacted with NHERF1
(SLC9A3R1; 604990) and NHERF2 (SLC9A3R2; 606553) adaptor proteins. A
ternary complex was formed between PTEN, NHERF proteins and PDGFR (see
PDGFRA; 173490), resulting in activation of the PI3K pathway upon PDGF
(see PDGFA; 173430) binding. In Nherf1 -/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts,
activation of the PI3K pathway by Pdgfr was prolonged in comparison with
wildtype cells, consistent with defective Pten recruitment to Pdgfr in
the absence of Nherf1. Depletion of Nherf2 by small interfering RNA
similarly increased PI3K signaling. Loss of Nherf1 enhanced Pdgf-induced
cytoskeletal rearrangements and chemotactic migration. Takahashi et al.
(2006) concluded that NHERF proteins recruit PTEN to PDGFR to restrict
PI3K activation.

In studies in human astrocytes engineered to contain alterations
functionally equivalent to those seen in human malignant glioma, Parsa
et al. (2007) demonstrated that expression of the PDCD1LG1 gene (605402)
increased posttranscriptionally after loss of PTEN and activation of the
PI3K pathway. Levels of B7H1, the PDCD1LG1 gene product, correlated with
PTEN loss in glioblastoma specimens, and tumor-specific T cells lysed
human glioma targets expressing wildtype PTEN more effectively than
those expressing mutant PTEN. Parsa et al. (2007) concluded that
immunoresistance in glioma is related to loss of the tumor suppressor
PTEN and is mediated in part by B7H1.

Some T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (T-ALL) show resistance to
gamma-secretase inhibitors, which act by blocking NOTCH1 (190198)
activation. Using microarray analysis, Palomero et al. (2007) identified
PTEN as the gene most consistently downregulated in gamma-secretase
inhibitor-resistant T-cell lines. Further analysis showed that these
resistant cell lines had truncating mutations in the PTEN gene. Loss of
PTEN function resulted in aberrant activation of the PI3-kinase-AKT
signaling pathway, which induced resistance to gamma-secretase
inhibitors. Studies in normal mouse thymocytes indicated that Notch1
regulated Pten expression downstream. Notch signaling and the
PI3-kinase-AKT pathway acted synergistically in a Drosophila model of
Notch-induced tumorigenesis. The findings demonstrated that NOTCH1
controls a transcriptional network that regulates PTEN expression and
PI3-kinase-AKT signaling activity in normal thymocytes and leukemic T
cells.

Mazurek et al. (2007) showed that introduction of phosphorylated GAL3
(LGALS3; 153619) into a GAL3-null human breast cancer cell line promoted
apoptotic cell death through TRAIL (TNFSF10; 603598), a member of the
tumor necrosis factor family that transmits death signals through death
domain-containing receptors. Downstream, TRAIL sensitivity depended upon
induction of PTEN expression and inactivation of the PI3K/AKT survival
pathway.

Using protein pull-down assays, Wang et al. (2007) showed that PTEN
interacted directly with endogenous NEDD4 (602278) in human embryonic
kidney cells. NEDD4, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, polyubiquitinated PTEN and
negatively regulated its stability.

Trotman et al. (2007) found that monoubiquitination of PTEN permitted
its shuttling to nuclei, while polyubiquitination led to cytoplasmic
retention and degradation. They further found that lys289 and lys13 were
targets for ubiquitination, and their mutation led to a constitutive
shuttling defect that was overcome by forced monoubiquitination.
Knockdown of NEDD4 in human or mouse cells led to cytoplasmic and/or
perinuclear accumulation of PTEN, suggesting that NEDD4 is required for
PTEN monoubiquitination. Nuclear PTEN retained its ability to antagonize
AKT and cause apoptosis. Trotman et al. (2007) concluded that retention
of nuclear import capability of PTEN is critical for its
tumor-suppressive effects.

Drinjakovic et al. (2010) showed that Pten opposed arborization of
retinal ganglion cell axonal projections to the tectum in developing
Xenopus embryos. Proteasomal degradation of Pten via Nedd4, and possibly
netrin-1 (NTN1; 601614), was required to permit arborization.

Using wildtype and Pten-defective mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Shen et
al. (2007) showed that nuclear Pten was essential to maintain chromosome
integrity. Pten localized at centromeres and associated directly with
Cenpc (117140), an integral component of kinetochores. Loss of Pten led
to extensive centromere breakage and defects in DNA double-strand break
repair. Pten regulated Rad51 (179617) at the transcriptional level, thus
contributing to chromosome stability.

Alvarez-Breckenridge et al. (2007) found that overexpression of PTEN in
a human breast cancer cell line increased phospholipase D (see 602382)
activity, resulting in increased phosphatidic acid and decreased
phosphatidylcholine. They hypothesized that PTEN modulates PLC (see
PLCG1; 172420)-PLD activation pathways, in addition to activating the
AKT pathway.

Guo et al. (2008) showed that Pten deletion in mouse hematopoietic stem
cells leads to a myeloproliferative disorder, followed by acute T
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Self-renewable leukemia stem cells are
enriched in the c-Kit(mid)CD3+Lin- compartment, where unphosphorylated
beta-catenin is significantly increased. Conditional ablation of one
allele of the beta-catenin gene (CTNNB1; 116806) substantially decreased
the incidence and delayed the occurrence of T-ALL caused by Pten loss,
indicating that activation of the beta-catenin pathway may contribute to
the formation or expansion of the leukemia stem cell population.
Moreover, a recurring chromosomal translocation, t(14;15), results in
aberrant overexpression of the c-myc oncogene in c-Kit(mid)CD3+Lin-
leukemic stem cells and CD3+ leukemic blasts, recapitulating a subset of
human T-ALL. No alterations in Notch1 signaling were detected in this
model, suggesting that Pten inactivation and c-myc overexpression may
substitute functionally for Notch1 abnormalities, leading to T-ALL
development. Guo et al. (2008) concluded that genetic or molecular
alterations contribute cooperatively to leukemia stem cell
transformation.

Mao et al. (2008) demonstrated that mTOR (601231) is targeted for
ubiquitination and consequent degradation by binding to the tumor
suppressor protein FBXW7 (606278). Human breast cancer cell lines and
primary tumors showed a reciprocal relation between loss of FBXW7 and
deletion or mutation of PTEN, which also activates mTOR. Tumor cell
lines harboring deletions or mutations in FBXW7 are particularly
sensitive to rapamycin treatment, suggesting to Mao et al. (2008) that
loss of FBXW7 may be a biomarker for human cancers susceptible to
treatment with inhibitors of the mTOR pathway.

Song et al. (2008) found that PTEN was aberrantly localized in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL; 612376) in which PML (102578) function was
disrupted by the PML-RARA (180240) fusion oncoprotein. Treatment with
drugs that triggered PML-RARA degradation restored nuclear PTEN. PML
opposed the activity of HAUSP (USP7; 602519) towards PTEN through a
mechanism involving DAXX (603186). Confocal microscopy and
immunohistochemistry demonstrated that HAUSP was overexpressed in
prostate cancer and that levels of HAUSP directly correlated with tumor
aggressiveness and with PTEN nuclear exclusion. Song et al. (2008)
concluded that a PML-HAUSP network controls PTEN deubiquitinylation and
subcellular localization, which is perturbed in human cancers.

Zheng et al. (2008) showed that concomitant central nervous
system-specific deletion of p53 (191170) and Pten in the mouse central
nervous system generates a penetrant acute-onset high grade malignant
glioma phenotype with notable clinical, pathologic, and molecular
resemblance to primary glioblastoma in humans. This genetic observation
prompted TP53 and PTEN mutation analysis in human primary glioblastoma,
demonstrating unexpectedly frequent inactivating mutations of TP53 as
well as the expected PTEN mutations. Integrated transcriptomic
profiling, in silico promoter analysis, and functional studies of murine
neural stem cells established that dual, but not singular, inactivation
of p53 and Pten promotes an undifferentiated state with high renewal
potential and drives increased Myc (190080) protein levels and its
associated signature. Functional studies validated increased Myc
activity as a potent contributor to the impaired differentiation and
enhanced renewal of neural stem cells doubly null for p53 and Pten
(p53-/-Pten-/-) as well as tumor neurospheres derived from this model.
Myc also serves to maintain robust tumorigenic potential of
p53-/-Pten-/- tumor neurospheres. These murine modeling studies,
together with confirmatory transcriptomic/promoter studies in human
primary glioblastoma, validated a pathogenetic role of a common tumor
suppressor mutation profile in human primary glioblastoma and
established Myc as an important target for cooperative actions of p53
and Pten in the regulation of normal and malignant stem/progenitor cell
differentiation, self-renewal, and tumorigenic potential.

To test for the role of intrinsic impediments to axon regrowth, Park et
al. (2008) analyzed cell growth control genes using a virus-assisted in
vivo conditional knockout approach. Deletion of PTEN, a negative
regulator of the mTOR pathway, in adult retinal ganglion cells promoted
robust axon regeneration after optic nerve injury. In wildtype adult
mice, the mTOR activity was suppressed and new protein synthesis was
impaired in axotomized retinal ganglion cells, which may have
contributed to the regeneration failure. Reactivating this pathway by
conditional knockout of tuberous sclerosis complex-1 (TSC1; 605284),
another negative regulator of the mTOR pathway, also led to axon
regeneration.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Kim et al. (2008) found that Pten
was highly expressed in mouse retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and in
retinal ganglion cell axons. RPE-specific deletion of Pten resulted in
RPE cells that failed to maintain basolateral adhesions, underwent
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and subsequently migrated
out of the retina entirely, leading to progressive death of
photoreceptors. Mutation analysis showed that the C-terminal PDZ-binding
domain of Pten was essential for maintenance of RPE cell junctional
integrity. Inactivation of Pten, and loss of its interaction with
junctional proteins, were also evident in RPE cells isolated from Ccr2
(601267) -/- mice and from mice subjected to oxidative damage, both of
which displayed age-related macular degeneration. Kim et al. (2008)
concluded that PTEN has an essential role in normal RPE cell function
and in the response of these cells to oxidative stress.

Kalaany and Sabatini (2009) showed that certain human cancer cell lines,
when grown as tumor xenografts in mice, are highly sensitive to the
antigrowth effects of dietary restriction, whereas others are resistant.
Cancer cell lines that form dietary restriction-resistant tumors carry
mutations that cause constitutive activation of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K; see PIK3CA, 171834) pathway and in
culture proliferate in the absence of insulin (176730) or insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF1; 147440). Substitution of an activated mutant
allele of PIK3CA with wildtype PIK3CA in otherwise isogenic cancer
cells, or the restoration of PTEN expression in a PTEN-null cancer cell
line, was sufficient to convert a dietary restriction-resistant tumor
into one that was dietary restriction-sensitive. Dietary restriction did
not affect a PTEN-null mouse model of prostate cancer, but it
significantly decreased tumor burden in a mouse model of lung cancer
lacking constitutive PI3K signaling. Kalaany and Sabatini (2009)
concluded that the PI3K pathway is an important determinant of the
sensitivity of tumors to dietary restriction, and activating mutations
in the pathway may influence the response of cancers to dietary
restriction-mimetic therapies. Kalaany and Sabatini (2009) also found
that overexpression of FOXO1 (136533) sensitizes tumors to dietary
restriction.

Huse et al. (2009) showed that MIR26A (see MIR26A2; 613057) is a direct
regulator of PTEN expression. MIR26A was overexpressed in a subset of
high-grade gliomas, primarily due to amplification of the MIR26A2 locus,
a genomic event strongly associated with monoallelic PTEN loss. In a
mouse glioma model Mir26a reduced Pten levels, facilitating glioma
formation. Mir26a overexpression functionally substituted for loss of
heterozygosity at the Pten locus.

Fine et al. (2009) identified phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate
RAC exchanger 2a (PREX2a, 612139) as a PTEN-interacting protein. PREX2a
mRNA was more abundant in human cancer cells and significantly increased
in tumors with wildtype PTEN that expressed an activated mutant of
PIK3CA encoding the p110 subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase subunit
alpha (PI3K-alpha). PREX2a inhibited PTEN lipid phosphatase activity and
stimulated the PI3K pathway only in the presence of PTEN. PREX2a
stimulated cell growth and cooperated with a PIK3CA mutant to promote
growth factor-independent proliferation and transformation. Depletion of
PREX2a reduced amounts of phosphorylated AKT and growth in human cell
lines with intact PTEN. Thus, Fine et al. (2009) concluded that PREX2a
is a component of the PI3K pathway that can antagonize PTEN in cancer
cells.

Teresi et al. (2008) showed that SREBP (see 184756) induced PTEN protein
expression in MCF-7 cells via upregulation of PPAR-gamma (PPARG;
601487). Several statins also induced both PTEN mRNA and protein and
PPARG activity. However, while SREBP used PPARG transcriptional activity
to upregulate PTEN expression, the statins appeared to regulate PPARG
protein activity, resulting in upregulation of PTEN expression.

Sathaliyawala et al. (2010) found that the Mtor inhibitor rapamycin
impaired mouse Flt3l (FLT3LG; 600007)-driven dendritic cell (DC)
development in vitro, with plasmacytoid DCs and classical DCs most
profoundly affected. Depletion of the Pi3k-Mtor negative regulator Pten
facilitated Flt3l-driven DC development in culture. Targeting Pten in
DCs in vivo caused expansion of Cd8 (see 186910)-positive and Cd103
(ITGAE; 604682)-positive classical DCs, which could be reversed by
rapamycin. Increased Cd8-positive classical DC numbers caused by Pten
deletion correlated with increased susceptibility to Listeria infection.
Sathaliyawala et al. (2010) concluded that PI3K-MTOR signaling
downstream of FLT3L controls DC development, and that restriction by
PTEN ensures optimal DC numbers and subset composition.

Deletion of either PTEN or SOCS3 (604176) in adult retinal ganglion
cells (RGCs) individually promotes significant optic nerve regeneration,
but regrowth tapers off around 2 weeks after crush injury (Park et al.,
2008; Smith et al., 2009). Sun et al. (2011) showed that, remarkably,
simultaneous deletion of both PTEN and SOCS3 enables robust and
sustained axon regeneration. Sun et al. (2011) further showed that PTEN
and SOCS3 regulate 2 independent pathways that act synergistically to
promote enhanced axon regeneration. Gene expression analyses suggested
that double deletion not only results in the induction of many
growth-related genes, but also allows RGCs to maintain the expression of
a repertoire of genes at the physiologic level after injury. Sun et al.
(2011) concluded that their results revealed concurrent activation of
mTOR (601231) and STAT3 (102582) pathways as key for sustaining
long-distance axon regeneration in adult central nervous system, a
crucial step towards functional recovery.

- Regulation of PTEN Expression by PTENP1 Transcript Levels

Poliseno et al. (2010) described the functional relationship between the
mRNAs produced by the PTEN tumor suppressor gene and its pseudogene
PTENP1 (613531) and the critical consequences of this interaction.
Poliseno et al. (2010) found that PTENP1 is biologically active as it
can regulate cellular levels of PTEN and exert a growth-suppressive
role. They also found that the PTENP1 locus is selectively lost in human
cancer. Poliseno et al. (2010) extended their analysis to other
cancer-related genes that possess pseudogenes, such as the oncogene KRAS
(190070), and its pseudogene KRAS1P. Poliseno et al. (2010) also
demonstrated that the transcripts of protein-coding genes such as PTEN
are biologically active, and concluded that their findings attribute a
novel biological role to expressed pseudogenes, as they can regulate
coding gene expression, and reveal a noncoding function for mRNAs.

Pal et al. (2012) measured insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function as
well as anthropometric indices in 15 patients diagnosed with Cowden
disease who carried mutations in the PTEN gene as well as 15 age-, sex-,
and body mass index (BMI)-matched controls. Measures of insulin
resistance were lower in patients with PTEN mutations than in controls
(p = 0.001), which was confirmed by hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamping
studies. Increased AKT phosphorylation was observed in patients versus
controls, suggesting that the patients' increased insulin sensitivity
might be explained by enhanced insulin signaling through the PI3K/AKT
pathway (see 164730). In addition, PTEN mutation carriers were obese
compared to population-based controls (p less than 0.001); the increased
body mass was due to augmented adiposity without corresponding changes
in fat distribution. Pal et al. (2012) concluded that PTEN
haploinsufficiency appears to result in an increased risk of obesity and
cancer but a decreased risk of type 2 diabetes (125853), owing to
enhanced insulin sensitivity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Blumenthal and Dennis (2008) provided a detailed review of PTEN
hamartoma syndromes.

- Cowden Disease

Liaw et al. (1997) identified germline mutations in 4 of 5 families with
Cowden disease (CD). They found missense (601728.0001) and nonsense
(601728.0002; 601728.0003) mutations predicted to disrupt the protein
tyrosine/dual-specificity phosphatase domain of the protein. Nelen et
al. (1997) confirmed the PTEN gene as the Cowden disease gene in 8
unrelated families and reported germline missense mutations in CD
families (e.g., 601728.0005).

Genetic heterogeneity of Cowden disease was suggested by the fact that
Tsou et al. (1997) found no coding sequence mutations in 23 CD families
for whom linkage to the PTEN locus had never been established. They
reported 3 novel PTEN mutations in Cowden disease and demonstrated that
these mutations were associated with Cowden disease and breast cancer.
They found no PTEN mutations in a group of individuals with early-onset
breast cancer, suggesting that germline mutations in the PTEN gene are
not common in this group.

Tsou et al. (1998) found 3 mutations in the PTEN gene in unrelated
individuals with Cowden disease. These included a missense mutation in
exon 5, a splice site mutation in intron 7 causing exon skipping, and a
missense mutation in exon 3. Tsou et al. (1998) also reported a rare
polymorphism in exon 7 of the PTEN coding sequence.

Marsh et al. (1998) identified PTEN mutations in 30 of 37 (81%) Cowden
disease families, including missense and nonsense point mutations,
deletions, insertions, a deletion/insertion, and splice site mutations.
These mutations were scattered over the entire length of PTEN, with the
exception of the first, fourth, and last exons. A 'hotspot' for PTEN
mutation in Cowden disease was identified in exon 5, which contains the
PTPase core motif, with 13 of 30 (43%) Cowden disease mutations
identified in that exon. Thus, 7 of 30 (23%) were within the core motif,
the majority (5 of 7) of which were missense mutations, possibly
pointing to the functional significance of this region.

Kurose et al. (1999) examined a 35-year-old Japanese man who had been
followed clinically for juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS; 174900)
because of numerous hamartomatous polypoid lesions throughout the
digestive tract, from esophagus to rectum. Although he had none of the
pathognomonic skin lesions of Cowden disease, mutations in the PTEN gene
were sought. He was found to be heterozygous for a G-to-A transition at
the second nucleotide of codon 130, resulting in an arg130-to-gln
(R130Q; 601728.0017) substitution. The patient's mother and sister did
not carry this mutation; the father had died of brainstem infarction, a
condition thought to be unrelated to Cowden disease. On closer
examination of the patient, Kurose et al. (1999) found a small thyroid
adenoma, a few papillomatous papules on his right hand, and a lung
tumor, which was being examined for possible malignancy. Waite and Eng
(2002) classified this patient as a case of Cowden disease and referred
to the patient's 'classic cutaneous features.'

Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Ruvalcaba-Riley syndrome share clinical
characteristics such as hamartomatous polyps of the gastrointestinal
tract, mucocutaneous lesions, and increased risk of developing
neoplasms. Furthermore, both conditions and several other distinctive
phenotypes are caused by mutations in the PTEN gene. For this reason
Marsh et al. (1999) suggested that the spectrum of disorders be referred
to as PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS).

Trotman et al. (2007) identified lys13 and lys289 as major
monoubiquitination sites essential for PTEN import. They showed that a
K289E mutant protein showed normal activity and membrane association but
lacked monoubiquitination at the mutated site and was excluded from
nuclei. Immunohistochemical staining of intestinal polyps from a Cowden
patient with the mutation revealed both nuclear and cytoplasmic PTEN
staining in normal-appearing mucosa that retained wildtype PTEN;
however, PTEN was excluded from the nuclei of epithelial cells that had
lost the wildtype PTEN allele.

Pezzolesi et al. (2007) identified germline deletions involving the
5-prime promoter region of the PTEN gene in 4 of 30 patients with Cowden
syndrome who did not have point mutation in the coding regions of the
gene. The deletions were associated with a decrease in PTEN activity and
upregulation of downstream targets. The findings indicated that
alterations at cis-regulatory elements can contribute to disease
pathogenesis.

Lobo et al. (2009) reported that somatic colorectal carcinoma-derived
PTEN missense mutations were associated with nuclear mislocalization.
These mutations altered cellular proliferation, apoptosis, and
anchorage-dependent growth and were found to reside in previously
undescribed ATP-binding motifs (residues 60 to 73 and residues 122 to
136) in the N-terminal phosphatase domain. In contrast to wildtype PTEN,
both cancer-associated somatic and germline-derived PTEN missense
mutations (see, e.g., R130Q, 601728.0017) within the ATP-binding motifs
resulted in mutant PTEN that did not bind ATP efficiently. The Cowden
syndrome patients with germline ATP-binding motif-mutations had nuclear
PTEN mislocalization. Of 4 unrelated patients with functional germline
ATP-binding domain mutations, all 3 female patients had breast cancers.
Lobo et al. (2009) concluded that germline and somatic mutations within
PTEN ATP-binding domains may play important pathogenic roles in both
heritable and sporadic carcinogenesis by PTEN nuclear mislocalization,
resulting in altered signaling and growth.

- Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome

In a patient referred with a diagnosis of Bannayan-Zonana syndrome
(153480), also known as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Syndrome (BRRS), or
macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, and hemangiomata, Arch et al. (1997)
demonstrated an interstitial deletion of 10q23.2-q24.1. They
demonstrated that the PTEN gene was missing from the deleted chromosome.
Because of phenotypic overlap between the BRRS and Cowden disease and
because of the apparent mapping to the same chromosomal area, Arch et
al. (1997) proposed that Cowden disease and BRRS are allelic.

Balciuniene et al. (2007) described this patient and 2 others who shared
deletion of 10q22-q23 with cognitive and behavioral abnormalities. They
suggested that the 10q22.3-q23.32 region should be added to the list of
genomic regions affected by recurring rearrangements (612242). They
related the breakpoint in each family to the organization of complex
low-copy repeats (LCRs) located in the proximity of the deletions. The
breakpoints in 2 of the families mapped within these LCRs, whereas the
deletion in the family of Arch et al. (1997) removed the telomeric LCR
and had a complex noncontiguous structure. Balciuniene et al. (2007)
proposed that the LCRs in this region increased susceptibility to
chromosomal rearrangements.

Marsh et al. (1997) identified germline mutations in PTEN in the
hamartomatous polyposis syndrome, which they referred to as
Bannayan-Zonana syndrome (BZS), but which goes by a number of other
designations, including Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. Hamartomas
are benign, hyperplastic, disorganized growths. Characteristic features
of BZS include macrocephaly, lipomas, intestinal hamartomatous polyps,
vascular malformations, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and speckled pigmentation
of the penis. Many patients present at birth with macrocephaly and
failure to thrive. The disorder has been described particularly in young
patients. Cowden disease has been described mainly in older individuals
and is characterized by hamartomas in multiple organs and a risk of
breast and thyroid cancer. Breast tumors are said to occur in 75% of
females with Cowden disease and thyroid disease in 50 to 75%;
macrocephaly (38%) and lipomas (less than 5%) are less common, and
speckled penis apparently does not occur. Hamartomatous polyps occur in
the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (175200), which is associated with melanin
spots of the lips, buccal mucosa, and digits. The Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
maps to 19p, without genetic heterogeneity, and juvenile polyposis
(174900) to 10q22. Cowden syndrome maps to a region of 10q thought to be
telomeric to the juvenile polyposis region. In studies of 2 unrelated
well-characterized BZS families, Marsh et al. (1997) found that affected
individuals demonstrated haplotype sharing for the 10q22-q23 region.
Therefore, PTEN mutations were sought, with the demonstration of
germline mutations, arg233ter (R233X; exon 7; 601728.0002) in one family
and ser170arg (S170R; exon 6; 601728.0004) in the second family. The
R233X mutation had been found in a family with classic Cowden disease by
Liaw et al. (1997). The identical mutation occurred in these 2 families
with 2 distinct syndromes on 2 different 10q22-q23 haplotypes, arguing
against a common ancestor or founder effect. The only common clinical
features in the CD family and the BZS family with R233X were
macrocephaly and thyroid disease.

Marsh et al. (1998) identified germline PTEN mutations in 4 of 7 (57%)
Bannayan-Zonana syndrome families studied. None of these mutations was
observed in the PTPase core motif.

Longy et al. (1998) identified germline PTEN mutations in 6 subjects
from 4 unrelated European families with the Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
phenotype. They noted that 4 of the 7 mutations described thus far in
BRRS patients result in a truncated protein, and they concluded that the
defect responsible for BRRS corresponds to an inactivating mutation.
Longy et al. (1998) also noted that 4 mutations associated with the BRRS
phenotype occur in exon 6 of PTEN, whereas 2 mutations associated with
this phenotype occur in exon 7. They contrasted this with mutations
associated with Cowden syndrome, where mutations in PTEN are spread over
the entire gene with the exceptions of exons 1, 4, and 9.

- 'Proteus-like' Syndrome

Zhou et al. (2000) reported a boy with congenital hemihypertrophy,
epidermoid nevi, macrocephaly, lipomas, arteriovenous malformations, and
normal intellect. He was given the clinical diagnosis of 'Proteus-like'
syndrome because of phenotypic similarities to Proteus syndrome
(176920). Molecular analysis identified a heterozygous germline R335X
mutation, and a somatic R130X (601728.0007) mutation in a nevus, lipoma,
and arteriovenous malformation from the patient. The authors postulated
that the second hit, R130X, occurred early in embryonic development and
may even represent germline mosaicism. Thus, PTEN may be involved in
'Proteus-like' syndrome with its implications for cancer development in
the future. Cohen et al. (2003) disputed the diagnosis of Proteus
syndrome in the patient reported by Zhou et al. (2000). Cohen et al.
(2003) stated that some of the clinical features were not consistent
with classic Proteus syndrome and noted that the term 'Proteus-like
syndrome' is unhelpful and confounding.

Loffeld et al. (2006) reported a 3-year-old boy with a germline PTEN
missense mutation inherited from his mother who had Cowden syndrome. The
boy showed extensive epidermal nevus, macrocephaly, vascular
malformations, asymmetric hypertrophy of 1 leg, localized macrodactyly,
and abdominal lipoma. They identified loss of heterozygosity for the
PTEN mutation in an epidermal nevus from the boy, suggesting wildtype
PTEN allele loss.

Caux et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated families in which multiple
members had typical Cowden syndrome confirmed by genetic analysis. The
female proband of 1 family had an atypical phenotype of segmental
overgrowth, lipomas, vascular malformations, and epidermal nevi, and
molecular analysis revealed loss of the wildtype allele in several
atypical lesions, including a cutaneous fibroma, an epidermal nevus, and
a lipoma. The female proband of the other family also had an atypical
presentation but lacked epidermal nevus, and molecular analysis of a
single biopsy of her affected skin did not show loss of the wildtype
PTEN allele. The findings suggested that heterozygous germline PTEN
mutations associated with a mosaic inactivation of the wildtype allele
may underlie multiple atypical dysmorphisms suggestive of other
diseases, including 'Proteus-like' syndrome, previously reported by Zhou
et al. (2000) and Loffeld et al. (2006). These atypical lesions could be
explained by biallelic inactivation and complete loss of PTEN function,
resulting in segmental exacerbations of the disease. To clinically
distinguish between Proteus syndrome and segmental exacerbation of
Cowden disease, Caux et al. (2007) suggested 'SOLAMEN syndrome' as an
acronym for segmental overgrowth, lipomatosis, arteriovenous
malformation, and epidermal nevus.

- Macrocephaly/Autism Syndrome

Butler et al. (2005) performed PTEN gene mutation analysis in 18
subjects with autism spectrum disorders and macrocephaly (605309). They
identified germline PTEN mutations in 3 young boys: H93R (601728.0037),
D252G (601728.0038), and F241S (601728.0039), respectively. There were
no features suggestive of Cowden syndrome or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome except for pigmented macules on the glans penis of 1
mutation-positive boy.

Herman et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated patients with
macrocephaly/autism syndrome who had each had a heterozygous mutation in
the PTEN gene (601728.0007 and 601728.0040).

O'Roak et al. (2012) identified 3 heterozygous de novo mutations in the
PTEN gene while sequencing 44 candidate genes among 2,446 autism
spectrum disorder probands. There were 2 missense and 1 frameshift
mutation identified (601728.0042-601728.0044). All 3 patients were
macrocephalic.

- Prostate Cancer

Deletion mapping studies based on loss of heterozygosity on 10q
identified the region 10q23 to be the minimal area of loss in cases of
sporadic prostate cancer. As noted earlier, the PTEN tumor suppressor
gene, which was found to be inactivated by mutation in 3 prostate cancer
cell lines, was isolated from this region. Cairns et al. (1997) screened
80 prostate tumors by microsatellite analysis and found chromosome 10q23
to be deleted in 23 cases. They performed a sequence analysis of the
entire PTEN coding region and tested for homozygous deletion with new
intragenic markers in these 23 cases with 10q23 loss of heterozygosity.
In 10 of the tumors (43%) they identified the second mutation, thus
establishing PTEN as a main inactivation target of 10q loss in sporadic
prostate cancer.

Forrest et al. (2000) studied 188 subjects from 50 prostate cancer
families in which 3 or more individuals or a sib pair with 1 diagnosed
before age 67 had prostate cancer. Pairwise and multipoint linkage
analysis showed no evidence of linkage to the PTEN region.

In a study of 188 probands with hereditary prostate cancer (176807), Xie
et al. (2011) identified 15 different germline variants in the PTEN
gene, none of which was located in an exon. However, there was no
segregation of these variants with prostate cancer. There were no
significant differences in the allele frequencies of 33 SNPs spanning
the PTEN gene in 1,527 sporadic cases and 482 controls or in aggressive
and non-aggressive cancer. Finally, an association between copy number
variation involving the PTEN gene and prostate cancer was not found. Xie
et al. (2011) concluded that germline variants in the PTEN gene do not
have an important role in susceptibility to prostate cancer.

- Breast Cancer

Shugart et al. (1999) reported linkage analysis, using markers flanking
the PTEN locus, of 56 families that had 3 or more individuals with
breast cancer and in whom a BRCA1 (113705) or BRCA2 (600185) mutation
had not been found. Parametric and nonparametric analysis did not
support linkage to the PTEN locus in these families; an overall
multipoint lod score of -8.25 was obtained. Shugart et al. (1999)
concluded that PTEN is not a major contributor to familial breast
cancer.

Because of the association of CD with breast cancer, Figer et al. (2002)
screened the 9 coding exons of the PTEN gene in 2 subsets of Israeli
patients: 12 patients clinically diagnosed with BRRS, and 89 women with
an apparently inherited predisposition to breast cancer, some with
salient features of CD. Two of 3 familial BRRS patients exhibited novel
germline mutations in PTEN and, among the 89 high-risk women, 2
mutations were detected in exon 4. The study suggested that PTEN does
not play a major role in predisposing to hereditary breast cancer in
Israeli women, and that detection of PTEN mutations in BRRS patients is
more likely in familial cases.

Kurose et al. (2002) demonstrated high frequencies of somatic mutations
in TP53 (191170) and PTEN in breast neoplastic epithelium and stroma.
Mutations in TP53 and PTEN were mutually exclusive in either
compartment. In contrast, mutations in WFDC1 (605322) occurred at low
frequency in the stroma.

Basal-like breast cancer is a subtype of breast cancer that is highly
proliferative, poorly differentiated, and has a poor prognosis. These
tumor cells express cytokeratin markers typical of basally oriented
epithelial cells of the normal mammary gland. Saal et al. (2008) found
that loss of PTEN protein expression was significantly associated with
the basal-like cancer subtype in both nonhereditary breast cancer and
hereditary BRCA1-deficient breast cancer. Loss of PTEN in the
BRCA1-deficient basal-like breast cancer tumors was associated with
frequent gross PTEN mutations, including intragenic chromosome breaks,
inversions, deletions, and micro copy number alterations, consistent
with a mechanism involving inappropriate repair of double-strand DNA
breaks. The findings indicated a specific and recurrent oncogenic
consequence of BRCA1-dependent dysfunction in DNA repair and implied
that the PTEN pathway is directly involved in transformation of
basal-like progenitor cells.

- Malignant Melanoma

Birck et al. (2000) analyzed the coding region of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in
uncultured specimens of malignant melanoma (155600) from 16 primary and
61 metastatic tumors from 67 patients. They found mutations in 4 of the
metastatic samples (7%), and analysis of 2 intragenic polymorphisms
showed allelic loss in 3 of 8 informative primary tumors (38%) and in 18
of 31 metastatic tumors (58%). One of the mutant cases showed allelic
loss, suggesting that both PTEN/MMAC1 alleles were inactivated in this
tumor. Birck et al. (2000) proposed that mutation and deletion of
PTEN/MMAC1 may contribute to the development and progression of
malignant melanoma. Celebi et al. (2000) examined 21 metastatic melanoma
samples and found LOH at 10q23 in 7 of 21 samples and identified
sequence alterations in the PTEN gene in 4 of the samples and sequence
alterations in the p16 gene (CDKN2A; 600160) in 2 of the samples. One
case showed mutations in both genes.

Wang et al. (2009) studied samples from 59 melanomas, 47 in situ and 12
invasive, from 8 patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. PTEN mutations
were found in 56% of the melanomas, and 91% of the melanomas with
mutations had 1 to 4 UV-type base substitutions, i.e., occurring at
adjacent pyrimidines (p less than 0.0001 compared to random mutations).
Almost 70% were mutations that altered amino acids, and transfection
studies demonstrated that the mutations impaired PTEN function. Wang et
al. (2009) stated that these data provide direct molecular evidence of
UV involvement in melanoma induction in humans.

- Cervical Cancer

Cervical cancer (603956) is not a known component of either Cowden
syndrome or Bannayan-Zonana syndrome; however, LOH of markers on
chromosome 10q is frequently observed in cervical cancers. To determine
the potential role that PTEN mutation may play in cervical
tumorigenesis, Kurose et al. (2000) screened 20 primary cervical cancers
for LOH of polymorphic markers within and flanking the PTEN gene, and
for intragenic mutations in the entire coding region and exon-intron
boundaries of the PTEN gene. LOH was observed in 7 of 19 (36.8%) cases.
Further, 1 sample may have had a homozygous deletion. Three (15%)
intragenic mutations were found: 2 were somatic missense mutations in
exon 5, which encodes the phosphatase motif, and the third was an occult
germline intronic sequence variant in intron 7 that was shown to be
associated with aberrant splicing. All 3 samples with the mutations also
had LOH of the wildtype allele. The data indicated that disruption of
PTEN by allelic loss or mutation may contribute to tumorigenesis in
cervical cancers. In cervical cancer, however, unlike some other human
primary carcinomas, e.g., those of the breast and thyroid, biallelic
structural PTEN defects seem necessary for carcinogenesis.

- Endometrial Carcinoma

Somatic genetic and epigenetic inactivation of PTEN is involved in as
high as 93% of sporadic endometrial carcinomas, irrespective of
microsatellite status, and can occur in the earliest precancers.
Endometrial carcinoma is the most frequent extracolonic cancer in
patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer syndrome (HNPCC; see
120435), characterized by germline mutations in the mismatch repair
(MMR) genes and by microsatellite instability in component tumors. Zhou
et al. (2002) obtained 41 endometrial carcinomas from 29 MLH1 (see
120436) or MSH2 (609309) mutation-positive HNPCC families and subjected
them to PTEN expression and mutation analysis. Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed 68% (28 of 41) of the HNPCC-related endometrial
carcinomas with absent or weak PTEN expression. Mutation analysis of 20
aberrant PTEN-expressing tumors revealed that 17 (85%) harbored 18
somatic PTEN mutations. All mutations were frameshift, 10 (56%) of which
involved the 6(A) tracts in exon 7 or 8. The authors suggested that PTEN
may play a significant pathogenic role in both HNPCC and sporadic
endometrial carcinogenesis, unlike the scenarios for colorectal cancer.
They further concluded that somatic PTEN mutations, especially
frameshift, may be a consequence of profound MMR deficiency in
HNPCC-related endometrial carcinomas.

- Squamous Cell Carcinoma, Head and Neck

Poetsch et al. (2002) studied the role of PTEN in head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas (HNSCC; 275355) in correlation to mutation and
methylation of the p16 gene and to previous studies concerning loss of
chromosomes 9 and 10. They screened for alterations in PTEN and p16 in
52 HNSCC of different sites and found mutations in 12 (23%) tumor
samples; PTEN missense mutations were found in 7 carcinomas (13%), and a
loss of chromosome 10 was detected in 5 (71%) of these.

- Multiple Cancers

De Vivo et al. (2000) reported mutation analysis of the PTEN gene in 103
women drawn from 32,826 members of the prospective Nurses' Health Study
cohort who had more than 1 primary tumor at different anatomic sites.
They observed 2 novel germline heterozygous missense mutations in exon 5
in 5 of the cases. Neither mutation was observed in 115 controls free of
diagnosed cancer. Both mutants showed partial tumor suppressor activity
when compared to wildtype PTEN when transfected into a PTEN-null breast
cancer cell line. The phenotype was cell-line-specific, suggesting that
genetic background affects growth suppression activity of the mutants.

- Reviews

Bonneau and Longy (2000) reported that 110 germline PTEN mutations had
been reported in patients with 2 tumor-predisposing syndromes, with
overlapping clinical features: Cowden disease and
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. A mutation hotspot is found in exon
5, which encodes the phosphatase catalytic core motif, and recurrent
mutations had been found at CpG dinucleotides suggesting
deamination-induced mutations. In addition to these germline mutations,
they found reports of 332 somatic point mutations of PTEN, occurring in
primary tumors or metastasis. These occurred particularly in endometrial
carcinomas and glioblastomas. In most cases, these somatic mutations
resulted in protein inactivation and, as with germline mutations,
recurrent somatic mutations were found in CpG dinucleotides. A
mutagenesis by insertion-deletion in repetitive elements was
specifically observed in endometrial carcinomas.

Orloff and Eng (2008) provided a review of PTEN mutations and their
various phenotypic effects, with emphasis on the importance of
understanding PTEN-related pathways in the study of cancer genetics.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Marsh et al. (1999) screened for PTEN mutations in constitutive DNA
samples from 43 Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba individuals comprising 16
sporadic and 27 familial cases, 11 of which were families with both
Cowden disease and BRRS. Mutations were identified in 26 of 43 (60%)
BRRS cases. Genotype-phenotype analyses within the BRRS group suggested
a number of correlations, including the association of PTEN mutations
and cancer or breast fibroadenoma in any given CD, BRRS, or BRRS/CD
overlap family (P = 0.014), and, in particular, truncating mutations
were associated with the presence of cancer and breast fibroadenoma in a
given family (P = 0.024). Additionally, the presence of lipomas was
correlated with the presence of PTEN mutation in BRRS patients (P =
0.028). In contrast to the report of Carethers et al. (1998), in which
no PTEN mutations or deletions were identified in sporadic cases of
BRRS, Marsh et al. (1999) found that identification of germline PTEN
mutations was equally likely in sporadic and familial BRRS (P = 0.113).
Comparisons between BRRS and a previously studied group of 37 CD
families suggested an increased likelihood of identifying a germline
PTEN mutation in families with either CD alone or both CD and BRRS when
compared with BRRS alone (P = 0.002). Among CD, BRRS, and BRRS/CD
overlap families that were PTEN mutation positive, the mutation spectra
appeared similar. Thus, PTEN mutation-positive CD and BRRS may be
different presentations of a single syndrome and, hence, both should
receive equal attention with respect to cancer surveillance.

Zhou et al. (2003) stated that germline intragenic mutations in PTEN are
associated with 80% of patients with CS and 60% of patients with BRRS;
the underlying genetic causes in classic cases without a PCR-detectable
PTEN mutation had not been determined. They hypothesized that gross gene
deletions and mutations in the PTEN promoter might alternatively account
for a subset of apparently mutation-negative patients with these 2
disorders. Using real-time and multiplex PCR techniques in 122
apparently mutation-negative patients, 95 with classic CS and 27 with
BRRS, they identified 3 (11%) of 27 patients with BRRS or BBRS/CS
overlap who had germline hemizygous PTEN deletions; fine mapping
suggested that one deletion encompassed the whole gene (601728.0035),
one included exon 1, and one encompassed exons 1-5. Analysis of the PTEN
promoter revealed 9 cases (7.4%) harboring heterozygous germline
mutations. All 9 had classic CS, representing almost 10% of all patients
with CS studied. Eight had breast cancers and/or benign breast tumors
but, otherwise, involvement of fewer than 4 organs. PTEN protein
analysis, from 1 deletion-positive and 5 promoter mutation-positive
samples, showed a 50% reduction in protein and multiple bands of
immunoreactive protein, respectively. In contrast, control samples
showed only the expected band. Furthermore, an elevated level of
phosphorylated AKT was detected in the 5 promoter mutation-positive
samples, compared with controls, indicating an absence of or marked
reduction in functional PTEN. Zhou et al. (2003) concluded that patients
with BRRS and CS without PCR-detected intragenic PTEN mutations can be
offered clinical deletion analysis and promoter mutation analysis,
respectively.

Eng (2003) reviewed the many syndromes related to mutation in the PTEN
gene. Germline PTEN mutations had been found to occur in 80% of classic
CS, 60% of BRRS, up to 20% of Proteus syndrome (176920), and
approximately 50% of a 'Proteus-like' syndrome. Pooled analysis of PTEN
mutation series of CS and BRRS showed that 65% of CS-associated
mutations occur in the first 5 exons encoding the phosphatase domain and
the promoter region, while 60% of BRRS-associated mutations occur in the
3-prime 4 exons encoding mainly the C2 domain. Somatic PTEN mutations
occur with a wide distribution of frequencies in sporadic primary
tumors, with the highest frequencies in endometrial carcinomas and
glioblastoma multiforme.

To investigate whether all cases of Lhermitte-Duclos syndrome (LDD; see
158350), even without features of Cowden syndrome, are caused by
germline PTEN mutation and whether somatic PTEN mutation occurs in
sporadic LDD, Zhou et al. (2003) obtained paraffin-imbedded LDD lesions
from 18 unselected, unrelated patients and performed mutational analysis
of PTEN. All 15 (83%) of 18 samples were found to carry a PTEN mutation.
All individuals with mutations were adult-onset patients but the 3
without mutations were diagnosed at the ages of 1, 3, and 11 years.
Germline DNA was available from 6 adult-onset cases, and all germline
PTEN mutations. Of these 6, 2 had Cowden syndrome features, 1 did not
have Cowden syndrome features, and 3 were of unknown Cowden syndrome
status. Immunohistochemistry revealed that 75% of the LDD samples had
complete or partial loss of PTEN expression accompanied by elevated
phosphorylated Akt, specifically in the dysplastic gangliocytoma cells.
The high frequency and spectrum of germline PTEN mutations in patients
ascertained by LDD alone confirmed that LDD is an important defining
feature for Cowden syndrome. Individuals with LDD, even without apparent
Cowden features, should be counseled as in Cowden syndrome.

Although germline PTEN mutations have been identified in a significant
proportion of patients with the group of disorders referred to jointly
as the 'PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome' (PHTS), there are still many
individuals with classic diagnostic features for whom mutations have not
been identified. To address this, Pezzolesi et al. (2006) took a
haplotype-based approach and investigated the association of specific
genomic regions of the PTEN locus with PHTS. They found this locus to be
characterized by 3 distinct haplotype blocks of 33 kb, 65 kb, and 43 kb.
Comparisons of the haplotype distributions of all 3 blocks differed
significantly among patients with PHTS and controls. 'Rare' haplotype
blocks and extended haplotypes accounted for 2- to 3-fold more PHTS
chromosomes than control chromosomes. PTEN mutation-negative patients
were strongly associated with a haplotype block spanning a region
upstream of PTEN and the gene's first intron. Furthermore, allelic
combinations contributed to the phenotypic complexity of this syndrome.
Taken together, these data suggested that specific haplotypes and rare
alleles underlie the disease etiology in these sample populations;
constitute low-penetrance, modifying loci; and, specifically in the case
of patients with PHTS for whom traditional mutations have yet to be
identified, may harbor pathogenic variant(s) that have escaped detection
by standard PTEN mutation-scanning methods.

In a discussion of the genetics of health and the role of modifier genes
in modulating the penetrance, dominance, expressivity, and pleiotropy of
disease genes, Nadeau and Topol (2006) commented on the remarkable fact
that the same PTEN germline mutation may result in different syndromes
(see, for example, 601728.0002), suggesting that modifier genes dictate
the specific cancers and developmental anomalies that occur in
particular individuals, families, and populations.

Patients with Cowden syndrome with germline PTEN promoter mutations have
aberrant PTEN protein expression and an increased frequency of breast
cancer (Zhou et al., 2003). Teresi et al. (2007) examined the downstream
effect of 5 PTEN promoter variants, including -861G/T (601728.0034) and
-764G/A (601728.0033), that are not within any known cis-acting
regulatory elements. Clinically, the patients with these variants had
been given diagnoses of breast, thyroid, and/or endometrial cancer.
Teresi et al. (2007) found that protein binding to the PTEN promoter
(-893 to -755) was not altered in these variants when compared with
wildtype. However, reporter assays indicated that 3 of the variants,
including -861G/T and -764G/A, demonstrated a decrease of approximately
50% in luciferase activity compared with the wildtype construct. PTEN
mRNA levels were not altered in these variants, whereas secondary
structure predictions indicated that different PTEN 5-prime untranslated
region transcript-folding patterns existed in 3 variants, suggesting an
inhibition of protein translation. This was confirmed by PTEN protein
analysis. These data indicated that variants causing large mRNA
secondary structure alterations result in an inhibition of protein
translation and a decrease in PTEN protein expression. The data
emphasized the importance of PTEN promoter nucleotide variations and
their ability to lead to Cowden syndrome progression by a novel
regulatory mechanism. Importantly, these patients have a high prevalence
of breast, thyroid, and endometrial malignancies.

Lachlan et al. (2007) were unable to find a genotype/phenotype
correlation among 42 patients from 26 families with PTEN mutations and
clinical features of either Cowden syndrome or BRRS. The earliest
features of the PTEN-related phenotype were macrocephaly and hamartomas,
with mucocutaneous features and sometimes malignancies developing over
time in the same patients.

Pezzolesi et al. (2008) presented evidence that the microRNAs MIRN19A
(609418) and MIRN21 (611020) may act as genetic modifiers in Cowden
syndrome and its related phenotypes. MIRN19A and MIRN21 specifically
target and downregulate PTEN. Among 28 PTEN mutation-positive patients
carrying 1 of 3 truncating PTEN mutations (R130X, 601728.0007; R233X,
601728.0002; or R335X, 601728.0021), the authors found that variable
PTEN protein levels were inversely correlated with MIRN19A and MIRN21
expression levels in patients with the R130X and/or R233X mutations.
This association was not observed in those with the R335X mutation.
MIR19A and MIRN21 were also differentially expressed in a series of 130
PTEN-mutation-negative patients with variable clinical phenotypes and
decreased full-length PTEN protein expression. The findings indicated
that differential expression of these 2 miRNAs could modulate PTEN
protein levels and the Cowden syndrome and Cowden syndrome-like
phenotypes, irrespective of the patient's mutation status, thus
supporting their roles as genetic modifiers.

ANIMAL MODEL

To examine the role of the dual-specificity phosphatase PTEN in
ontogenesis and tumor suppression, Di Cristofano et al. (1998) disrupted
mouse Pten by homologous recombination. Pten inactivation resulted in
early embryonic lethality. Homozygous deficient ES (embryonic stem)
cells formed aberrant embryoid bodies and displayed an altered ability
to differentiate into endodermal, ectodermal, and mesodermal
derivatives. Heterozygous knockout mice and chimeric mice derived from
heterozygous ES cells showed hyperplastic/dysplastic changes in the
prostate, skin, and colon, which are characteristic of Cowden disease,
Lhermitte-Duclos disease, and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. They also
spontaneously developed germ cell, gonadostromal, thyroid, and colon
tumors. In addition, Pten inactivation enhanced the ability of ES cells
to generate tumors in nude and syngeneic mice, due to increased
anchorage-independent growth and aberrant differentiation. These results
supported the notion that PTEN haploinsufficiency plays a causal role in
the 3 disorders in which mutations had been found, and demonstrated that
Pten is a tumor suppressor essential for embryonic development.

Stambolic et al. (1998) found that Pten-mutant mouse embryos displayed
regions of increased proliferation. In contrast, Pten-deficient
immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts exhibited decreased sensitivity
to cell death in response to a number of apoptotic stimuli, accompanied
by constitutively elevated activity and phosphorylation of protein
kinase B (PKB)/Akt, a crucial regulator of cell survival. Expression of
exogenous Pten in mutant cells restored both their sensitivity to
agonist-induced apoptosis and normal pattern of PKB/Akt phosphorylation.
Furthermore, Pten negatively regulated intracellular levels of
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate in cells and dephosphorylated
it in vitro. These results showed that PTEN may exert its role as a
tumor suppressor by negatively regulating the PI3K/PKB/Akt signaling
pathway.

Di Cristofano et al. (1999) demonstrated that Pten heterozygous mutant
mice develop a lethal polyclonal autoimmune disorder with features
reminiscent of those observed in Fas (134637)-deficient mutants.
Fas-mediated apoptosis was impaired in Pten +/- mice, and T lymphocytes
from these mice showed reduced activation-induced cell death and
increased proliferation upon activation. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitors restored Fas responsiveness in Pten +/- mice. Di Cristofano
et al. (1999) concluded that Pten is an essential mediator of the Fas
response and a repressor of autoimmunity, and that their results
implicated the PI3 kinase/Akt pathway in Fas-mediated apoptosis.

Inactivation of the PTEN gene and lack of p27(KIP1) expression (600778)
have been detected in most advanced prostate cancers. But mice deficient
for Cdkn1b, which encodes p27(Kip1), do not develop prostate cancer.
PTEN activity leads to the induction of p27(KIP1) expression, which in
turn can negatively regulate the transition through the cell cycle.
Thus, the inactivation of p27(KIP1) may be epistatic to PTEN in the
control of the cell cycle. Di Cristofano et al. (2001) showed that the
concomitant inactivation of 1 Pten allele and 1 or both Cdkn1b alleles
accelerates spontaneous neoplastic transformation and incidence of
tumors of various histologic origins. Cell proliferation, but not cell
survival, is increased in mice that are heterozygous for knockout of the
Pten gene and homozygous for knockout of the Cdkn1b gene. Moreover,
these heterozygous/homozygous mice developed prostate carcinoma at
complete penetrance within 3 months from birth. These cancers
recapitulated the natural history and pathologic features of human
prostate cancers. The findings reveal the crucial relevance of the
combined tumor-suppressive activity of Pten and p27(Kip1) through the
control of cell cycle progression.

In prostate cancer and other human malignancies, high rates of LOH are
observed at the 10q23.3 region containing the human PTEN gene, but the
demonstrated rate of biallelic inactivation of the PTEN gene by mutation
or homozygous deletion is significantly lower than the rate of LOH.
Kwabi-Addo et al. (2001) studied the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse
prostate model and found that when these mice were bred to Pten +/-
mice, haploinsufficiency of the Pten gene promoted the progression of
prostate cancer. This observation may explain the discordance in rates
of LOH at 10q23 and biallelic PTEN inactivation observed in prostate
cancer and many other human malignancies.

Backman et al. (2001) generated a tissue-specific deletion of the mouse
homolog Pten to address its role in brain function. Mouse homozygous for
this deletion developed seizures and ataxia by 9 weeks and died by 29
weeks. Histologic analysis showed brain enlargement as a consequence of
primary granule-cell dysplasia in the cerebellum and dentate gyrus. Pten
mutant cells showed a cell-autonomous increase in soma size and elevated
phosphorylation of Akt (164730). These data represented the first
evidence for the role of Pten and Akt in cell size regulation in mammals
and provided an animal model for a human phakomatosis condition,
Lhermitte-Duclos disease.

Kwon et al. (2001) likewise investigated the function of PTEN in the
brain by selective inactivation of Pten in specific mouse neuronal
populations. Loss of Pten resulted in progressive macrocephaly and
seizures. Neurons lacking Pten expressed high levels of phosphorylated
Akt and showed a progressive increase in soma size without evidence of
abnormal proliferation. Cerebellar abnormalities closely resembled the
histopathology of human LDD. The results indicated that Pten regulates
neuronal size in vivo in a cell-autonomous manner.

Groszer et al. (2001) used conditional gene targeting to mutate the
mouse Pten gene only in embryonic neural stem cells. They noted
enlarged, abnormal brains resulting from increased cell proliferation,
decreased cell death, and enlarged cell size. The mice died shortly
after birth with no signs of hydrocephalus. Analysis of isolated
aggregates of neuronal progenitors (neurospheres) from these mice showed
that they contained more and larger cells per sphere and that the cells
displayed an increased number of cell divisions. Groszer et al. (2001)
concluded that PTEN deficiency results in increased proliferation and
self renewal of neural stem cells without a major disturbance of cell
fate commitments. In a commentary, Penninger and Woodgett (2001)
suggested that PTEN may be important for maintaining the
pluripotentiality of neural and other types of stem cells and may allow
for enhanced production of neuronal stem cells.

Using a high-throughput screen, Schwartzbauer and Robbins (2001) found
that mouse Pten was actively translated in experimentally induced
cardiac hypertrophy and that the protein level increased in the absence
of increased mRNA expression. Overexpression of Pten caused apoptosis in
neonatal rat primary cardiomyocytes and blocked growth factor signaling
through the phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate pathway. Expression
of a catalytically inactive Pten mutant led to cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy, with increased protein synthesis, cell surface area, and
atrial natriuretic factor (108780) expression. Hypertrophy was also
accompanied by increased Akt activity and improved cell viability in
culture.

Crackower et al. (2002) showed that cardiomyocyte-specific inactivation
of Pten in mice resulted in hypertrophy and, unexpectedly, a dramatic
decrease in cardiac contractility. Analysis of Pten/Pi3k-gamma
double-mutant mice revealed that the cardiac hypertrophy and
contractility defects could be genetically uncoupled. Pi3k-alpha
(171834) was found to mediate the alteration in cell size, while
Pi3k-gamma was found to act as a negative regulator of cardiac
contractility. Mechanistically, Pi3k-gamma inhibited cAMP production,
and hypercontractility could be reverted by blocking cAMP function.
These data showed that PTEN has an important in vivo role in
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and G protein-coupled receptor signaling and
identified a function for the PTEN-PI3K-gamma pathway in the modulation
of heart muscle contractility.

By selective inactivation of Pten in mouse B lymphocytes and
immunohistochemical analysis, Anzelon et al. (2003) detected a selective
expansion of marginal zone (MZ) B and B1 cells. Pten-deficient B cells
were hyperproliferative in response to mitogenic stimuli and had a lower
threshold for activation through the B lymphocyte antigen receptor.
Inactivation of Pten rescued germinal center, MZ B, and B1 cell
formation in Cd19 (107265) -/- mice, which exhibit reduced activation of
PI3K . Anzelon et al. (2003) concluded that intracellular
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate has a central role in the
regulation of differentiation of peripheral B-cell subsets.

Kwak et al. (2003) found that intratracheal administration of PI3K
inhibitors or adenoviruses carrying PTEN cDNA reduced bronchial
inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness in a mouse model of asthma
(600807). Pi3k activity increased after allergen (ovalbumin) challenge,
while Pten protein expression and activity decreased after allergen
challenge. Immunoreactive Pten localized in epithelial layers around the
bronchioles in control mice, but Pten staining disappeared in asthmatic
lungs. PI3K inhibitors or adenovirus PTEN administration reduced the Il4
(147780), Il5 (147850), and eosinophil cationic protein (RNASE3; 131398)
levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluids. Kwak et al. (2003) concluded
that PTEN may play a role in the pathogenesis of asthma.

Kwon et al. (2003) found that inhibition of Mtor (FRAP1; 601231)
decreased the seizure frequency and death rate in mice with conditional
Pten deficiency, prevented the increase in Pten-deficient neuronal soma
size in young mice, and reversed neuronal soma enlargement in adult
mice. Mtor inhibition did not decrease the size of wildtype adult
neurons. Kwon et al. (2003) concluded that MTOR is required for neuronal
hypertrophy downstream of PTEN deficiency, but it is not required for
maintenance of normal neuronal soma size. They proposed that MTOR
inhibitors may be useful therapeutic agents for the treatment of brain
diseases resulting from PTEN deficiency, such as Lhermitte-Duclos
disease or glioblastoma multiforme.

Backman et al. (2004) selectively inactivated Pten in murine tissues in
which the MMTV-LTR (mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat)
promoter is active, resulting in hyperproliferation and neoplastic
changes in Pten null skin and prostate. These phenotypes had early onset
and were completely penetrant. Abnormalities in Pten mutant skin
consisted of mild epidermal hyperplasia, whereas prostates from these
mice exhibited high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia that
frequently progressed to focally invasive cancer. These data
demonstrated that Pten is an important physiologic regulator of growth
in the skin and prostate. Further, the early onset of prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia in Pten mutant males was unique to this animal
model and implicated PTEN mutations in the initiation of prostate
cancer. Consistent with high PTEN mutation rates in human prostate
tumors, these data indicated that PTEN is a critical tumor suppressor in
this organ.

Horie et al. (2004) generated mice with a conditional
hepatocyte-specific null mutation of the Pten gene. Mutant mice
developed massive hepatomegaly and steatohepatitis with triglyceride
accumulation, a phenotype similar to human nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.
Adipocyte-specific genes were induced in mutant hepatocytes, and genes
involved in lipogenesis and beta-oxidation were also induced. Almost
half of the mutant mice developed liver cell adenomas by 44 weeks of
age; by 74 to 78 weeks of age, 100% of the livers of mutant mice showed
adenomas and 66% had hepatocellular carcinomas. The mutant mice also
showed insulin hypersensitivity. Horie et al. (2004) concluded that PTEN
is an important regulator of lipogenesis, glucose metabolism, hepatocyte
homeostasis, and tumorigenesis in the liver.

By delivering a recombinant adenoviral vector expressing Cre recombinase
to the bursal cavity that encloses the ovary, Dinulescu et al. (2005)
expressed an oncogenic Kras (190070) allele within the ovarian surface
epithelium and observed benign epithelial lesions with a typical
endometrioid glandular morphology that did not progress to ovarian
carcinoma (167000); 7 of 15 mice (47%) also developed peritoneal
endometriosis (131200). When the Kras mutation was combined with
conditional deletion of Pten, all mice developed invasive endometrioid
ovarian adenocarcinomas. Dinulescu et al. (2005) stated that these were
the first mouse models of endometriosis and endometrioid adenocarcinoma
of the ovary.

Hamada et al. (2005) generated mice with endothelial cell-specific Pten
deletion. Mutant embryos died before embryonic day 11.5 due to bleeding
and cardiac failure. The phenotype was caused by impaired recruitment of
pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells to blood vessels and of
cardiomyocytes to the endocardium. They showed that enhanced
angiogenesis depended on both PI3K subunits p110-gamma (PIK3CG; 601232)
and p85-alpha (PIK3R1; 171833), but that the defect in cardiovascular
morphogenesis was more dependent on p110-gamma than p85-alpha. Hamada et
al. (2005) concluded that interaction of PI3Ks and PTEN is essential for
regulation of cardiovascular morphogenesis and postnatal
neovascularization, including tumor angiogenesis.

Chen et al. (2006) demonstrated that Akt1 deficiency attenuated tumor
development in Pten +/- mice.

Kwon et al. (2006) found that mice with targeted inactivation of the
Pten gene in differentiated neurons of the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus demonstrated abnormal social interaction and exaggerated
responses to sensory stimuli. The mice also showed macrocephaly and
neuronal hypertrophy, including hypertrophic and ectopic dendrites and
axon tracts with increased synapses. The findings suggested that Pten
defects in mice can result in macrocephaly and autistic-like behavior.

Intestinal polyposis, a precancerous neoplasia, results primarily from
an abnormal increase in the number of crypts, which contain intestinal
stem cells (ISCs). In mice, widespread deletion of the tumor suppressor
Pten generates hamartomatous intestinal polyps with epithelial and
stromal involvement. Using this model, He et al. (2007) established the
relationship between stem cells and polyp and tumor formation. PTEN
helps govern the proliferation rate and number of ISCs and loss of PTEN
results in an excess of ISCs. In Pten-deficient mice, excess ISCs
initiate de novo crypt formation and crypt fission, recapitulating crypt
production in fetal and neonatal intestine. The PTEN-AKT (164730)
pathway probably governs stem cell activation by helping control nuclear
localization of the Wnt pathway effector beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806).
AKT phosphorylates beta-catenin at ser552, resulting in a
nuclear-localized form in ISCs. The observations showed that intestinal
polyposis is initiated by PTEN-deficient ISCs that undergo excessive
proliferation driven by Akt activation and nuclear localization of
beta-catenin.

Liu et al. (2007) showed that mice with osteoblast-specific Pten
deficiency were of normal size but demonstrated dramatic and
progressively increasing bone mineral density throughout life. In vitro,
osteoblasts lacking Pten differentiated more rapidly than controls and
exhibited greatly reduced apoptosis associated with increased levels of
phosphorylated Akt and activation of Akt signaling.

To assess the usefulness of mouse models in cancer gene discovery and
the extent of cross-species overlap in cancer-associated copy number
aberrations, Maser et al. (2007) engineered lymphoma-prone mice with
chromosomal instability. Along with targeted resequencing, their
comparative oncogenomic studies identified FBXW7 (606278) and PTEN to be
commonly deleted both in murine lymphomas and in human T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL). The murine cancers acquired
widespread recurrent amplifications and deletions targeting loci
syntenic to those not only in human T-ALL but also in diverse human
hematopoietic, mesenchymal, and epithelial tumors. These results
indicated that murine and human tumors experience common biologic
processes driven by orthologous genetic events in their malignant
evolution. Maser et al. (2007) concluded that the highly concordant
nature of genomic events encourages the use of genomically unstable
murine cancer models in the discovery of biologic driver events in the
human oncogenome.

Reddy et al. (2008) provided genetic evidence that in mice lacking Pten
in oocytes, the entire primordial follicle pool becomes activated. All
primordial follicles become depleted in early adulthood, causing
premature ovarian failure. Reddy et al. (2008) concluded that the
mammalian oocyte serves as the headquarters of programming of follicle
activation and that the oocyte PTEN-PI3K pathway governs follicle
activation through control of initiation of oocyte growth.

Page et al. (2009) showed that haploinsufficient Pten +/- mice were
macrocephalic and that female Pten +/- mice were impaired in social
approach behavior but not male Pten +/- mice. This phenotype was
exacerbated in Pten and Slc6a4 (182138) double haploinsufficient mice.
While increased brain size correlated with decreased sociability across
these genotypes in females, within each genotype, increased brain size
correlated with increased sociability, suggesting that epigenetic
influences interact with genetic factors in influencing the phenotype.
The findings suggested an interaction between 2 autism spectrum disorder
candidate genes during brain development.

Alimonti et al. (2010) generated transgenic hypomorphic (hy) mice with
decreasing levels of Pten expression: Pten (+/+), Pten (hy/+), Pten
(+/-), and Pten (hy/-). Reduction of Pten dose in mice resulted in
decreased survival, with Pten (+/-) mice showing a mean survival of 12
months and Pten (hy/-) mice showing a mean survival of about 8.5 months.
Pten (hy/+) also showed decreased survival compared to wildtype. Similar
to Pten (+/-) mutants, Pten (hy/+) mice had autoimmune disorders with
lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, although the onset was delayed in the
Pten (hy/+) mice. Pten (hy/+), which expressed 80% of normal levels of
Pten, showed increased susceptibility to tumor development compared to
wildtype, with breast tumors occurring at the highest penetrance.
However, tumorigenesis was not as high as in Pten (+/-) mice. Tumor size
and proliferation increased with the reduction of Pten dosage. All
breast tumors analyzed from Pten (hy/+) mice retained 2 intact copies of
Pten and maintained Pten levels above the heterozygous levels,
indicating protein expression. Cellular studies showed that subtle
downregulation of Pten altered the steady-state biology of mammary
tissues and the expression profiles of genes involved in cancer cell
proliferation, such a cyclin B2 (CCNB2; 602755), cyclin D1 (CCND1;
168461), and Bub1 (602452). A proportion of human breast cancer tissue
showed similar changes with decreased PTEN expression. Alimonti et al.
(2010) proposed a continuum working model of tumorigenesis in which
subtle reductions in the dose of some tumor suppressor genes may
predispose to cancer development in a tissue-specific manner.

Cotter et al. (2010) showed that, in Schwann cells, mammalian disks
large homolog-1 (DLG1; 601014) interacts with Pten to inhibit axonal
stimulation of myelination. This mechanism limits myelin sheath
thickness and prevents overmyelination in mouse sciatic nerves. Removing
this brake results in myelin outfoldings and demyelination,
characteristics of some peripheral neuropathies. Indeed, the Dlg1 brake
is no longer functional in a mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(CMT4B1; 601382). Cotter et al. (2010) concluded that negative
regulation of myelination appears to be essential for optimization of
nerve conduction velocity and myelin maintenance.

Harrington et al. (2010) found that mice with conditional inactivation
of Pten in oligodendrocytes showed hypermyelination and increased myelin
sheath thickness in the corpus callosum and spinal cord during
development. Older mice showed progressive axonal myelin sheath
abnormalities associated with neurologic features, such as ataxia.
However, there was no improvement in myelination after white matter
injury in conditional Pten-knockout mice compared to control mice. The
findings indicated that Pten functions to regulate myelin thickness and
preserve axonal integrity in oligodendrocytes, but appears to be
dispensable during myelin repair.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, GLY129GLU

In a family with 2 males with Cowden disease (158350) manifested by
melanoma and trichilemmomas of the skin, adenocarcinoma of the breast,
and glioblastoma, Liaw et al. (1997) found that the PTEN gene carried a
transition of nucleotide 386, changing codon 129 from GGA (gly) to GAA
(glu). In a second family in which 2 males had Cowden disease manifested
by trichilemmoma and follicular adenoma of the thyroid, Liaw et al.
(1997) observed the same mutation.

Ramaswamy et al. (1999) showed that PTEN protein induces a G1 block when
reconstituted in PTEN-null cells. The G129E PTEN mutant, which is
associated with Cowden disease, was found to have protein phosphatase
activity yet was defective in dephosphorylating inositol
1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate in vitro and failed to arrest cells in G1.
These data suggested a link between induction of cell cycle block by
PTEN and its ability to dephosphorylate, in vivo, phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-triphosphate. Tumor cells lacking PTEN contained high levels of
activated AKT1, suggesting that PTEN is necessary for the appropriate
regulation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT1 pathway.

.0002
COWDEN DISEASE 1
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME, INCLUDED
PTEN, ARG233TER

In a family with 3 females with Cowden disease (158350) manifested by
trichilemmomas, multinodular goiter, and macrocephaly, Liaw et al.
(1997) observed a transition in nucleotide 697, changing codon 233 from
CGA (arg) to TGA (stop) (R233X).

In a family with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (153480), reported by
Gorlin et al. (1992), Marsh et al. (1997) identified this same R233X
mutation. The identical mutation, occurring in 2 unrelated families with
2 distinct syndromes, arose on 2 different 10q22-q23 haplotypes, arguing
against a common ancestor or founder effect. The only common clinical
features in both the Cowden disease family and the family reported by
Gorlin et al. (1992) with R233X were macrocephaly and thyroid disease.

.0003
LHERMITTE-DUCLOS DISEASE
PTEN, GLU157TER

In a family with 2 males and 2 females affected with Lhermitte-Duclos
disease (see 158350) manifested by trichilemmomas,
fibroadenoma/hamartoma of the breast, macrocephaly, and cerebellar
ataxia, Liaw et al. (1997) found in the PTEN gene a transversion at
nucleotide 697, converting codon 157 from GAA (glu) to TAA (stop).

.0004
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
PTEN, SER170ARG

In affected members of a family with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome
(153480), Marsh et al. (1997) identified a mutation in exon 6 of the
PTEN gene, resulting in a ser170-to-arg (S170R) substitution. Affected
members of the family showed macrocephaly and speckled penis with soft
tissue tumors (lipomas, hemangiomas, and leiomyomas).

.0005
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, HIS123ARG

In patients with Cowden disease (158350), Nelen et al. (1997) identified
3 different mutations in the active site sequence motif HCxxGxxRS/T
characteristic of protein tyrosine phosphatases and dual specificity
phosphatases. Two of these mutations were missense mutations, his123arg
and cys124arg (601728.0006), and 1 was a nonsense mutation, R130X
(601728.0007), which occurred twice. All 3 could be predicted to lead to
a complete or severe loss of phosphatase activity.

.0006
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, CYS124ARG

See Nelen et al. (1997) and 601728.0005.

.0007
COWDEN DISEASE 1
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME, INCLUDED;;
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME, INCLUDED
PTEN, ARG130TER

In a study of Cowden disease (158350), Nelen et al. (1997) found 2
independent occurrences of an arg130-to-ter (R130X) mutation in the PTEN
gene. The mutation involved a CpG dinucleotide.

Zori et al. (1998) described a family in which a mother had Cowden
disease and the son had macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, and
hemangiomata, also known as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (153480).
Both were heterozygous for the R130X mutation. The son had been seen at
the age of 11 years for severe developmental delay and autistic
behavior. In early childhood, rectal bleeding led to removal of a few
rectal polyps; the pathology showed benign pseudopolyp with
telangiectatic vessels in an inflamed myxoid stroma. His verbal and
performance IQs were 40 at 11 years. He developed a goiter at 18 years
for which left hemithyroidectomy was performed, and a tumor was also
excised from the right side of the thyroid. The left lobe contained in
insular (follicular) carcinoma while the right showed nodular
hyperplasia with a focus of papillary microcarcinoma. At the age of 11
years, the son had multiple pigmented macules on the glands and shaft of
the penis. He lacked the second toes. The mother of the patient reported
by Zori et al. (1998) had a large head (59.5 cm) and multiple small
papules on her tongue and oral mucosa. She had polyposis of the entire
gastrointestinal tract. Mammogram showed bilateral fibroglandular tissue
with single well-defined benign nodules in each breast with mild
dysplasia.

In a 4-year-old boy with macrocephaly/autism syndrome (605309), Herman
et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous R130X substitution. The
substitution occurs in exon 5 of the PTEN gene within the core
phosphatase domain of the protein. The child inherited the mutation from
his unaffected father. Herman et al. (2007) noted that the boy may
develop further clinical manifestations of other PTEN-associated
syndromes and emphasized that the family was counseled on the
possibility of increased tumor risk in the boy and the mutation-carrying
father.

.0008
ENDOMETRIAL CARCINOMA
PTEN, IVS4, G-A, +1

A high rate of loss of heterozygosity is observed at 10q23-q26 in
endometrial carcinomas (Peiffer et al., 1995; Nagase et al., 1996;
Safara et al., 1997; Peiffer-Schneider et al., 1998). Kong et al. (1997)
observed 38 endometrial-cancer DNAs for LOH at loci on chromosomes 2, 9,
and 10. Among 23 informative endometrial cancer samples, they found LOH
in 11 (48%). PCR-SSCP analysis or direct DNA sequencing was then
performed for all exons and intron-exon boundaries of the PTEN gene in
38 cancers. Whereas no mutation was found in PTEN in colorectal and
pancreatic tumors, mutations were identified in 21 of the 38 endometrial
carcinomas (55%). In each of 5 endometrial tumors without LOH, 2
mutations were seen. A variety of mutations were identified, including
frameshifts, splice site mutations, and point mutations. Two tumors had
an identical base substitution (a G-to-A transition) at the first base
of intron 4. Mutations were found more often in tumors with
microsatellite instability (MI+), implying that PTEN may constitute a
target for microsatellite instability. Furthermore, Kong et al. (1997)
suggested that the MI+ phenotype may predispose these tumors to simple
base-substitution mutations, as well as to the frameshift mutations that
are typical of microsatellite instability.

.0009
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, IVS6, T-G, +2

Olschwang et al. (1998) screened all 9 exons of PTEN by heteroduplex
analysis of leukocyte genomic DNA from patients considered to have
juvenile polyposis coli. In 1 patient, a T-to-G transversion at the
second position of the consensus splicing donor site of exon 6 was
found. This change was predicted to lead to a skipping of at least exon
6 in the processed mRNA, resulting in a shift of the translation reading
frame starting at codon 164 and leading to a stop codon at position 172.
The patient was a 14-year-old male who underwent colonoscopy that
revealed juvenile polyposis. He had no previous personal or family
history that could be related to either Cowden disease or
Bannayan-Zonana syndrome.

Eng and Peacocke (1998) suggested that this patient may have had Cowden
syndrome (158350) that had not yet 'declared itself' because of reduced
penetrance under 15 years of age. Waite and Eng (2002) reiterated the
conclusion of Eng and Peacocke (1998) that the individuals studied by
Olschwang et al. (1998) (see also 601728.0010 and 601728.0011) had
Cowden syndrome or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, and stated that
juvenile intestinal polyposis is not a so-called PTEN hamartoma-tumor
syndrome (PHTS). They suggested that the discovery of the germline PTEN
mutation in an individual considered to have JPS should raise a
suspicion that the clinical diagnosis is incorrect and that such an
individual should be managed medically in the same manner as all
patients with PHTS.

.0010
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, 1-BP DEL, 696A

In a patient considered to have juvenile polyposis coli, Olschwang et
al. (1998) identified a 1-bp deletion (A) at nucleotide 696, causing a
frameshift in exon 7 and leading to a stop codon at position 255. The
patient was 74 years old when he presented with severe anemia and
hypoalbuminemia. Gastroscopy and colonoscopy showed polyps throughout
the digestive tract, which were classified as juvenile by histology,
leading to the diagnosis of juvenile polyposis coli. Two years earlier,
this patient had developed laryngeal cancer that was treated by
radiotherapy only. This was thought to be related to heavy tobacco use
and alcohol consumption. The deletion in this patient involved
proline-232.

Eng and Peacocke (1998) interpreted features of this patient as highly
suggestive of Cowden syndrome (158350). Waite and Eng (2002) supported
this conclusion and stated that juvenile intestinal polyposis is not a
so-called PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome (PHTS). They suggested that the
discovery of the germline PTEN mutation in an individual considered to
have JPS should raise a suspicion that the clinical diagnosis is
incorrect and that such an individual should be managed medically in the
same manner as all patients with PHTS.

.0011
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, MET35ARG

In a patient considered to have juvenile polyposis coli, Olschwang et
al. (1998) identified a T-to-G transversion in exon 2 predicted to
substitute an arginine for the methionine at codon 35. The PTEN protein
demonstrates exceedingly high phylogenic conservation, with the human
protein identical to that of dog and differing from that of mouse by a
single amino acid change at codon 398. Codon 35 occurs in the region of
PTEN that presents significant homology with tensin (600076) and
auxilin. Taken together, these observations suggested that the DNA
variation in this patient was deleterious. The patient underwent
gastroscopy and colonoscopy at 7 years of age, after a 3-year history of
intermittent rectal bleeding. Juvenile polyps were found throughout the
stomach, duodenum, and colon. At the age of 10 years, clinical
evaluations had not revealed any extra-digestive manifestations that
could be associated with Cowden disease. Both parents underwent
colonoscopy that showed normal digestive tracts. The genotypes at 8
highly polymorphic microsatellite loci in the parents and patient
confirmed mendelian inheritance. Sequencing of exon 2 amplified from the
DNAs of both parents revealed only codon 35 for methionine,
demonstrating that codon 35 of arginine was a new mutation.

Eng and Peacocke (1998) pointed out that the penetrance of Cowden
syndrome (158350) is well under 10% below 15 years of age (Nelen et al.,
1996); thus children with JPS, according to diagnostic criteria, may
develop other features of Cowden syndrome as they age. Waite and Eng
(2002) supported this conclusion and stated that juvenile intestinal
polyposis is not a so-called PTEN hamartoma-tumor syndrome (PHTS). They
suggested that the discovery of the germline PTEN mutation in an
individual considered to have JPS should raise a suspicion that the
clinical diagnosis is incorrect and that such an individual should be
managed medically in the same manner as all patients with PHTS.

.0012
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, LEU70PRO

Marsh et al. (1998) studied 64 families with a Cowden syndrome-like
phenotype insufficient to make the diagnosis of Cowden syndrome
(158350). They found only 1 mutation, in a male with follicular
carcinoma. The mutation was a T-to-C transition at codon 209 of the PTEN
gene, resulting in a leu70-to-pro substitution predicted to affect
splicing.

.0013
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
PTEN, 1-BP DEL, 1390C

In 3 affected members of a family with macrocephaly, multiple lipomas,
and hemangiomata (153480), Longy et al. (1998) identified a 1-bp
deletion (1390delC) in exon 6 of the PTEN gene, resulting in a
frameshift and premature truncation of the protein at codon 198. One
member of the family had features more suggestive of Cowden disease
(158350).

.0014
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
PTEN, TYR178TER

Longy et al. (1998) reported a heterozygous pattern T/A for nucleotides
1338 and 1339 in exon 6 of the PTEN gene in affected members of a family
with macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, and hemangiomata (153480). They
interpreted this mutation as being due to a small inversion of these
nucleotides, resulting in a termination signal at codon 178 (Y178X).

.0015
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
PTEN, GLN214TER

In a patient with macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, and hemangiomata
(153480), Longy et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous 144C-T
transition in exon 7 of the PTEN gene, resulting in a gln214-to-ter
(Q214X) substitution. Neither parent of the proband had evidence of the
mutation, suggesting that it was de novo.

.0016
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
PTEN, GLU256TER

In a 2-year-old child with macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, and
hemangiomata (153480), Longy et al. (1998) identified a de novo 1570G-T
transversion in exon 7 of the PTEN gene, resulting in a glu256-to-ter
(E256X) substitution. The patient also had mild psychomotor retardation.

.0017
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, ARG130GLN

Kurose et al. (1999) described a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the
second nucleotide of codon 130 of the PTEN gene, predicted to result in
an arg130-to-gln (R130Q) substitution, in a 35-year-old Japanese man who
had been followed clinically for presumed JPS (174900) because of
numerous hamartomatous polypoid lesions throughout the digestive tract,
from esophagus to rectum. On further examination, he was found to have a
small thyroid adenoma and a few papillomatous papules on his right hand,
as well as a lung tumor which had not been fully characterized at the
time of report. Waite and Eng (2002) classified this patient as a case
of Cowden disease (158350) and referred to the patient's 'classic
cutaneous features.'

.0018
PROSTATE CANCER, SOMATIC
PTEN, 5-BP DEL, NT761

Cairns et al. (1997) found deletion of 10q23 in 23 of 80 prostate tumors
(176807). Homozygous deletion of the PTEN gene was implicated in 6 cases
by testing with new intragenic markers. Repeat sequence analysis of the
coding region of the PTEN and the intron/exon boundaries in the
remaining 17 prostate tumors with 10q LOH demonstrated 4 tumors with
somatic mutations. One of the mutations was a 5-bp deletion involving
nucleotides 761-765 in exon 7 and resulting in a frameshift. The
identification of the second 'hit' in 10 (43%) of 23 tumors with LOH at
10q23 established PTEN as a main inactivation target of 10q loss in
sporadic prostate cancer.

.0019
PROSTATE CANCER, SOMATIC
PTEN, 564T-A

In a sporadic prostate cancer, Cairns et al. (1997) found a T-to-A
transversion at nucleotide 564 in exon 6, predicted to result in a
change from TAT (tyr) to TAA (stop).

.0020
LHERMITTE-DUCLOS DISEASE
PTEN, LEU112PRO

In a patient with a severe form of Lhermitte-Duclos disease (158350),
Sutphen et al. (1999) identified a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 335
in the PTEN gene, resulting in a leu112-to-pro substitution. The
mutation occurred in exon 5, which has been proposed to be a hotspot for
PTEN germline mutations.

.0021
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
COWDEN DISEASE 1, INCLUDED;;
PROTEUS-LIKE SYNDROME, INCLUDED
PTEN, ARG335TER

In affected members of a family with 2 females with phenotypic findings
of Cowden syndrome (158350) and 2 males with phenotypic findings of
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (153480), Celebi et al. (1999)
identified a heterozygous 1003C-T transition in the PTEN gene, resulting
in an arg335-to-ter (R335X) substitution. The mutation was not
identified in 30 alleles from unaffected, unrelated subjects.

Zhou et al. (2000) reported a boy with congenital hemihypertrophy,
epidermoid nevi, macrocephaly, lipomas, arteriovenous malformations, and
normal intellect. He was given the clinical diagnosis of 'Proteus-like'
syndrome because of phenotypic similarities to Proteus syndrome
(176920). Molecular analysis identified a heterozygous germline R335X
mutation, and a somatic R130X (601728.0007) mutation in a nevus, lipoma,
and arteriovenous malformation from the patient. The authors postulated
that the second hit, R130X, occurred early in embryonic development and
may even represent germline mosaicism. Thus, PTEN may be involved in
'Proteus-like' syndrome with its implications for cancer development in
the future. Five unrelated patients with classic Proteus syndrome had no
demonstrable mutations in PTEN. Cohen et al. (2003) disputed the
diagnosis of Proteus syndrome in the patient reported by Zhou et al.
(2000). Cohen et al. (2003) stated that some of the clinical features
were not consistent with classic Proteus syndrome and noted that the
term 'Proteus-like' syndrome is unhelpful and confounding.

Caux et al. (2007) suggested that the patient reported by Zhou et al.
(2000) had segmental exacerbation of Cowden syndrome due to somatic
mosaicism for a second PTEN mutation, and they suggested 'SOLAMEN
syndrome' as an acronym for segmental overgrowth, lipomatosis,
arteriovenous malformation, and epidermal nevus.

.0022
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, 1-BP INS, A

In a patient with numerous manifestations of Cowden disease (158350)
including fibroepithelial polyps and acanthosis nigricans, Raizis et al.
(2000) found a single adenine insertion in exon 1 of the PTEN gene
between position 40 and 41. The mutation results in a frameshift in
codon 14 with protein truncation 29 amino acids later. This mutation,
resulting in total disruption of the PTEN gene including the phosphatase
and 5-prime tensin domain, was reported to be the most 5-prime mutation
in the PTEN gene reported so far.

.0023
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, CYS124SER

Marsh et al. (1998) described germline mutations in Cowden syndrome
(158350) at the cys124 position and the gly129-to-glu (601728.0001)
mutation. Families with cys124 mutations appear to have multiorgan
involvement and a paucity of malignant breast disease.

Weng et al. (2001) stated that the cys124-to-ser (C124S) mutation
results in a phosphatase-dead protein, with neither lipid nor protein
phosphatase activity.

.0024
MALIGNANT MELANOMA, SOMATIC
PTEN, CYS211TER

Celebi et al. (2000) examined 21 metastatic melanoma samples and
identified a C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 633 in exon 6 of the PTEN
gene, resulting in a cys211-to-ter mutation.

.0025
MALIGNANT MELANOMA, SOMATIC
PTEN, ASP19ASN

Celebi et al. (2000) examined 21 metastatic melanoma samples and
identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 55 in exon 1 of the PTEN
gene, resulting in an asp19-to-asn mutation.

.0026
MALIGNANT MELANOMA, SOMATIC
PTEN, VAL217ILE

Celebi et al. (2000) examined 21 metastatic melanoma samples and
identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 649 in exon 7 of the PTEN
gene, resulting in a val217-to-ile mutation.

.0027
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, 1-BP DEL, 802G

Fackenthal et al. (2001) identified a 1-bp deletion in PTEN cDNA in a
male with Cowden syndrome (158350) who developed breast cancer at the
age of 41 years.

.0028
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, 5-BP DEL, NT347

Fackenthal et al. (2001) identified a 5-bp deletion in PTEN cDNA in a
family with Cowden syndrome (158350). One male member of this family
developed breast cancer at the age of 43 years and died at the age of 57
years.

.0029
GLIOMA SUSCEPTIBILITY 2
MENINGIOMA, INCLUDED
PTEN, ARG234GLN

Staal et al. (2002) described a 38-year-old male who presented with
focal seizures of the right arm and dysphasia in 1981. In 1985, he was
found to have a meningioma (607174), which was removed completely. A
low-grade glioma of the left frontal lobe was detected in 1990 and
operated on in 1993 with subsequent radiotherapy. The tumor was
classified as an anaplastic oligodendroglioma (GLM2; 613028). By 1998,
regrowth of the tumor had occurred and the diagnosis was again
anaplastic oligodendroglioma. In the patient, Staal et al. (2002)
identified a heterozygous germline G-to-A transition at nucleotide 701
in exon 7 of the PTEN gene, resulting in an arg234-to-gln (R234Q)
substitution, without loss of heterozygosity in tumor DNA. The mutant
PTEN protein was not capable of inducing apoptosis, induced increased
cell proliferation, and led to high constitutive protein kinase B (PKB,
or AKT1; 164730) activation, which could not be increased further by
stimulation with insulin. The patient did not show any of the clinical
signs of Cowden disease (CD; 158350) or other hereditary diseases
typically associated with PTEN germline mutations.

.0030
VATER ASSOCIATION WITH MACROCEPHALY AND VENTRICULOMEGALY
PTEN, HIS861ASP

Reardon et al. (2001) identified a de novo his61-to-asp (H61D) mutation
in a child with macrocephaly and features of VATER association (see
276950).

.0031
SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA, HEAD AND NECK, SOMATIC
PTEN, ALA121GLY

In a study of 52 head and neck squamous cell carcinoma tumor samples
(HNSCC; 275355), Poetsch et al. (2002) found a 362C-A transition in exon
5 of the PTEN gene, resulting in an ala121-to-gly (A121G) mutation, in 1
oropharyngeal and 1 laryngeal carcinoma.

.0032
PROTEUS-LIKE SYNDROME
PTEN HAMARTOMA TUMOR SYNDROME, INCLUDED
PTEN, 1-BP DEL, 507C

Smith et al. (2002) identified a de novo 1-bp deletion in exon 6 of the
PTEN gene, 507delC, resulting in a premature stop codon (TAA) 38
nucleotides downstream within exon 6, in a 16-month-old male with
features suggestive of a 'Proteus-like' syndrome (see 158350), including
a left-sided epidermal nevus following the lines of Blaschko, widespread
capillary venous malformation on his chest and abdomen, multiple
lipoblastomata, disproportionate overgrowth of the right leg, and a
progressive course. Smith et al. (2002) stated that there was clear
evidence of mosaicism in this patient, although a somatic PTEN mutation
was not identified in a biopsy of a skin lesion.

Cohen et al. (2003) disputed the diagnosis of Smith et al. (2002) and
stated that several features in the patient had never been observed in
Proteus syndrome, such as lipoblastomatosis, polypoid lesions of the
jejunum and colon, and true hemangioma. Cohen et al. (2003) proposed
that the patient reported by Smith et al. (2002) actually had a PTEN
hamartoma tumor syndrome.

.0033
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, -764A-G

In 9 of 97 Cowden syndrome (158350) patients without a PCR-detectable
PTEN mutation, Zhou et al. (2003) identified 10 heterozygous sequence
variants within the PTEN promoter region, none of which was found among
186 normal white control subjects (372 chromosomes). One of the 10
variants was a -764A-G transition, present in a patient who had breast
cancer but no thyroid cancer or uterine cancer. See also Teresi et al.
(2007).

.0034
COWDEN DISEASE 1
PTEN, -861G-T

Zhou et al. (2003) identified a -861G-T transversion in the promoter
region of the PTEN gene in a patient with Cowden syndrome (158350) who
had breast cancer and thyroid cancer, but not uterine cancer, and showed
multiorgan involvement, defined as at least 5 organs affected (Marsh et
al., 1998). See also Teresi et al. (2007).

.0035
BANNAYAN-RILEY-RUVALCABA SYNDROME
PTEN, DEL

In a patient with macrocephaly, multiple lipomas, and hemangiomata, also
known as Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (153480), in whom no PTEN
mutation had been detectable by PCR, Zhou et al. (2003) identified
deletion of the entire PTEN gene.

.0036
PTEN HAMARTOMA TUMOR SYNDROME WITH GRANULAR CELL TUMOR
PTEN, 1-BP DEL, 179G

Marchese et al. (2003) described a patient with multiple granular cell
tumors and phenotypic findings of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS)
in whom they identified a 1-bp deletion (179delG) in exon3 of the PTEN
gene, resulting in a termination sequence at codon 98. The mutation was
not found in the parents, and DNA from 2 granular cell tumors and from
peripheral blood of the patient showed no loss of heterozygosity. The
38-year-old Caucasian male patient, born of nonconsanguineous healthy
parents, was well until the age of 16 years when blurred vision led to
the diagnosis of choreoretinitis. At age 21, he underwent partial
resection of the thyroid gland for microfollicular and trabecular
adenoma. At the age of 22, a fibrous lesion was removed from the left
turbinate sinus, as well as 3 'cystic' lesions from the left hand, which
were shown to be granular cell tumors. At age 26, a parasellar
angiofibroma, which was thought to have caused an arteriovenous fistula
of the cavernous sinus, was removed. Cataract in the left eye was
removed at the age of 28 and in the right eye at the age of 34. Diffuse
gastroesophageal polyposis and multiple polyps in the rectum and sigmoid
were discovered at the age of 29 years. Colonoscopy revealed multiple
hyperplastic polyps (less than 100) in the descending colon sigmoid and
rectum, 1 of which was, however, a schwannoma of the intestinal mucosa.
A large polyp in the transverse colon was histologically interpreted as
a juvenile polyp. The patient had several facial papular lesions,
increased head circumference (63 cm), a left-convex scoliosis, and
penile lentigines. Marchese et al. (2003) noted that although many
features seen in this patient have been associated with PHTS (thyroid
lesions, GI hamartomas, macrocephaly, facial papules, penile lentigines,
bilateral juvenile cataracts), multiple granular cell tumors had not
been described previously in patients with PHTS.

.0037
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, HIS93ARG

In a 4-year-old boy with macrocephaly and autistic behaviors (605309),
Butler et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition in exon
4 of the PTEN gene, resulting in a his93-to-arg (H93R) substitution.
Preliminary protein analysis predicted an increase in the surface
accessibility of the protein. Neither parent carried the mutation, and
nonpaternity was excluded by microsatellite genotyping.

.0038
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, ASP252GLY

In a 3.5-year-old boy with macrocephaly and pervasive developmental
disorder (605309), Butler et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous A-to-G
transition in exon 7 of the PTEN gene, resulting in an asp252-to-gly
(D252G) substitution. Preliminary protein analysis predicted an increase
in the surface accessibility of the protein. The mother did not have the
mutation, but the father was unavailable for mutation testing.

.0039
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, PHE241SER

In a 2.5-year-old boy with macrocephaly and autistic behavior (605309),
Butler et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous T-to-C transition in exon
7 of the PTEN gene, resulting in a phe241-to-ser (F241S) substitution.
Preliminary protein analysis predicted a decrease in the surface
accessibility of the protein. The patient, who was adopted, had freckles
on his glans penis but no other cutaneous pigmentary or vascular
abnormalities, and there was no known family history of Cowden syndrome
(158350) or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (153480). The parents were
unavailable for mutation testing.

.0040
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, 1-BP INS, 519T

In a 27-month-old girl with macrocephaly/autism syndrome (605309),
Herman et al. (2007) identified a de novo heterozygous 1-bp insertion
(519insT) in exon 6 of the PTEN gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature truncation at codon 179.

.0041
PTEN HAMARTOMA TUMOR SYNDROME
PTEN, GLY132VAL

In a 4.5-year-old Turkish boy with verrucous epidermal nevus,
macrocephaly, progressive lipomatosis, and intestinal polyposis,
suggestive of PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome, Tekin et al. (2006)
identified heterozygosity for a germline 395G-T transversion in the PTEN
gene, resulting in a gly132-to-val (G132V) substitution. The mutation
was not found in either parent. Loss of heterozygosity for chromosome
10q23 markers in the PTEN region was shown in tissue from a lipoma. The
authors noted that the clinical presentation of this patient was similar
to that of a 16-month-old boy with congenital left-sided verrucoid
epidermal nevus, multiple lipoblastomas, and vascular anomalies in whom
Smith et al. (2002) identified a deletion in the PTEN gene
(601728.0032), but that limb overgrowth and asymmetry were absent in
their patient.

.0042
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, THR167ASN

In an 8-year-old non-Hispanic white female diagnosed with autism
(605309), O'Roak et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous de novo
thr167-to-asn (T167N) mutation in the PTEN gene. The patient had very
low verbal IQ of 57, low nonverbal IQ of 77, and low adaptive score of
79. There was a history of speech delay with loss of words during
development. Head circumference was 56 cm (z score = 2.8).

.0043
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, THR131ILE

In a 49-month-old non-Hispanic white male diagnosed with autism
(605309), O'Roak et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous de novo
thr131-to-ile (T131I) mutation in the PTEN gene. The patient had very
low verbal and nonverbal IQ scores of 55 and 50, respectively, with a
low adaptive score of 73. There was a history of speech delay and
possible non-febrile seizures; EEG was normal. Head circumference was
57.8 cm (z score = 4.7).

.0044
MACROCEPHALY/AUTISM SYNDROME
PTEN, 1-BP INS, A

In a 9-year-old non-Hispanic white male diagnosed with autism (605309),
O'Roak et al. (2012) identified heterozygous de novo insertion of 1
basepair (A) in the PTEN gene resulting in frameshift and premature
termination of the protein (Cys136MetfsX44). The patient had extremely
low verbal IQ (19), nonverbal IQ (33), and adaptive score (57). There
was a history of speech delay and loss of words during development; the
patient was nonverbal at the time of the report. Head circumference was
56 cm (z score = 2.0).

REFERENCE 1. Agrawal, S.; Pilarski, R.; Eng, C.: Different splicing defects
lead to differential effects downstream of the lipid and protein phosphatase
activities of PTEN. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2459-2468, 2005.

2. Alimonti, A.; Carracedo, A.; Clohessy, J. G.; Trotman, L. C.; Nardella,
C.; Egia, A.; Salmena, L.; Sampieri, K.; Haveman, W. J.; Brogi, E.;
Richardson, A. L.; Zhang, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Subtle variations
in Pten dose determine cancer susceptibility. Nature Genet. 42:
454-458, 2010.

3. Alvarez-Breckenridge, C. A.; Waite, K. A.; Eng, C.: PTEN regulates
phospholipase D and phospholipase C. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1157-1163,
2007.

4. Anzelon, A. N.; Wu, H.; Rickert, R. C.: Pten inactivation alters
peripheral B lymphocyte fate and reconstitutes CD19 function. Nature
Immun. 4: 287-294, 2003.

5. Arch, E. M.; Goodman, B. K.; Van Wesep, R. A.; Liaw, D.; Clarke,
K.; Parsons, R.; McKusick, V. A.; Geraghty, M. T.: Deletion of PTEN
in a patient with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome suggests allelism
with Cowden disease. Am. J. Med. Genet. 71: 489-493, 1997.

6. Backman, S. A.; Ghazarian, D.; So, K.; Sanchez, O.; Wagner, K.-U.;
Hennighhausen, L.; Suzuki, A.; Tsao, M.-S.; Chapman, W. B.; Stambolic,
V.; Mak, T. W.: Early onset of neoplasia in the prostate and skin
of mice with tissue-specific deletion of Pten. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
1725-1730, 2004.

7. Backman, S. A.; Stambolic, V.; Suzuki, A.; Haight, J.; Elia, A.;
Pretorius, J.; Tsao, M.-S.; Shannon, P.; Bolon, B.; Ivy, G. O.; Mak,
T. W.: Deletion of Pten in mouse brain causes seizures, ataxia and
defects in soma size resembling Lhermitte-Duclos disease. Nature
Genet. 29: 396-403, 2001.

8. Balciuniene, J.; Feng, N.; Iyadurai, K.; Hirsch, B.; Charnas, L.;
Bill, B. R.; Easterday, M. C.; Staaf, J.; Oseth, L.; Czapansky-Beilman,
D.; Avramopoulos, D.; Thomas, G. H.; Borg, A.; Valle, D.; Schimmenti,
L. A.; Selleck, S. B.: Recurrent 10q22-q23 deletions: a genomic disorder
on 10q associated with cognitive and behavioral abnormalities. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 80: 938-947, 2007.

9. Birck, A.; Ahrenkiel, V.; Zeuthen, J.; Hou-Jensen, K.; Guldberg,
P.: Mutation and allelic loss of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in primary and
metastatic melanoma biopsies. J. Invest. Derm. 114: 277-280, 2000.

10. Blumenthal, G. M.; Dennis, P. A.: PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 16: 1289-1300, 2008.

11. Bonneau, D.; Longy, M.: Mutations of the human PTEN gene. Hum.
Mutat. 16: 109-122, 2000.

12. Butler, M. G.; Dasouki, M. J.; Zhou, X.-P.; Talebizadeh, Z.; Brown,
M. Takahashi, T. N.; Miles, J. H.; Wang, C. H.; Stratton, R.; Pilarski,
R.; Eng, C.: Subset of individuals with autism spectrum disorders
and extreme macrocephaly associated with germline PTEN tumour suppressor
gene mutations. J. Med. Genet. 42: 318-321, 2005.

13. Cairns, P.; Okami, K.; Halachmi, S.; Halachmi, N.; Esteller, M.;
Herman, J. G.; Jen, J.; Isaacs, W. B.; Bova, G. S.; Sidransky, D.
: Frequent inactivation of PTEN/MMAC1 in primary prostate cancer. Cancer
Res. 57: 4997-5000, 1997.

14. Cantley, L. C.; Neel, B. G.: New insights into tumor suppression:
PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide
3-kinase/AKT pathway. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4240-4245, 1999.

15. Carethers, J. M.; Furnari, F. B.; Zigman, A. F.; Lavine, J. E.;
Jones, M. C.; Graham, G. E.; Teebi, A. S.; Huang, H.-J. S.; Ha, H.
T.; Chauhan, D. P.; Chang, C. L.; Cavenee, W. K.; Boland, C. R.:
Absence of PTEN/MMAC1 germ-line mutations in sporadic Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome. Cancer. Res. 58: 2724-2726, 1998.

16. Caux, F.; Plauchu, H.; Chibon, F.; Faivre, L.; Fain, O.; Vabres,
P.; Bonnet, F.; Selma, Z. B.; Laroche, L.; Gerard, M.; Longy, M.:
Segmental overgrowth, lipomatosis, arteriovenous malformation and
epidermal nevus (SOLAMEN) syndrome is related to mosaic PTEN nullizygosity. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 15: 767-773, 2007.

17. Celebi, J. T.; Shendrik, I.; Silvers, D. N.; Peacocke, M.: Identification
of PTEN mutations in metastatic melanoma specimens. J. Med. Genet. 37:
653-657, 2000.

18. Celebi, J. T.; Tsou, H. C.; Chen, F. F.; Zhang, H.; Ping, X. L.;
Lebwohl, M. G.; Kezis, J.; Peacocke, M.: Phenotypic findings of Cowden
syndrome and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome in a family associated with
a single germline mutation in PTEN. J. Med. Genet. 36: 360-364,
1999.

19. Chen, M.-L.; Xu, P.-Z.; Peng, X.; Chen, W. S.; Guzman, G.; Yang,
X.; Di Cristofano, A.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Hay, N.: The deficiency of
Akt1 is sufficient to suppress tumor development in Pten+/- mice. Genes
Dev. 20: 1569-1574, 2006.

20. Chen, Z.; Trotman, L. C.; Shaffer, D.; Lin, H.-K.; Dotan, Z. A.;
Niki, M.; Koutcher, J. A.; Scher, H. I.; Ludwig, T.; Gerald, W.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Crucial role of p53-dependent cellular senescence
in suppression of Pten-deficient tumorigenesis. (Letter) Nature 436:
725-730, 2005.

21. Cohen, M. M., Jr.; Turner, J. T.; Biesecker, L. G.: Proteus syndrome:
misdiagnosis with PTEN mutations. Am. J. Med. Genet. 122A: 323-324,
2003.

22. Cotter, L.; Ozcelik, M.; Jacob, C.; Pereira, J. A.; Locher, V.;
Baumann, R.; Relvas, J. B.; Suter, U.; Tricaud, N.: Dlg1-PTEN interaction
regulates myelin thickness to prevent damaging peripheral nerve overmyelination. Science 328:
1415-1418, 2010.

23. Crackower, M. A.; Oudit, G. Y.; Kozieradzki, I.; Sarao, R.; Sun,
H.; Sasaki, T.; Hirsch, E.; Suzuki, A.; Shioi, T.; Irie-Sasaki, J.;
Sah, R.; Cheng, H.-Y. M.; and 13 others: Regulation of myocardial
contractility and cell size by distinct PI3K-PTEN signaling pathways. Cell 110:
737-749, 2002.

24. Dahia, P. L. M.; Aguiar, R. C. T.; Alberta, J.; Kum, J. B.; Caron,
S.; Sill, H.; Marsh, D. J.; Ritz, J.; Freedman, A.; Stiles, C.; Eng,
C.: PTEN is inversely correlated with the cell survival factor Akt/PKB
and is inactivated via multiple mechanisms in haematological malignancies. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 185-193, 1999.

25. De Vivo, I.; Gertig, D. M.; Nagase, S.; Hankinson, S. E.; O'Brien,
R.; Speizer, F. E.; Parsons, R.; Hunter, D. J.: Novel germline mutations
in the PTEN tumour suppressor gene found in women with multiple cancers. J.
Med. Genet. 37: 336-341, 2000.

26. Di Cristofano, A.; De Acetis, M.; Koff, A.; Cordon-Cardo, C.;
Pandolfi, P. P.: Pten and p27(KIP1) cooperate in prostate cancer
tumor suppression in the mouse. Nature Genet. 27: 222-224, 2001.

27. Di Cristofano, A.; Kotsi, P.; Peng, Y. F.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Elkon,
K. B.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Impaired Fas response and autoimmunity in
Pten +/- mice. Science 285: 2122-2125, 1999.

28. Di Cristofano, A.; Pandolfi, P. P.: The multiple roles of PTEN
in tumor suppression. Cell 100: 387-390, 2000.

29. Di Cristofano, A.; Pesce, B.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi, P. P.
: Pten is essential for embryonic development and tumour suppression. Nature
Genet. 19: 348-355, 1998.

30. Dinulescu, D. M.; Ince, T. A.; Quade, B. J.; Shafer, S. A.; Crowley,
D.; Jacks, T.: Role of K-ras and Pten in the development of mouse
models of endometriosis and endometrioid ovarian cancer. Nature Med. 11:
63-70, 2005.

31. Drinjakovic, J.; Jung, H.; Campbell, D. S.; Strochlic, L.; Dwivedy,
A.; Holt, C. E.: E3 ligase Nedd4 promotes axon branching by downregulating
PTEN. Neuron 65: 341-357, 2010.

32. Eng, C.: PTEN: one gene, many syndromes. Hum. Mutat. 22: 183-198,
2003.

33. Eng, C.; Peacocke, M.: PTEN and inherited hamartoma-cancer syndromes.
(Letter) Nature Genet. 19: 223 only, 1998.

34. Fackenthal, J. D.; Marsh, D. J.; Richardson, A.-L.; Cummings,
S. A.; Eng, C.; Robinson, B. G.; Olopade, O. I.: Male breast cancer
in Cowden syndrome patients with germline PTEN mutations. J. Med.
Genet. 38: 159-164, 2001.

35. Figer, A.; Kaplan, A.; Frydman, M.; Lev, D.; Paswell, J.; Papa,
M. Z.; Goldman, B.; Friedman, E.: Germline mutations in the PTEN
gene in Israeli patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome and
women with familial breast cancer. Clin. Genet. 62: 298-302, 2002.

36. Fine, B.; Hodakoski, C.; Koujak, S.; Su, T.; Saal, L. H.; Maurer,
M.; Hopkins, B.; Keniry, M.; Sulis, M. L.; Mense, S.; Hibshoosh, H.;
Parsons, R.: Activation of the PI3K pathway in cancer through inhibition
of PTEN by exchange factor P-REX2a. Science 325: 1261-1265, 2009.

37. Forrest, M. S.; Edwards, S. M.; Hamoudi, R. A.; Dearnaley, D.
P.; Arden-Jones, A.; Dowe, A.; Murkin, A.; Kelly, J.; Teare, M. D.;
Easton, D. F.; Knowles, M. A.; Bishop, D. T.; Eeles, R. A.; CRC/BPG
UK Familial Prostate Cancer Study Collaborators; EC Biomed Familial
Prostate Cancer Study Collaborators: No evidence of germline PTEN
mutations in familial prostate cancer. J. Med. Genet. 37: 210-212,
2000.

38. Funamoto, S.; Meili, R.; Lee, S.; Parry, L.; Firtel, R. A.: Spatial
and temporal regulation of 3-phosphoinositides by PI 3-kinase and
PTEN mediates chemotaxis. Cell 109: 611-623, 2002.

39. Gimm, O.; Attie-Bitach, T.; Lees, J. A.; Vekemans, M.; Eng, C.
: Expression of the PTEN tumour suppressor protein during human development. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 1633-1639, 2000.

40. Goberdhan, D. C. I.; Wilson, C.: PTEN: tumour suppressor, multifunctional
growth regulator and more. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: R239-R248, 2003.

41. Gomez-Manzano, C.; Fueyo, J.; Jiang, H.; Glass, T. L.; Lee, H.-Y.;
Hu, M.; Liu, J.-L.; Jasti, S. L.; Liu, T.-J.; Conrad, C. A.; Yung,
W. K. A.: Mechanisms underlying PTEN regulation of vascular endothelial
growth factor and angiogenesis. Ann. Neurol. 53: 109-117, 2003.

42. Gorlin, R. J.; Cohen, M. M., Jr.; Condon, L. M.; Burke, B. A.
: Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 44: 307-314,
1992.

43. Groszer, M.; Erickson, R.; Scripture-Adams, D. D.; Lesche, R.;
Trumpp, A.; Zack, J. A.; Kornblum, H. I.; Liu, X.; Wu, H.: Negative
regulation of neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation by the Pten
tumor suppressor gene in vivo. Science 294: 2186-2189, 2001.

44. Guo, W.; Lasky, J. L.; Chang, C.-J.; Mosessian, S.; Lewis, X.;
Xiao, Y.; Yeh, J. E.; Chen, J. Y.; Iruela-Arispe, M. L.; Varella-Garcia,
M.; Wu, H.: Multi-genetic events collaboratively contribute to Pten-null
leukaemia stem-cell formation. Nature 453: 529-533, 2008.

45. Hamada, K.; Sasaki, T.; Koni, P. A.; Natsui, M.; Kishimoto, H.;
Sasaki, J.; Yajima, N.; Horie, Y.; Hasegawa, G.; Naito, M.; Miyazaki,
J.; Suda, T.; Itoh, H.; Nakao, K.; Mak, T. W.; Nakano, T.; Suzuki,
A.: The PTEN/PI3K pathway governs normal vascular development and
tumor angiogenesis. Genes Dev. 19: 2054-2065, 2005.

46. Hansen, G. M.; Justice, M. J.: Pten, a candidate tumor suppressor
gene, maps to mouse chromosome 19. Mammalian Genome 9: 88-90, 1998.

47. Harrington, E. P.; Zhao, C.; Fancy, S. P. J.; Kaing, S.; Franklin,
R. J. M.; Rowitch, D. H.: Oligodendrocyte PTEN is required for myelin
and axonal integrity, not remyelination. Ann. Neurol. 68: 703-716,
2010.

48. He, X. C.; Yin, T.; Grindley, J. C.; Tian, Q.; Sato, T.; Tao,
W. A.; Dirisina, R.; Porter-Westpfahl, K. S.; Hembree, M.; Johnson,
T.; Wiedemann, L. M.; Barrett, T. A.; Hood, L.; Wu, H.; Li, L.: PTEN-deficient
intestinal stem cells initiate intestinal polyposis. Nature Genet. 39:
189-198, 2007.

49. Herman, G. E.; Butter, E.; Enrile, B.; Pastore, M.; Prior, T.
W.; Sommer, A.: Increasing knowledge of PTEN germline mutations:
two additional patients with autism and macrocephaly. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 143A: 589-593, 2007.

50. Horie, Y.; Suzuki, A.; Kataoka, E.; Sasaki, T.; Hamada, K.; Sasaki,
J.; Mizuno, K.; Hasegawa, G.; Kishimoto, H.; Iizuka, M.; Naito, M.;
Enomoto, K.; Watanabe, S.; Mak, T. W.; Nakano, T.: Hepatocyte-specific
Pten deficiency results in steatohepatitis and hepatocellular carcinomas. J.
Clin. Invest. 113: 1774-1783, 2004.

51. Huse, J. T.; Brennan, C.; Hambardzumyan, D.; Wee, B.; Pena, J.;
Rouhanifard, S. H.; Sohn-Lee, C.; le Sage, C.; Agami, R.; Tuschl,
T.; Holland, E. C.: The PTEN-regulating microRNA miR-26a is amplified
in high-grade glioma and facilitates gliomagenesis in vivo. Genes
Dev. 23: 1327-1337, 2009.

52. Iijima, M.; Devreotes, P.: Tumor suppressor PTEN mediates sensing
of chemoattractant gradients. Cell 109: 599-610, 2002.

53. Kalaany, N. Y.; Sabatini, D. M.: Tumours with PI3K activation
are resistant to dietary restriction. Nature 458: 725-731, 2009.

54. Kim, J. W.; Kang, K. H.; Burrola, P.; Mak, T. W.; Lemke, G.:
Retinal degeneration triggered by inactivation of PTEN in the retinal
pigment epithelium. Genes Dev. 22: 3147-3157, 2008.

55. Kong, D.; Suzuki, A.; Zou, T.-T.; Sakurada, A.; Kemp, L. W.; Wakatsuki,
S.; Yokoyama, T.; Yamakawa, H.; Furukawa, T.; Sato, M.; Ohuchi, N.;
Sato, S.; Yin, J.; Wang, S.; Abraham, J. M.; Souza, R. F.; Smolinski,
K. N.; Meltzer, S. J.; Horii, A.: PTEN1 is frequently mutated in
primary endometrial carcinomas. (Letter) Nature Genet. 17: 143-144,
1997.

56. Kurose, K.; Araki, T.; Matsunaka, T.; Takada, Y.; Emi, M.: Variant
manifestation of Cowden disease in Japan: hamartomatous polyposis
of the digestive tract with mutation of the PTEN gene. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 64: 308-310, 1999.

57. Kurose, K.; Gilley, K.; Matsumoto, S.; Watson, P. H.; Zhou, X.-P.;
Eng, C.: Frequent somatic mutations in PTEN and TP53 are mutually
exclusive in the stroma of breast carcinomas. Nature Genet. 32:
355-357, 2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 32: 681 only, 2002.

58. Kurose, K.; Zhou, X.-P.; Araki, T.; Eng, C.: Biallelic inactivating
mutations and an occult germline mutation of PTEN in primary cervical
carcinomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 29: 166-172, 2000.

59. Kwabi-Addo, B.; Giri, D.; Schmidt, K.; Podsypanina, K.; Parsons,
R.; Greenberg, N.; Ittmann, M.: Haploinsufficiency of the Pten tumor
suppressor gene promotes prostate cancer progression. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 11563-11568, 2001.

60. Kwak, Y.-G.; Song, C. H.; Yi, H. K.; Hwang, P. H.; Kim, J.-S.;
Lee, K. S.; Lee, Y. C.: Involvement of PTEN in airway hyperresponsiveness
and inflammation in bronchial asthma. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 1083-1092,
2003.

61. Kwon, C.-H.; Luikart, B. W.; Powell, C. M.; Zhou, J.; Matheny,
S. A.; Zhang, W.; Li, Y.; Baker, S. J.; Parada, L. F.: Pten regulates
neuronal arborization and social interaction in mice. Neuron 50:
377-388, 2006.

62. Kwon, C.-H.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, J.; Baker, S. J.: mTor is required
for hypertrophy of Pten-deficient neuronal soma in vivo. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 100: 12923-12928, 2003.

63. Kwon, C.-H.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, J.; Knoop, L. L.; Tharp, R.; Smeyne,
R. J.; Eberhart, C. G.; Burger, P. C.; Baker, S. J.: Pten regulates
neuronal soma size: a mouse model of Lhermitte-Duclos disease. Nature
Genet. 29: 404-411, 2001.

64. Lachlan, K. L.; Lucassen, A. M.; Bunyan, D.; Temple, I. K.: Cowden
syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome represent one condition
with variable expression and age-related penetrance: results of a
clinical study of PTEN mutation carriers. J. Med. Genet. 44: 579-585,
2007.

65. Lee, J.-O.; Yang, H.; Georgescu, M.-M.; Di Cristofano, A.; Maehama,
T.; Shi, Y.; Dixon, J. E.; Pandolfi, P.; Pavletich, N. P.: Crystal
structure of the PTEN tumor suppressor: implications for its phosphoinositide
phosphatase activity and membrane association. Cell 99: 323-334,
1999.

66. Li, D.-M.; Sun, H.: PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 suppresses the tumorigenicity
and induces G1 cell cycle arrest in human glioblastoma cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15406-15411, 1998.

67. Li, J.; Yen, C.; Liaw, D.; Podsypanina, K.; Bose, S.; Wang, S.
I.; Puc, J.; Miliaresis, C.; Rodgers, L.; McCombie, R.; Bigner, S.
H.; Giovanella, B. C.; Ittmann, M.; Tycko, B.; Hibshoosh, H.; Wigler,
M. H.; Parsons, R.: PTEN, a putative protein tyrosine phosphatase
gene mutated in human brain, breast, and prostate cancer. Science 275:
1943-1946, 1997.

68. Li, L.; Ernsting, B. R.; Wishart, M. J.; Lohse, D. L.; Dixon,
J. E.: A family of putative tumor suppressors is structurally and
functionally conserved in humans and yeast. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
29403-29406, 1997.

69. Liaw, D.; Marsh, D. J.; Li, J.; Dahia, P. L. M.; Wang, S. I.;
Zheng, Z.; Bose, S.; Call, K. M.; Tsou, H. C.; Peacocke, M.; Eng,
C.; Parsons, R.: Germline mutations of the PTEN gene in Cowden disease,
an inherited breast and thyroid cancer syndrome. Nature Genet. 16:
64-67, 1997.

70. Liu, X.; Bruxvoort, K. J.; Zylstra, C. R.; Liu, J.; Cichowski,
R.; Faugere, M.-C.; Bouxsein, M. L.; Wan, C.; Williams, B. O.; Clemens,
T. L.: Lifelong accumulation of bone in mice lacking Pten in osteoblasts. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 2259-2264, 2007.

71. Lobo, G. P.; Waite, K. A.; Planchon, S. M.; Romigh, T.; Nassif,
N. T.; Eng, C.: Germline and somatic cancer-associated mutations
in the ATP-binding motifs of PTEN influence its subcellular localization
and tumor suppressive function. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2851-2862,
2009.

72. Loffeld, A.; McLellan, N. J.; Cole, T.; Payne, S. J.; Fricker,
D.; Moss, C.: Epidermal naevus in Proteus syndrome showing loss of
heterozygosity for an inherited PTEN mutations. Brit. J. Derm. 154:
1194-1198, 2006.

73. Longy, M.; Coulon, V.; Duboue, B.; David, A.; Larregue, M.; Eng,
C.; Amati, P.; Kraimps, J.-L.; Bottani, A.; Lacombe, D.; Bonneau,
D.: Mutations of PTEN in patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba phenotype. J.
Med. Genet. 35: 886-889, 1998.

74. Mao, J.-H.; Kim, I.-J.; Wu, D.; Climent, J.; Kang, H. C.; DelRosario,
R.; Balmain, A.: FBXW7 targets mTOR for degradation and cooperates
with PTEN in tumor suppression. Science 321: 1499-1502, 2008.

75. Marchese, C.; Montera, M.; Torrini, M.; Goldoni, F.; Mareni, C.;
Forni, M.; Locatelli, L.: Granular cell tumor in a PHTS patient with
a novel germline PTEN mutation. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 120A:
286-288, 2003.

76. Marsh, D. J.; Coulon, V.; Lunetta, K. L.; Rocca-Serra, P.; Dahia,
P. L. M.; Zheng, Z.; Liaw, D.; Caron, S.; Duboue, B.; Lin, A. Y.;
Richardson, A.-L.; Bonnetblanc, J.-M.; and 25 others: Mutation
spectrum and genotype-phenotype analyses in Cowden disease and Bannayan-Zonana
syndrome, two hamartoma syndromes with germline PTEN mutation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 7: 507-515, 1998.

77. Marsh, D. J.; Dahia, P. L. M.; Caron, S.; Kum, J. B.; Frayling,
I. M.; Tomlinson, I. P. M.; Hughes, K. S.; Eeles, R. A.; Hodgson,
S. V.; Murday, V. A.; Houlston, R.; Eng, C.: Germline PTEN mutations
in Cowden syndrome-like families. J. Med. Genet. 35: 881-885, 1998.

78. Marsh, D. J.; Dahia, P. L. M.; Zheng, Z.; Liaw, D.; Parsons, R.;
Gorlin, R. J.; Eng, C.: Germline mutations in PTEN are present in
Bannayan-Zonana syndrome. (Letter) Nature Genet. 16: 333-334, 1997.

79. Marsh, D. J.; Kum, J. B.; Lunetta, K. L.; Bennett, M. J.; Gorlin,
R. J.; Ahmed, S. F.; Bodurtha, J.; Crowe, C.; Curtis, M. A.; Dasouki,
M.; Dunn, T.; Feit, H.; and 20 others: PTEN mutation spectrum and
genotype-phenotype correlations in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome
suggest a single entity with Cowden syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
1461-1472, 1999.

80. Maser, R. S.; Choudhury, B.; Campbell, P. J.; Feng, B.; Wong,
K.-K.; Protopopov, A.; O'Neil, J.; Gutierrez, A.; Ivanova, E.; Perna,
I.; Lin, E.; Mani, V.; and 24 others: Chromosomally unstable mouse
tumours have genomic alterations similar to diverse human cancers. Nature 447:
966-971, 2007.

81. Mazurek, N.; Sun, Y. J.; Liu, K.-F.; Gilcrease, M. Z.; Schober,
W.; Nangia-Makker, P.; Raz, A.; Bresalier, R. S.: Phosphorylated
galectin-3 mediates tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand signaling by regulating phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted
on chromosome 10 in human breast carcinoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
21337-21348, 2007.

82. Mehenni, H.; Lin-Marq, N.; Buchet-Poyau, K.; Reymond, A.; Collart,
M. A.; Picard, D.; Antonarakis, S. E.: LKB1 interacts with and phosphorylates
PTEN: a functional link between two proteins involved in cancer predisposing
syndromes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2209-2219, 2005.

83. Modur, V.; Nagarajan, R.; Evers, B. M.; Milbrandt, J.: FOXO proteins
regulate tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand expression:
implications for PTEN mutation in prostate cancer. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
47928-47937, 2002.

84. Mutter, G. L.; Lin, M.-C.; Fitzgerald, J. T.; Kum, J. B.; Eng,
C.: Changes in endometrial PTEN expression throughout the human menstrual
cycle. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 2334-2338, 2000.

85. Nadeau, J. H.; Topol, E. J.: The genetics of health. (Commentary) Nature
Genet. 38: 1095-1098, 2006.

86. Nagase, S.; Sato, S.; Tezuka, F.; Wada, Y.; Yajima, A.; Horii,
A.: Deletion mapping on chromosome 10q25-q26 in human endometrial
cancer. Brit. J. Cancer 74: 1979-1983, 1996.

87. Nagata, Y.; Lan, K.-H.; Zhou, X.; Tan, M.; Esteva, F. J.; Sahin,
A. A.; Klos, K. S.; Li, P.; Monia, B. P.; Nguyen, N. T.; Hortobagyi,
G. N.; Hung, M.-C.; Yu, D.: PTEN activation contributes to tumor
inhibition by trastuzumab, and loss of PTEN predicts trastuzumab resistance
in patients. Cancer Cell 6: 117-127, 2004.

88. Nakamura, N.; Ramaswamy, S.; Vazquez, F.; Signoretti, S.; Loda,
M.; Sellers, W. R.: Forkhead transcription factors are critical effectors
of cell death and cell cycle arrest downstream of PTEN. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 20: 8969-8982, 2000.

89. Nelen, M. R.; Padberg, G. W.; Peeters, E. A.; Lin, A. Y.; van
den Helm, B.; Frants, R. R.; Coulon, V.; Goldstein, A. M.; van Reen,
M. M.; Easton, D. F.; Eeles, R. A.; Hodgsen, S.; and 10 others:
Localization of the gene for Cowden disease to chromosome 10q22-23. Nature
Genet. 13: 114-116, 1996.

90. Nelen, M. R.; van Staveren, W. C. G.; Peeters, E. A. J.; Ben Hassel,
M.; Gorlin, R. J.; Hamm, H.; Lindboe, C. F.; Fryns, J.-P.; Sijmons,
R. H.; Woods, D. G.; Mariman, E. C. M.; Padberg, G. W.; Kremer, H.
: Germline mutations in the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in patients with Cowden
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 1383-1387, 1997.

91. O'Roak, B. J.; Vives, L.; Fu, W.; Egertson, J. D.; Stanaway, I.
B.; Phelps, I. G.; Carvill, G.; Kumar, A.; Lee, C.; Ankenman, K.;
Munson, J.; Hiatt, J. B.; and 14 others: Multiplex targeted sequencing
identifies recurrently mutated genes in autism spectrum disorders. Science 338:
1619-1622, 2012.

92. Okahara, F.; Ikawa, H.; Kanaho, Y.; Maehama, T.: Regulation of
PTEN phosphorylation and stability by a tumor suppressor candidate
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 45300-45303, 2004.

93. Okumura, K.; Mendoza, M.; Bachoo, R. M.; DePinho, R. A.; Cavenee,
W. K.; Furnari, F. B.: PCAF modulates PTEN activity. J. Biol. Chem. 281:
26562-26568, 2006.

94. Olschwang, S.; Serova-Sinilnikova, O. M.; Lenoir, G. M.; Thomas,
G.: PTEN germ-line mutations in juvenile polyposis coli. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 18: 12-14, 1998.

95. Orloff, M. S.; Eng, C.: Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity
in the PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome. Oncogene 27: 5387-5397, 2008.

96. Page, D. T.; Kuti, O. J.; Prestia, C.; Sur, M.: Haploinsufficiency
for Pten and Serotonin transporter cooperatively influences brain
size and social behavior. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 1989-1994,
2009.

97. Pal, A.; Barber, T. M.; Van de Bunt, M.; Rudge, S. A.; Zhang,
Q.; Lachlan, K. L.; Cooper, N. S.; Linden, H.; Levy, J. C.; Wakelam,
M. J. O.; Walker, L.; Karpe, F.; Gloyn, A. L.: PTEN mutations as
a cause of constitutive insulin sensitivity and obesity. New Eng.
J. Med. 367: 1002-1011, 2012.

98. Palomero, T.; Sulis, M. L.; Cortina, M.; Real, P. J.; Barnes,
K.; Ciofani, M.; Caparros, E.; Buteau, J.; Brown, K.; Perkins, S.
L.; Bhagat, G.; Agarwal, A. M.; Basso, G.; Castillo, M.; Nagase, S.;
Cordon-Cardo, C.; Parsons, R.; Zuniga-Pflucker, J. C.; Dominguez,
M.; Ferrando, A. A.: Mutational loss of PTEN induces resistance to
NOTCH1 inhibition in T-cell leukemia. Nature Med. 13: 1203-1210,
2007.

99. Pandolfi, P. P.: Breast cancer--loss of PTEN predicts resistance
to treatment. New Eng. J. Med. 351: 2337-2338, 2004.

100. Park, K. K.; Liu, K.; Hu, Y.; Smith, P. D.; Wang, C.; Cai. B.;
Xu, B.; Connolly, L.; Kramvis, I.; Sahin, M.; He, Z.: Promoting axon
regeneration in the adult CNS by modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322:
963-966, 2008.

101. Parsa, A. T.; Waldron, J. S.; Panner, A.; Crane, C. A.; Parney,
I. F.; Barry, J. J.; Cachola, K. E.; Murray, J. C.; Tihan, T.; Jensen,
M. C.; Mischel, P. S.; Stokoe, D.; Pieper, R. O.: Loss of tumor suppressor
PTEN function increases B7-H1 expression and immunoresistance in glioma. Nature
Med. 13: 84-88, 2007.

102. Peiffer, S. L.; Herzog, T. J.; Tribune, D. J.; Mutch, D. G.;
Gersell, D. J.; Goodfellow, P. J.: Allelic loss of sequences from
the long arm of chromosome 10 and replication errors in endometrial
cancers. Cancer Res. 55: 1922-1926, 1995.

103. Peiffer-Schneider, S.; Noonan, F. C.; Mutch, D. G.; Simpkins,
S. B.; Herzog, T.; Rader, J.; Elbendary, A.; Gersell, D. J.; Call,
K.; Goodfellow, P. J.: Mapping an endometrial cancer tumor suppressor
gene at 10q25 and development of a bacterial clone contig for the
consensus deletion interval. Genomics 52: 9-16, 1998.

104. Penninger, J. M.; Woodgett, J.: PTEN--coupling tumor suppression
to stem cells? Science 294: 2116-2118, 2001.

105. Pezzolesi, M. G.; Li, Y.; Zhou, X.-P.; Pilarski, R.; Shen, L.;
Eng, C.: Mutation-positive and mutation-negative patients with Cowden
and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndromes associate with distinct 10q
haplotypes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 923-934, 2006.

106. Pezzolesi, M. G.; Platzer, P.; Waite, K. A.; Eng, C.: Differential
expression of PTEN-targeting microRNAs miR-19a and miR-21 in Cowden
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82: 1141-1149, 2008.

107. Pezzolesi, M. G.; Zbuk, K. M.; Waite, K. A.; Eng, C.: Comparative
genomic and functional analyses reveal a novel cis-acting PTEN regulatory
element as a highly conserved functional E-box motif deleted in Cowden
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1058-1071, 2007.

108. Poetsch, M.; Lorenz, G.; Kleist, B.: Detection of new PTEN/MMAC1
mutations in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas with loss of chromosome
10. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 132: 20-24, 2002.

109. Poliseno, L.; Salmena, L.; Zhang, J.; Carver, B.; Haveman, W.
J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: A coding-independent function of gene and pseudogene
mRNAs regulates tumour biology. Nature 465: 1033-1038, 2010.

110. Raftopoulou, M.; Etienne-Manneville, S.; Self, A.; Nicholls,
S.; Hall, A.: Regulation of cell migration by the C2 domain of the
tumor suppressor PTEN. Science 303: 1179-1181, 2004.

111. Raizis, A. M.; Ferguson, M. M.; Nicholls, D. T.; Goodisson, D.
W.; George, P. M.: A novel 5-prime (40^41insA) mutation in a patient
with numerous manifestations of Cowden disease. J. Invest. Derm. 114:
597-598, 2000.

112. Ramaswamy, S.; Nakamura, N.; Vazquez, F.; Batt, D. B.; Perera,
S.; Roberts, T. M.; Sellers, W. R.: Regulation of G1 progression
by the PTEN tumor suppressor protein is linked to inhibition of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
2110-2115, 1999.

113. Reardon, W.; Zhou, X.-P.; Eng, C.: A novel germline mutation
of the PTEN gene in a patient with macrocephaly, ventricular dilatation,
and features of VATER association. J. Med. Genet. 38: 820-823, 2001.

114. Reddy, P.; Liu, L.; Adhikari, D.; Jagarlamudi, K.; Rajareddy,
S.; Shen, Y.; Du, C.; Tang, W.; Hamalainen, T.; Peng, S. L.; Lan,
Z.-J.; Cooney, A. J.; Huhtaniemi, I.; Liu, K.: Oocyte-specific deletion
of Pten causes premature activation of the primordial follicle pool. Science 319:
611-613, 2008.

115. Saal, L. H.; Gruvberger-Saal, S. K.; Persson, C.; Lovgren, K.;
Jumppanen, M.; Staaf, J.; Jonsson, G.; Pires, M. M.; Maurer, M.; Holm,
K.; Koujak, S.; Subramaniyam, S.; and 13 others: Recurrent gross
mutations of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in breast cancers with
deficient DSB repair. Nature Genet. 40: 102-107, 2008.

116. Safara, A.; Maia, A. T.; Martins, A. P.; Roriz, M. L.; Ramos,
S.; Leal, F.; Rueff, J.; Monteiro, C.: A putative tumour suppressor
gene DEC involved in endometrial cancer located in the q26 region
of chromosome 10. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61 (suppl.): A81
only, 1997.

117. Sanchez, T.; Thangada, S.; Wu, M.-T.; Kontos, C. D.; Wu, D.;
Wu, H.; Hla, T.: PTEN as an effector in the signaling of antimigratory
G protein-coupled receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 4312-4317,
2005.

118. Sathaliyawala, T.; O'Gorman, W. E.; Greter, M.; Bogunovic, M.;
Konjufca, V.; Hou, Z. E.; Nolan, G. P.; Miller, M. J.; Merad, M.;
Reizis, B.: Mammalian target of rapamycin controls dendritic cell
development downstream of Flt3 ligand signaling. Immunity 33: 597-606,
2010.

119. Schwartzbauer, G.; Robbins, J.: The tumor suppressor gene PTEN
can regulate cardiac hypertrophy and survival. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
35786-35793, 2001.

120. Sharrard, R. M.; Maitland, N. J.: Alternative splicing of the
human PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1494: 282-285,
2000.

121. Shen, W. H.; Balajee, A. S.; Wang, J.; Wu, H.; Eng, C.; Pandolfi,
P. P.; Yin, Y.: Essential role for nuclear PTEN in maintaining chromosomal
integrity. Cell 128: 157-170, 2007.

122. Shugart, Y. Y.; Cour, C.; Renard, H.; Lenoir, G.; Goldgar, D.;
Teare, D.; Easton, D.; Rahman, N.; Gusterton, R.; Seal, S.; Barfoot,
R.; Stratton, M.; and 10 others: Linkage analysis of 56 multiplex
families excludes the Cowden disease gene PTEN as a major contributor
to familial breast cancer. J. Med. Genet. 36: 720-721, 1999.

123. Smith, J. M.; Kirk, E. P. E.; Theodosopoulos, G.; Marshall, G.
M.; Walker, J.; Rogers, M.; Field, M.; Brereton, J. J.; Marsh, D.
J.: Germline mutation of the tumour suppressor PTEN in Proteus syndrome.
(Letter) J. Med. Genet. 39: 937-940, 2002.

124. Smith, P. D.; Sun, F.; Park, K. K.; Cai, B.; Wang, C.; Kuwako,
K.; Martinez-Carrasco, I.; Connolly, L.; He, Z.: SOCS3 deletion promotes
optic nerve regeneration in vivo. Neuron 64: 617-623, 2009.

125. Song, M. S.; Salmena, L.; Carracedo, A.; Egia, A.; Lo-Coco, F.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: The deubiquitinylation and
localization of PTEN are regulated by a HAUSP-PML network. Nature 455:
813-817, 2008.

126. Staal, F. J. T.; van der Luijt, R. B.; Baert, M. R. M.; van Drunen,
J.; van Bakel, H.; Peters, E.; de Valk, I.; van Amstel, H. K. P.;
Taphoorn, M. J. B.; Jansen, G. H.; van Veelen, C. W. M.; Burgering,
B.; Staal, G. E. J.: A novel germline mutation of PTEN associated
with brain tumours of multiple lineages. Brit. J. Cancer 86: 1586-1591,
2002.

127. Stambolic, V.; MacPherson, D.; Sas, D.; Lin, Y.; Snow, B.; Jang,
Y.; Benchimol, S.; Mak, T. W.: Regulation of PTEN transcription by
p53. Molec. Cell 8: 317-325, 2001.

128. Stambolic, V.; Suzuki, A.; de la Pompa, J. L.; Brothers, G. M.;
Mirtsos, C.; Sasaki, T.; Ruland, J.; Penninger, J. M.; Siderovski,
D. P.; Mak, T. W.: Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell
survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell 95: 29-39, 1998.

129. Steck, P. A.; Pershouse, M. A.; Jasser, S. A.; Yung, W. K. A.;
Lin, H.; Ligon, A. H.; Langford, L. A.; Baumgard, M. L.; Hattier,
T.; Davis, T.; Frye, C.; Hu, R.; Swedlund, B.; Teng, D. H. F.; Tavtigian,
S. V.: Identification of a candidate tumour suppressor gene, MMAC1,
at chromosome 10q23.3 that is mutated in multiple advanced cancers. Nature
Genet. 15: 356-362, 1997.

130. Sun, F.; Park, K. K.; Belin, S.; Wang, D.; Lu, T.; Chen, G.;
Zhang, K.; Yeung, C.; Feng, G.; Yankner, B. A.; He, Z.: Sustained
axon regeneration induced by co-deletion of PTEN and SOCS3. Nature 480:
372-375, 2011.

131. Sutphen, R.; Diamond, T. M.; Minton, S. E.; Peacocke, M.; Tsou,
H. C.; Root, A. W.: Severe Lhermitte-Duclos disease with unique germline
mutation of PTEN. Am. J. Med. Genet. 82: 290-293, 1999.

132. Takahashi, Y.; Morales, F. C.; Kreimann, E. L.; Georgescu, M.-M.
: PTEN tumor suppressor associates with NHERF proteins to attenuate
PDGF receptor signaling. EMBO J. 25: 910-920, 2006.

133. Tamura, M.; Gu, J.; Matsumoto, K.; Aota, S.; Parsons, R.; Yamada,
K. M.: Inhibition of cell migration, spreading, and focal adhesions
by tumor suppressor PTEN. Science 280: 1614-1617, 1998.

134. Tekin, M.; Hismi, B. O.; Fitoz, S.; Yalcinkaya, F.; Ekim, M.;
Kansu, A.; Ertem, M.; Deda, G.; Tutar, E.; Arsan, S.; Zhou, X.-P.;
Pilarski, R.; Eng, C.; Akar, N.: A germline PTEN mutation with manifestations
of prenatal onset and verrucous epidermal nevus. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1472-1475, 2006.

135. Teresi, R. E.; Planchon, S. M.; Waite, K. A.; Eng, C.: Regulation
of the PTEN promoter by statins and SREBP. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
919-928, 2008.

136. Teresi, R. E.; Zbuk, K. M.; Pezzolesi, M. G.; Waite, K. A.; Eng,
C.: Cowden syndrome--affected patients with PTEN promoter mutations
demonstrate abnormal protein translation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81:
756-767, 2007.

137. Trotman, L. C.; Wang, X.; Alimont, A.; Chen, Z.; Teruya-Feldstein,
J.; Yang, H.; Pavletich, N. P.; Carver, B. S.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Erdjument-Bromage,
H.; Tempst, P.; Chi, S.-G.; Kim, H.-J.; Misteli, T.; Jiang, X.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: Ubiquitination regulates PTEN nuclear import and tumor suppression. Cell 128:
141-156, 2007.

138. Tsou, H. C.; Ping, X. L.; Xie, X. X.; Gruener, A. C.; Zhang,
H.; Nini, R.; Swisshelm, K.; Sybert, V.; Diamond, T. M.; Sutphen,
R.; Peacocke, M.: The genetic basis of Cowden's syndrome: three novel
mutations in PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1. Hum. Genet. 102: 467-473, 1998.

139. Tsou, H. C.; Teng, D. H.-F.; Ping, X. L.; Brancolini, V.; Davis,
T.; Hu, R.; Xie, X. X.; Gruener, A. C.; Schrager, C. A.; Christiano,
A. M.; Eng, C.; Steck, P.; Ott, J.; Tavtigian, S. V.; Peacocke, M.
: The role of MMAC1 mutations in early-onset breast cancer: causative
in association with Cowden syndrome and excluded in BRCA1-negative
cases. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 1036-1043, 1997.

140. Valiente, M.; Andres-Pons, A.; Gomar, B.; Torres, J.; Gil, A.;
Tapparel, C.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Pulido, R.: Binding of PTEN to
specific PDZ domains contributes to PTEN protein stability and phosphorylation
by microtubule-associated serine/threonine kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
28936-28943, 2005.

141. Waite, K. A.; Eng, C.: BMP2 exposure results in decreased PTEN
protein degradation and increased PTEN levels. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
679-684, 2003.

142. Waite, K. A.; Eng, C.: Protean PTEN: form and function. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 70: 829-844, 2002.

143. Waite, K. A.; Sinden, M. R.; Eng, C.: Phytoestrogen exposure
elevates PTEN levels. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1457-1463, 2005.

144. Wang, X.; Trotman, L. C.; Koppie, T.; Alimonti, A.; Chen, Z.;
Gao, Z.; Wang, J.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Jiang, X.: NEDD4-1 is a proto-oncogenic ubiquitin
ligase for PTEN. Cell 128: 129-139, 2007.

145. Wang, Y.; DiGiovanna, J. J.; Stern, J. B.; Hornyak, T. J.; Raffeld,
M.; Khan, S. G.; Oh, K.-S.; Hollander, M. C.; Dennis, P. A.; Kraemer,
K. H.: Evidence of ultraviolet type mutations in xeroderma pigmentosum
melanomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 6279-6284, 2009.

146. Wen, S.; Stolarov, J.; Myers, M. P.; Su, J. D.; Wigler, M. H.;
Tonks, N. K.; Durden, D. L.: PTEN controls tumor-induced angiogenesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 4622-4627, 2001.

147. Weng, L.-P.; Brown, J. L.; Baker, K. M.; Ostrowski, M. C.; Eng,
C.: PTEN blocks insulin-mediated ETS-2 phosphorylation through MAP
kinase, independently of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 1687-1696, 2002. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
12: 1943 only, 2003.

148. Weng, L.-P.; Brown, J. L.; Eng, C.: PTEN coordinates G1 arrest
by down-regulating cyclin D1 via its protein phosphatase activity
and up-regulating p27 via its lipid phosphatase activity in a breast
cancer model. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 599-604, 2001.

149. Weng, L.-P.; Brown, J. L.; Eng, C.: PTEN induces apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest through phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt-dependent and
-independent pathways. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 237-242, 2001.

150. Weng, L.-P.; Gimm, O.; Kum, J. B.; Smith, W. M.; Zhou, X.-P.;
Wynford-Thomas, D.; Leone, G.; Eng, C.: Transient ectopic expression
of PTEN in thyroid cancer cell lines induces cell cycle arrest and
cell type-dependent cell death. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 251-258,
2001.

151. Weng, L.-P.; Smith, W. M.; Brown, J. L.; Eng, C.: PTEN inhibits
insulin-stimulated MEK/MAPK activation and cell growth by blocking
IRS-1 phosphorylation and IRS-1/Grb-2/Sos complex formation in a breast
cancer model. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 605-616, 2001.

152. Weng, L.-P.; Smith, W. M.; Dahia, P. L. M.; Ziebold, U.; Gil,
E.; Lees, J. A.; Eng, C.: PTEN suppresses breast cancer cell growth
by phosphatase activity-dependent G1 arrest followed by cell death. Cancer
Res. 59: 5808-5814, 1999.

153. Wishart, M. J.; Taylor, G. S.; Slama, J. T.; Dixon, J. E.: PTEN
and myotubularin phosphoinositide phosphatases: bringing bioinformatics
to the lab bench. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13: 172-181, 2001.

154. Xie, C. C.; Lu, L.; Sun, J.; Zheng, S. L.; Isaacs, W. B.; Gronberg,
H.; Xu, J.: Germ-line sequence variants of PTEN do not have an important
role in hereditary and non-hereditary prostate cancer susceptibility. J.
Hum. Genet. 56: 496-502, 2011.

155. Yilmaz, O. H.; Valdez, R.; Theisen, B. K.; Guo, W.; Ferguson,
D. O.; Wu, H.; Morrison, S. J.: Pten dependence distinguishes haematopoietic
stem cells from leukaemia-initiating cells. Nature 441: 475-482,
2006.

156. Yu, Z.; Fotouhi-Ardakani, N.; Wu, L.; Maoui, M.; Wang, S.; Banville,
D.; Shen, S.-H.: PTEN associates with the vault particles in HeLa
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 40247-40252, 2002.

157. Zhang, J.; Grindley, J. C.; Yin, T.; Jayasinghe, S.; He, X. C.;
Ross, J. T.; Haug, J. S.; Rupp, D.; Porter-Westpfahl, K. S.; Wiedemann,
L. M.; Wu, H.; Li, L.: PTEN maintains haematopoietic stem cells and
acts in lineage choice and leukaemia prevention. Nature 441: 518-522,
2006.

158. Zhao, M.; Song, B.; Pu, J.; Wada, T.; Reid, B.; Tai, G.; Wang,
F.; Guo, A.; Walczysko, P.; Gu, Y.; Sasaki, T.; Suzuki, A.; Forrester,
J. V.; Bourne, H. R.; Devreotes, P. N.; McCaig, C. D.; Penninger,
J. M.: Electrical signals control wound healing through phosphatidylinositol-3-OH
kinase-gamma and PTEN. Nature 442: 457-460, 2006.

159. Zheng, H.; Ying, H.; Yan, H.; Kimmelman, A. C.; Hiller, D. J.;
Chen, A.-J.; Perry, S. R.; Tonon, G.; Chu, G. C.; Ding, Z.; Stommel,
J. M.; Dunn, K. L.; Wiedemeyer, R.; You, M. J.; Brennan, C.; Wang,
Y. A.; Ligon, K. L.; Wong, W. H.; Chin, L.; DePinho, R. A.: p53 and
Pten control neural and glioma stem/progenitor cell renewal and differentiation. Nature 455:
1129-1133, 2008.

160. Zhou, X.-P.; Kuismanen, S.; Nystrom-Lahti, M.; Peltomaki, P.;
Eng, C.: Distinct PTEN mutational spectra in hereditary non-polyposis
colon cancer syndrome-related endometrial carcinomas compared to sporadic
microsatellite unstable tumors. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 445-450,
2002.

161. Zhou, X.-P.; Marsh, D. J.; Hampel, H.; Mulliken, J. B.; Gimm,
O.; Eng, C.: Germline and germline mosaic PTEN mutations associated
with a Proteus-like syndrome of hemihypertrophy, lower limb asymmetry,
arteriovenous malformations and lipomatosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
765-768, 2000.

162. Zhou, X.-P.; Marsh, D. J.; Morrison, C. D.; Chaudhury, A. R.;
Maxwell, M.; Reifenberger, G.; Eng, C.: Germline inactivation of
PTEN and dysregulation of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt pathway
cause human Lhermitte-Duclos disease in adults. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
1191-1198, 2003.

163. Zhou, X.-P.; Waite, K. A.; Pilarski, R.; Hampel, H.; Fernandez,
M. J.; Bos, C.; Dasouki, M.; Feldman, G. L.; Greenberg, L. A.; Ivanovich,
J.; Matloff, E.; Patterson, A.; Pierpont, M. E.; Russo, D.; Nassif,
N. T.; Eng, C.: Germline PTEN promoter mutations and deletions in
Cowden/Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome result in aberrant PTEN protein
and dysregulation of the phosphoinositol-3-kinase/Akt pathway. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 73: 404-411, 2003.

164. Zori, R. T.; Marsh, D. J.; Graham, G. E.; Marliss, E. B.; Eng,
C.: Germline PTEN mutation in a family with Cowden syndrome and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 80: 399-402, 1998.

165. Zundel, W.; Schindler, C.; Haas-Kogan, D.; Koong, A.; Kaper,
F.; Chen, E.; Gottschalk, A. R.; Ryan, H. E.; Johnson, R. S.; Jefferson,
A. B.; Stokoe, D.; Giaccia, A. J.: Loss of PTEN facilitates HIF-1-mediated
gene expression. Genes Dev. 14: 391-396, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/20/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/12/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/8/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/25/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/22/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/24/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/23/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/9/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/13/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/17/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/31/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/25/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/6/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/26/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/12/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/20/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/18/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/27/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/3/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/27/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/26/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/14/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/6/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/25/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/19/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/20/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/19/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/5/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/26/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/7/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/19/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/2/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/30/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/10/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/22/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/15/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/17/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/11/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/12/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/17/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/30/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/18/2003
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 4/4/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/26/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/5/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/6/2002
Michael J. Wright - updated: 10/22/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/15/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/3/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/26/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2002
Michael J. Wright - updated: 6/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/9/2001
Michael J. Wright - updated: 7/20/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/4/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/14/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/20/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/18/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/12/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/2001
Michael J. Wright - updated: 1/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/11/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/31/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/30/2000
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 6/13/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/27/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/5/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000
Michael J. Wright - updated: 12/16/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/10/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/1999
Anne M. Lopez - updated: 7/20/1999
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 5/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/4/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/9/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1999
Michael J. Wright - updated: 2/11/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 2/9/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/28/1998
Clair A. Francomano - updated: 7/10/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/25/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/24/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/29/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/26/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/22/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/31/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/16/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/2/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/27/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/01/2013
alopez: 1/25/2013
terry: 1/23/2013
terry: 11/28/2012
carol: 9/21/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
terry: 6/7/2012
alopez: 3/12/2012
carol: 3/5/2012
ckniffin: 2/8/2012
mgross: 10/14/2011
terry: 8/25/2011
terry: 4/25/2011
wwang: 3/24/2011
ckniffin: 3/22/2011
carol: 3/10/2011
mgross: 1/26/2011
terry: 1/24/2011
alopez: 8/20/2010
terry: 8/17/2010
carol: 7/27/2010
alopez: 7/1/2010
terry: 7/1/2010
wwang: 6/30/2010
terry: 6/23/2010
terry: 5/28/2010
alopez: 5/12/2010
carol: 5/11/2010
ckniffin: 5/10/2010
mgross: 5/5/2010
wwang: 3/24/2010
ckniffin: 3/9/2010
carol: 1/19/2010
mgross: 11/11/2009
terry: 11/4/2009
alopez: 10/23/2009
terry: 10/13/2009
mgross: 10/1/2009
alopez: 9/25/2009
terry: 9/21/2009
wwang: 9/21/2009
terry: 9/17/2009
wwang: 9/16/2009
ckniffin: 8/31/2009
wwang: 7/24/2009
carol: 7/8/2009
ckniffin: 6/25/2009
alopez: 5/5/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
wwang: 4/13/2009
ckniffin: 4/6/2009
mgross: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/1/2009
mgross: 3/26/2009
carol: 2/6/2009
wwang: 1/12/2009
alopez: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/30/2008
alopez: 12/9/2008
terry: 11/26/2008
wwang: 11/20/2008
mgross: 11/19/2008
terry: 11/18/2008
alopez: 9/30/2008
terry: 9/29/2008
mgross: 8/27/2008
wwang: 8/26/2008
ckniffin: 8/18/2008
wwang: 6/11/2008
wwang: 6/10/2008
terry: 6/5/2008
alopez: 6/4/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
wwang: 6/2/2008
ckniffin: 5/27/2008
wwang: 5/22/2008
ckniffin: 5/20/2008
carol: 2/21/2008
terry: 2/21/2008
wwang: 12/26/2007
wwang: 12/20/2007
ckniffin: 12/14/2007
wwang: 11/13/2007
ckniffin: 11/6/2007
wwang: 11/5/2007
ckniffin: 10/25/2007
alopez: 10/5/2007
terry: 10/3/2007
terry: 9/20/2007
alopez: 7/24/2007
terry: 7/19/2007
alopez: 5/3/2007
terry: 5/1/2007
wwang: 4/20/2007
wwang: 4/19/2007
wwang: 4/13/2007
ckniffin: 4/11/2007
ckniffin: 3/8/2007
wwang: 3/5/2007
alopez: 3/2/2007
terry: 2/23/2007
carol: 2/1/2007
alopez: 10/27/2006
terry: 10/26/2006
carol: 10/10/2006
terry: 10/10/2006
ckniffin: 9/18/2006
alopez: 9/13/2006
alopez: 8/9/2006
terry: 8/7/2006
alopez: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
mgross: 7/19/2006
alopez: 5/23/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
mgross: 2/9/2006
terry: 2/2/2006
carol: 10/20/2005
ckniffin: 10/20/2005
ckniffin: 10/19/2005
alopez: 9/30/2005
alopez: 9/14/2005
terry: 9/7/2005
wwang: 6/28/2005
wwang: 6/27/2005
terry: 6/20/2005
mgross: 5/10/2005
mgross: 4/14/2005
mgross: 4/13/2005
tkritzer: 3/22/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
carol: 2/22/2005
wwang: 2/22/2005
wwang: 2/17/2005
terry: 2/15/2005
mgross: 2/4/2005
alopez: 1/26/2005
terry: 1/12/2005
tkritzer: 1/11/2005
terry: 12/17/2004
carol: 7/9/2004
terry: 7/9/2004
alopez: 6/16/2004
alopez: 6/15/2004
terry: 6/11/2004
cwells: 12/17/2003
terry: 12/12/2003
mgross: 11/17/2003
cwells: 11/10/2003
alopez: 10/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
tkritzer: 7/15/2003
tkritzer: 7/9/2003
terry: 6/30/2003
cwells: 6/18/2003
cwells: 5/20/2003
ckniffin: 5/15/2003
mgross: 4/4/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
mgross: 3/26/2003
tkritzer: 3/19/2003
tkritzer: 3/11/2003
terry: 3/5/2003
alopez: 1/16/2003
ckniffin: 12/17/2002
tkritzer: 11/13/2002
tkritzer: 11/12/2002
terry: 11/6/2002
alopez: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/29/2002
tkritzer: 10/23/2002
terry: 10/22/2002
alopez: 10/16/2002
terry: 10/15/2002
ckniffin: 10/3/2002
mgross: 10/3/2002
cwells: 9/26/2002
mgross: 9/24/2002
mgross: 8/23/2002
tkritzer: 8/19/2002
terry: 8/15/2002
alopez: 6/28/2002
terry: 6/28/2002
alopez: 4/25/2002
cwells: 4/17/2002
terry: 4/12/2002
mgross: 12/13/2001
terry: 12/7/2001
alopez: 12/3/2001
terry: 12/3/2001
carol: 11/20/2001
mcapotos: 11/20/2001
mcapotos: 11/15/2001
terry: 11/1/2001
mgross: 10/29/2001
alopez: 9/10/2001
terry: 9/5/2001
cwells: 8/16/2001
cwells: 8/13/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
terry: 8/9/2001
alopez: 7/26/2001
terry: 7/20/2001
cwells: 6/4/2001
mcapotos: 5/18/2001
terry: 5/14/2001
alopez: 5/10/2001
cwells: 5/9/2001
cwells: 5/4/2001
cwells: 5/1/2001
cwells: 4/26/2001
cwells: 4/20/2001
alopez: 4/19/2001
terry: 4/18/2001
mgross: 3/1/2001
terry: 2/12/2001
alopez: 1/29/2001
terry: 1/26/2001
alopez: 1/8/2001
mcapotos: 1/5/2001
mcapotos: 12/19/2000
terry: 12/11/2000
alopez: 9/18/2000
mcapotos: 9/18/2000
mcapotos: 9/7/2000
terry: 8/31/2000
mgross: 8/30/2000
alopez: 6/13/2000
alopez: 4/27/2000
mgross: 4/5/2000
alopez: 2/14/2000
terry: 2/10/2000
alopez: 12/16/1999
mgross: 11/10/1999
carol: 8/20/1999
terry: 8/13/1999
carol: 7/20/1999
jlewis: 7/20/1999
carol: 5/12/1999
mgross: 5/7/1999
terry: 5/4/1999
alopez: 4/8/1999
mgross: 4/7/1999
carol: 4/2/1999
terry: 3/23/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
carol: 3/11/1999
terry: 3/9/1999
terry: 3/3/1999
mgross: 3/3/1999
mgross: 2/26/1999
terry: 2/11/1999
alopez: 2/9/1999
carol: 1/6/1999
terry: 12/30/1998
carol: 11/13/1998
carol: 10/8/1998
carol: 9/23/1998
terry: 8/20/1998
alopez: 7/31/1998
terry: 7/28/1998
carol: 7/22/1998
carol: 7/10/1998
alopez: 6/29/1998
terry: 6/25/1998
alopez: 6/8/1998
dholmes: 6/8/1998
alopez: 5/21/1998
carol: 4/24/1998
terry: 4/14/1998
terry: 2/19/1998
terry: 12/30/1997
terry: 12/29/1997
jenny: 12/2/1997
terry: 11/26/1997
dholmes: 10/23/1997
terry: 9/29/1997
terry: 9/25/1997
mark: 8/26/1997
terry: 8/22/1997
terry: 8/4/1997
terry: 7/31/1997
mark: 6/17/1997
terry: 6/16/1997
mark: 5/2/1997
terry: 4/30/1997
mark: 4/18/1997
mark: 3/31/1997
terry: 3/28/1997
mark: 3/27/1997

601752	TITLE *601752 ECTONUCLEOSIDE TRIPHOSPHATE DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE 1; ENTPD1
;;CD39 ANTIGEN; CD39;;
VASCULAR ATP DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE; ATPDase;;
APYRASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Endothelial cells have the ability to regulate platelet activation, in
part by the surface expression of ATP diphosphohydrolase (ATPDase; EC
3.6.1.5). ATPDase hydrolyzes extracellular ATP and ADP to AMP, which is
further converted to adenosine by another enzyme, 5-prime nucleotidase.
ADP is a powerful agonist for platelet recruitment and adhesion;
adenosine is an antagonist of these processes. Kaczmarek et al. (1996)
demonstrated that CD39, a B-cell activation marker previously
characterized by Maliszewski et al. (1994), encodes vascular ATPDase.
They isolated the cDNA of human ATPDase/CD39 by RT-PCR using RNA from
human umbilical endothelial cells. They expressed this cDNA in COS-7
cells and confirmed that it is expressed on the cell surface, hydrolyzes
both ATP and ADP, and inhibits platelet aggregation. CD39 was found to
have both immunologic identity to, and functional characteristics of,
vascular ATPDase. By Northern blot analysis, Chadwick and Frischauf
(1998) found that CD39 is expressed as a major 3.2- and a minor 3.6-kb
mRNA in several tissues. Additional bands were observed in a few
tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors, as well as CD39 and CD73 (NT5E; 129190), during
differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line. Granulocytic
differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. CD39
expression was nearly undetectable in undifferentiated cells, but
differentiation to either granulocytic or monocytic cells caused a
strong increase in CD39 transcript. CD39 was moderately expressed in
normal blood leukocytes.

MAPPING

Gray et al. (1997) mapped the CD39 gene to a YAC contig of 10q24 between
the genes for CYP2C (see 124020) and DNTT (187410).

ANIMAL MODEL

CD39 has been considered an important inhibitor of platelet activation.
Unexpectedly, Enjyoji et al. (1999) found that Cd39-deficient mice had
prolonged bleeding times with minimally perturbed coagulation
parameters. Platelet interactions with injured mesenteric vasculature
were considerably reduced in vivo, and purified mutant platelets failed
to aggregate to standard agonists in vitro. This platelet hypofunction
was reversible and associated with purinergic type P2y1 receptor
(601167) desensitization. In keeping with deficient vascular protective
mechanisms, fibrin deposition was found at multiple organ sites in
Cd39-deficient mice and in transplanted cardiac grafts. The data
indicated the dual role for CD39 in modulating hemostasis and thrombotic
reactions.

Langerhans cells (LC) are members of the dendritic cell (DC) family of
antigen-presenting cells residing in the skin. Wolff and Winkelmann
(1967) established that LC can be simply identified with light, rather
than electron, microscopy using surface ATPase staining. Mizumoto et al.
(2002) established that LC from CD39 -/- mice are not able to hydrolyze
both ATP and ADP and that CD39 +/- mice have a diminished ability to
effect ATP and ADP hydrolysis compared to wildtype mice. Histochemical,
Northern, and Western blot analyses showed that CD39 is expressed in
epidermal DC but not keratinocyte cell lines. CD39-deficient mice have
amplified inflammatory responses to irritant chemicals, while
heterozygous mice have intermediate responses compared to wildtype mice.
On the other hand, CD39 -/- mice have similar responses to ultraviolet
radiation and attenuated responses to contact allergens compared to
heterozygotes and wildtype mice. Using a fluorescent contact allergen,
Mizumoto et al. (2002) showed that the mutant mice LC are functional in
their homing and phenotypic maturation but are less able to stimulate T
cells, indicating that CD39 expression is required for optimal
stimulation of hapten-reactive T cells in mice. CD39-deficient DC are
unresponsive to ATP and are susceptible to cell death after prolonged
exposure to ADP. Mizumoto et al. (2002) and Granstein (2002) proposed
that if keratinocyte release of ATP and ADP occurs in response to all
chemical irritants and if the magnitude of release correlates with the
potency of the irritant, measurement of this release may be a useful in
vitro method to assess the risk of cosmetics and other topical agents
instead of animal testing.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Chadwick, B. P.; Frischauf, A.-M.: The CD39-like gene family:
identification of three new human members (CD39L2, CD39L3, and CD39L4),
their murine homologues, and a member of the gene family from Drosophila
melanogaster. Genomics 50: 357-367, 1998.

3. Enjyoji, K.; Sevigny, J.; Lin, Y.; Frenette, P. S.; Christie, P.
D.; am Esch, J. S., II; Imai, M.; Edelberg, J. M.; Rayburn, H.; Lech,
M.; Beeler, D. L.; Csizmadia, E.; Wagner, D. D.; Robson, S. C.; Rosenberg,
R. D.: Targeted disruption of cd39/ATP diphosphohydrolase results
in disordered hemostasis and thromboregulation. Nature Med. 5: 1010-1017,
1999.

4. Granstein, R. D.: The skinny on CD39 in immunity and inflammation. Nature
Med. 8: 336-338, 2002.

5. Gray, I. C.; Fallowfield, J.; Ford, S.; Nobile, C.; Volpi, E. V.;
Spurr, N. K.: An integrated physical and genetic map spanning chromosome
band 10q24. Genomics 43: 85-88, 1997.

6. Kaczmarek, E.; Koziak, K.; Sevigny, J.; Siegel, J. B.; Anrather,
J.; Beaudoin, A. R.; Bach, F. H.; Robson, S. C.: Identification and
characterization of CD39/vascular ATP diphosphohydrolase. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 33116-33122, 1996.

7. Maliszewski, C. R.; Delespesse, G. L.; Schoenborn, M. A.; Armitage,
R. J.; Fanslow, W. C.; Nakajima, T.; Baker, E.; Sutherland, G. R.;
Poindexter, K.; Birks, C.; Alpert, A.; Friend, D.; Gimpel, S. D.;
Gayle, R. B., III: The CD39 lymphoid cell activation antigen. Molecular
cloning and structural characterization. J. Immun. 153: 3574-3583,
1994.

8. Mizumoto, N.; Kumamoto, T.; Robson, S. C.; Sevigny, J.; Matsue,
H.; Enjyoji, K.; Takashima, A.: CD39 is the dominant Langerhans cell-associated
ecto-NTPDase: modulatory roles in inflammation and immune responsiveness. Nature
Med. 8: 358-365, 2002.

9. Wolff, K,.; Winkelmann, R. K.: Ultrastructural localization of
nucleoside triphosphatase in Langerhans cells. J. Invest. Derm. 48:
50-54, 1967.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/07/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/6/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 10/19/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 7/16/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/11/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/07/2005
joanna: 6/20/2003
alopez: 4/9/2002
carol: 4/11/2001
mgross: 1/14/2000
terry: 1/6/2000
alopez: 10/19/1998
alopez: 11/7/1997
mark: 7/16/1997
alopez: 5/1/1997
alopez: 4/14/1997

607465	TITLE *607465 CODANIN 1; CDAN1
;;DISCS LOST, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; DLT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) constitute a rare group of
inherited red blood cell disorders associated with dysplastic changes in
late erythroid precursors. A cluster of 45 highly inbred Israeli Bedouin
permitted Tamary et al. (1998) to map the gene for CDA type I (224120)
to a 2-Mb interval on chromosome 15q15. Dgany et al. (2002) refined the
localization to a 1.2-Mb interval and identified CDAN1, the gene
responsible for CDA type I, through the identification of mutations in 9
families with the disorder. The CDAN1 gene product, codanin-1, is a
putative O-glycosylated protein of 1,226 amino acids with no obvious
transmembrane domains. Codanin-1 has a 150-residue N-terminal domain
with sequence similarity to collagens, as well as 2 shorter segments
that show weak similarities to the microtubule-associated proteins MAP1B
(157129) and synapsin (SYN1; 313440). Alternative splicing produces a
variant encoding a 1,103-amino acid isoform. Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.7-kb CDAN1 transcript in all 8 tissues tested. Based on
their findings and the cellular phenotype of CDA type I, Dgany et al.
(2002) suggested that codanin-1 may be involved in nuclear envelope
integrity, conceivably related to microtubule attachments.

GENE FUNCTION

Using several techniques, including sequencing clones that rescued the
discs lost (dlt) phenotype in Drosophila, Pielage et al. (2003)
determined that CDAN1 is the human homolog of dlt. They showed that dlt
is an evolutionarily conserved protein required for cell survival and
cell cycle progression in the fly.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dgany et al. (2002) determined that the CDAN1 gene contains 28 exons and
spans 15 kb.

MAPPING

Dgany et al. (2002) mapped the CDAN1 gene to chromosome 15q15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Dgany et al. (2002) identified 12 different mutations in the CDAN1 gene
in 9 families with CDA type I.

In 1 French family in which a 56-year-old male and his 2 brothers
suffered from CDA type I, asthenoteratozoospermia, and nonsyndromic
deafness, Dgany et al. (2002) identified a point mutation within the
codanin gene (N598S; 607465.0003) as the cause of CDA type I. Avidan et
al. (2003) found that these 3 sibs were also homozygous for an
approximately 70-kb deletion in chromosome 15q15, which removed the
entire stereocilin gene (STRC; 606440) and truncated the CATSPER2 gene
(607249). Avidan et al. (2003) suggested that lack of functional
stereocilin, which is mutated in nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness
(DFNB16; 603720), and CATSPER2, a voltage-gated cation channel expressed
exclusively in spermatozoa, may explain the observed deafness and male
infertility phenotypes, respectively.

In studies of 8 unrelated patients with sporadic CDA type I, 3 of whom
had complex bone disease, Tamary et al. (2005) identified 6 different
mutations in the CDAN1 gene. In 2 patients, only 1 mutation was
identified, and in 1 patient, no CDAN1 mutation was identified. No
patient was homozygous for a null-type mutation. However, 1 patient with
complex bone disease was homozygous for a splice site mutation,
IVS12+5G-A (607465.0006). Western blotting revealed that codanin-1
synthesis was 65% less than the control in this patient. Although the
absence of codanin-1 is probably lethal, the presence of 35% of the
protein was compatible with life but was associated with severe clinical
manifestations. No correlation could be established between the expected
levels of codanin-1 or the nature of the mutation and the severity of
the clinical manifestations.

In 15 of 16 CDA I patients analyzed, Heimpel et al. (2006) identified 17
different mutations in at least 1 allele of the CDAN1 gene. All but 1 of
the mutations were located in exons 12 to 28; 1 mutation was found in
exon 6.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, ARG1040TRP

In Israeli Bedouin patients with type I congenital erythropoietic anemia
(224120), Dgany et al. (2002) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 3238 in the CDAN1 gene, causing an arg1040-to-trp
substitution.

.0002
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, PRO1129LEU

In a French Polynesian family with type I congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia (224120), Dgany et al. (2002) identified a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 3503 in the CDAN1 gene, resulting in a pro1129-to-leu
substitution.

.0003
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, ASN598SER

In a French family with type I congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
(224120), Dgany et al. (2002) identified homozygosity for an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 1910 in the CDAN1 gene, resulting in an
asn598-to-ser substitution. The 3 sibs who were affected also exhibited
sensorineural deafness and a lack of motile sperm cells. These symptoms
could be accounted for by a large 70-kb deletion 1 Mb distal to the
CDAN1 gene. Thus, it appeared to be a case of tightly linked independent
mutations on the same haplotype representing a contiguous gene syndrome.

Avidan et al. (2003) determined that the 70-kb deletion removed the
entire stereocilin gene (STRC; 606440) and truncated the CATSPER2 gene
(607249). They suggested that lack of functional stereocilin, which is
mutated in nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness (DFNB16; 603720), and
CATSPER2, a voltage-gated cation channel expressed exclusively in
spermatozoa, may explain the observed deafness and male infertility
phenotypes, respectively, in this family.

.0004
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, PRO671LEU

In a European family, Dgany et al. (2002) identified individuals with
type I congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (224120) who were compound
heterozygotes for 2 missense mutations in the CDAN1 gene: a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 2129, resulting an a pro671-to-leu
substitution, and a T-to-A transversion at nucleotide 2716, resulting in
a phe866-to-ile substitution (607465.0005). The mutations occurred in
exons 14 and 19, respectively.

.0005
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, PHE866ILE

See 607465.0004 and Dgany et al. (2002).

.0006
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, IVS12, G-A, +5

In an Israeli Arab patient with type I congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia (224120), Tamary et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a
G-to-A transition at the +5 consensus site position in intron 12
(IVS12+5G-A) of the CDAN1 gene. Sequence analysis of exons 11 to 15
revealed an expected 659-bp transcript and an 898-bp transcript that
retained intron 12 (139 bp). A 65% decrease in codanin-1 synthesis was
estimated. The patient showed dysmorphism of the left foot.

.0007
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, VAL372DEL

Ahmed et al. (2006) described a 3-bp in-frame deletion in the CDAN1
gene, resulting in deletion of valine-3721, as the basis of a sporadic
case of CDA I.

REFERENCE 1. Ahmed, M. R.; Chehal, A.; Zahed, L.; Taher, A.; Haidar, J.; Shamseddine,
A.; O'Hea, A.-M.; Bienz, N.; Dgany, O.; Avidan, N.; Beckmann, J. S.;
Tamary, H.; Higgs, D.; Vyas, P.; Wood, W. G.; Wickramasinghe, S. N.
: Linkage and mutational analysis of the CDAN1 gene reveals genetic
heterogeneity in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I. (Letter) Blood 15:
4968-4969, 2006.

2. Avidan, N.; Tamary, H.; Dgany, O.; Cattan, D.; Pariente, A.; Thulliez,
M.; Borot, N.; Moati, L.; Barthelme, A.; Shalmon, L.; Krasnov, T.;
Ben-Asher, E.; and 9 others: CATSPER2, a human autosomal nonsyndromic
male infertility gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11: 497-502, 2003.

3. Dgany, O.; Avidan, N.; Delaunay, J.; Krasnov, T.; Shalmon, L.;
Shalev, H.; Eidelitz-Markus, T.; Kapelushnik, J.; Cattan, D.; Pariente,
A.; Tulliez, M.; Cretien, A.; and 13 others: Congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia type I is caused by mutations in codanin-1. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71:
1467-1474, 2002.

4. Heimpel, H.; Schwarz, K.; Ebnother, M.; Goede, J. S.; Heydrich,
D.; Kamp, T.; Plaumann, L.; Rath, B.; Roessler, J.; Schildknecht,
O.; Schmid, M.; Wuillemin, W.; Einsiedler, B.; Leichtle, R.; Tamary,
H.; Kohne, E.: Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA I):
molecular genetics, clinical appearance, and prognosis based on long-term
observation. Blood 107: 334-340, 2006.

5. Pielage, J.; Stork, T.; Bunse, I.; Klambt, C.: The Drosophila
cell survival gene discs lost encodes a cytoplasmic codanin-1-like
protein, not a homolog of tight junction PDZ protein Patj. Dev. Cell 5:
841-851, 2003.

6. Tamary, H.; Dgany, O.; Proust, A.; Krasnov, T.; Avidan, N.; Eidelitz-Markus,
T.; Tchernia, G.; Genevieve, D.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Bader-Meunier,
B.; Ferrero-Vacher, C.; Munzer, M.; Gruppo, R.; Fibach, E.; Konen,
O.; Yaniv, I.; Delaunay, J.: Clinical and molecular variability in
congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type I. Brit. J. Haemat. 130:
628-634, 2005.

7. Tamary, H.; Shalmon, L.; Shalev, H.; Halil, A.; Dobrushin, D.;
Ashkenazi, N.; Zoldan, M.; Resnitzky, P.; Korostishevsky, M.; Bonne-Tamir,
B.; Zaizov, R.: Localization of the gene for congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia type I to a less than 1-cM interval on chromosome 15q15.1-15.3. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1062-1069, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/31/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/2/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/14/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/8/2003

EDITED carol: 10/03/2006
terry: 9/28/2006
wwang: 3/31/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
wwang: 10/21/2005
terry: 10/11/2005
carol: 12/21/2004
mgross: 12/2/2004
mgross: 5/14/2004
terry: 5/14/2004
mgross: 1/8/2003

601896	TITLE *601896 TNF RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 3; TRAF3
;;CD40-BINDING PROTEIN; CD40BP;;
LMP1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; LAP1;;
CD40-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; CAP1;;
CD40 RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1; CRAF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CD40 (109535) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)
family. The short cytoplasmic domain of CD40 contains a region with
limited homology to the conserved cytosolic death domain of TNFR1
(191190) and FAS (134637). Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay with the
cytoplasmic domain of CD40 as bait, Hu et al. (1994) isolated B-cell
cDNAs encoding a protein that they called CD40-binding protein (CD40bp).
The predicted CD40bp protein contains a RING finger DNA-binding motif, a
cys/his-rich region, and a coiled-coil domain. Like TRAF1 (601711) and
TRAF2 (601895), both TNFR2 (75-kD TNFR; 191191)-binding proteins, CD40bp
contains a C-terminal TRAF domain. In vitro translated CD40bp has an
apparent molecular mass of 64 kD. Coimmunoprecipitation studies
indicated that CD40bp interacts with CD40 in human B cells. Hu et al.
(1994) suggested that CD40bp, along with TRAF1 and TRAF2, comprise a
family of proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic faces of the TNFR
family and have in common a TRAF domain.

Independently, Sato et al. (1995) and Cheng et al. (1995) identified
CD40bp, designating it CAP1 (CD40-associated protein-1) and CRAF1 (CD40
receptor-associated factor 1), respectively. Sato et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CAP1 binds specifically to the cytoplasmic domain of
CD40, but not to that of TNFR1, TNFR2, or FAS. The C-terminal TRAF
domain of CAP1 was sufficient to mediate binding to CD40 and
homodimerization. Cheng et al. (1995) isolated mouse and human CRAF1
cDNAs. The predicted 568-amino acid human protein is 96% identical to
mouse CRAF1. These authors divided the TRAF domain into 2 regions:
TRAF-N, the more N-terminal coiled-coil subdomain, and TRAF-C, which was
necessary and sufficient for CRAF1 to interact with CD40. Overexpression
of a truncated cDNA encoding the entire TRAF domain of CRAF1 inhibited
CD40-mediated upregulation of the CD23 (151445) gene, which suggested to
Cheng et al. (1995) that CRAF1 participates in CD40 signaling.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the TRAF3 gene to chromosome 14q32.32 based on an
alignment of the TRAF3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC075086) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

The cytoplasmic C terminus of the Epstein-Barr virus latent infection
membrane protein-1 (LMP1) is essential for B lymphocyte growth
transformation. LMP1 is an integral membrane protein that has
transforming effects in nonlymphoid cells, and may act by constitutively
activating a common cellular growth factor receptor pathway. Mosialos et
al. (1995) found that CD40bp, which they called LAP1 (LMP1-associated
protein-1), interacted with the LMP1 C-terminal domain. Expression of
LMP1 caused LAP1 and TRAF1 (EBI6) to localize to LMP1 clusters in
lymphoblast plasma membranes, and LMP1 coimmunoprecipitated with these
proteins in cell extracts. LAP1 bound to the cytoplasmic domains of CD40
and LT-beta-R (600979) in vitro, and associated with p80 (TNFR2) in
vivo. Northern blot analysis revealed that LAP1 was expressed as a
full-length 2.8-kb mRNA and an alternatively spliced 1.8-kb mRNA in all
tissues tested. Mosialos et al. (1995) concluded that the interaction of
LAP1 with LMP1 and with the cytoplasmic domains of TNFR family members
is evidence for a central role of this protein as an effector of cell
growth or death signaling pathways.

Dadgostar et al. (2003) determined that the coiled-coil domain of mouse
T3jam (608255) interacted with the isoleucine zipper domain of Traf3.
T3jam did not associate with other Traf family members. Coexpression of
T3jam and Traf3 recruited Traf3 to the detergent-insoluble fraction, and
T3jam and Traf3 synergistically activated JNK (601158), but not nuclear
factor kappa-B (see 164011).

To dissect biochemically Toll-like receptor signaling, Hacker et al.
(2006) established a system for isolating signaling complexes assembled
by dimerized adaptors. Using MyD88 (602170) as a prototypic adaptor,
they identified TRAF3 as a new component of Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes that is recruited along with TRAF6 (602355). Using
myeloid cells from Traf3- and Traf6-deficient mice, Hacker et al. (2006)
demonstrated that TRAF3 is essential for the induction of type I
interferons and the antiinflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL10;
124092), but is dispensable for expression of proinflammatory cytokines.
In fact, Traf3-deficient cells overproduced proinflammatory cytokines
owing to defective Il10 production. Despite their structural similarity,
the functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6 are largely distinct. TRAF3 is also
recruited to the adaptor TRIF (607601) and is required for marshalling
the protein kinase TBK1 (604834) into Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes, thereby explaining its unique role in activation of
the interferon response.

Oganesyan et al. (2006) demonstrated that cells lacking TRAF3 are
defective in type I interferon responses activated by several different
Toll-like receptors. Furthermore, they showed that TRAF3 associates with
the Toll-like receptor adaptors TRIF and IRAK1 (300283), as well as
downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon (605048), suggesting that
TRAF3 serves as a critical link between Toll-like receptor adaptors and
downstream regulatory kinases important for IRF activation. In addition
to TLR stimulation, Oganesyan et al. (2006) showed that TRAF3-deficient
fibroblasts are defective in their type I interferon response to direct
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also
an important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways.
Oganesyan et al. (2006) concluded that TRAF3 is a major regulator of
type I interferon production and the innate antiviral response.

Production of type I interferon is a critical host defense triggered by
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system.
Kayagaki et al. (2007) demonstrated that reduction of DUBA (300713)
augmented the PRR-induced type I interferon response in transfected
HEK293 cells, whereas ectopic expression of DUBA had the converse
effect. DUBA bound TRAF3, an adaptor protein essential for type I
interferon response. TRAF3 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that preferentially
assembled lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains in cotransfection assays.
DUBA selectively cleaved the lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains on TRAF3,
resulting in its dissociation from the downstream signaling complex
containing TBK1. A discrete ubiquitin interaction motif within DUBA was
required for efficient deubiquitination of TRAF3 and optimal suppression
of type I interferon. Kayagaki et al. (2007) concluded that their data
identified DUBA as a negative regulator of innate immune responses.

Cytokine signaling is thought to require assembly of multicomponent
signaling complexes at cytoplasmic segments of membrane-embedded
receptors, in which receptor-proximal protein kinases are activated.
Matsuzawa et al. (2008) reported that, upon ligation, CD40 formed a
complex containing adaptor molecules TRAF2 and TRAF3,
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13 (UBE2N; 603679), cellular inhibitor
of apoptosis protein-1 (CIAP1, or BIRC2; 601712) and -2 (CIAP2, or
BIRC3; 601721), IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248), and MEKK1 (MAP3K1; 600982).
TRAF2, UBC13, and IKK-gamma were required for complex assembly and
activation of MEKK1 and MAP kinase cascades. However, the kinases were
not activated unless the complex was translocated from the membrane to
the cytosol upon CIAP1/CIAP2-induced degradation of TRAF3. Matsuzawa et
al. (2008) proposed that this 2-stage signaling mechanism may apply to
other innate immune receptors and may account for spatial and temporal
separation of MAPK and IKK signaling.

Hu et al. (2013) identified the deubiquitinase OTUD7B (611748) as a
pivotal regulator of the noncanonical NF-kappa-B pathway. OTUD7B
deficiency in mice has no appreciable effect on canonical NF-kappa-B
activation but causes hyperactivation of noncanonical NF-kappa-B. In
response to noncanonical NF-kappa-B stimuli, OTUD7B binds and
deubiquitinates TRAF3, thereby inhibiting TRAF3 proteolysis and
preventing aberrant noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation. Consequently,
the OTUD7B deficiency results in B-cell hyperresponsiveness to antigens,
lymphoid follicular hyperplasia in the intestinal mucosa, and elevated
host-defense ability against an intestinal bacterial pathogen,
Citrobacter rodentium. Hu et al. (2013) concluded that their findings
established OTUD7B as a crucial regulator of signal-induced noncanonical
NF-kappa-B activation, and indicated a mechanism of immune regulation
that involves OTUD7B-mediated deubiquitination and stabilization of
TRAF3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Braggio et al. (2009) identified biallelic inactivation of TRAF3 in 3
(5.3%) of 57 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM; see 153600) samples.
TRAF3 inactivation was associated with transcriptional activation of
NF-kappa-B (NFKB1; 164011). In addition, 1 of 24 patients with a 6q
deletion had an inactivating somatic mutation in TNFAIP3 (191163),
another negative regulator of NF-kappa-B. Monoallelic deletions of
chromosome 6q23, including the TNFAIP3 gene, were identified in 38% of
patients, suggesting that haploinsufficiency can predispose to the
development of WM. The results indicated that mutational activation of
the NF-kappa-B pathway plays a role in the pathogenesis of WM.

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) investigated an 18-year-old French female
who had suffered from herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4
years and who lacked mutations in either the UNC93B1 (608204) or TLR3
(603029) genes. They identified a heterozygous C-to-T substitution at
position 352 in exon 4 of the TRAF3 gene, resulting in a nonconservative
missense change, arg118 to trp (R118W; 601896.0001). The mutation was
not found in her parents or brothers, and none had a history of HSE.
RT-PCR analysis of the patient's cells detected normal levels of TRAF3
mRNA, but Western blot analysis showed severely reduced levels of TRAF3
protein. Responsiveness to TLR3 agonists was impaired, as indicated by
deficient NFKB activation and poor production of IFNB (147640), IFNL
(IL29; 607403), and IL6 (147620). Expression of wildtype and mutant
alleles in cell lines showed that the mutant was dominant-negative.
TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts had impaired type I and type III
IFN-dependent control of viruses and deficient responses through the
TNFR (e.g., TNFRSF5; 109535) pathways. Perez de Diego et al. (2010)
concluded that, whereas complete Traf3 deficiency is neonatal lethal in
mice, decreases in TRAF3 production and function result in
predisposition to HSE, a condition that is usually fatal if untreated.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HERPES SIMPLEX ENCEPHALITIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3
TRAF3, ARG118TRP

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) reported a female French patient with
herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4 years who was healthy
without prophylaxis and showed normal resistance to other infectious
diseases, including other herpesvirus family members, at age 18 years.
They identified a de novo heterozygous 352C-T transition in exon 4 of
the TRAF3 gene, resulting in an arg118-to-trp (R118W) substitution, in
this patient, whose HSE was successfully treated with acyclovir for 3
weeks.

REFERENCE 1. Braggio, E.; Keats, J. J.; Leleu, X.; Van Wier, S.; Jimenez-Zepeda,
V. H.; Valdez, R.; Schop, R. F. J.; Price-Troska, T.; Henderson, K.;
Sacco, A.; Azab, F.; Greipp, P.; and 11 others: Identification
of copy number abnormalities and inactivating mutations in two negative
regulators of nuclear factor-kappa-B signaling pathways in Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia. Cancer Res. 69: 3579-3588, 2009.

2. Cheng, G.; Cleary, A. M.; Ye, Z.; Hong, D. I.; Lederman, S.; Baltimore,
D.: Involvement of CRAF1, a relative of TRAF, in CD40 signaling. Science 267:
1494-1498, 1995.

3. Dadgostar, H.; Doyle, S. E.; Shahangian, A.; Garcia, D. E.; Cheng,
G.: T3JAM, a novel protein that specifically interacts with TRAF3
and promotes the activation of JNK. FEBS Lett. 553: 403-407, 2003.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/5/2012.

5. Hacker, H.; Redecke, V.; Blagoev, B.; Kratchmarova, I.; Hsu, L.-C.;
Wang, G. G.; Kamps, M. P.; Raz, E.; Wagner, H.; Hacker, G.; Mann,
M.; Karin, M.: Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through
distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. Nature 439: 204-207,
2006.

6. Hu, H.; Brittain, G. C.; Chang, J.-H.; Puebla-Osorio, N.; Jin,
J.; Zal, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Cheng, X.; Chang, M.; Fu, Y.-X.; Zal, T.; Zhu,
C.; Sun, S.-C.: OTUD7B controls noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation
through deubiquitination of TRAF3. Nature 494: 371-374, 2013.

7. Hu, H. M.; O'Rourke, K.; Boguski, M. S.; Dixit, V. M.: A novel
RING finger protein interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of CD40. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 30069-30072, 1994.

8. Kayagaki, N.; Phung, Q.; Chan, S.; Chaudhari, R.; Quan, C.; O'Rourke,
K. M.; Eby, M.; Pietras, E.; Cheng, G.; Bazan, J. F.; Zhang, Z.; Arnott,
D.; Dixit, V. M.: DUBA: a deubiquitinase that regulates type I interferon
production. Science 318: 1628-1632, 2007.

9. Matsuzawa, A.; Tseng, P.-H.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Luo, J.-L.; Zhang,
W.; Wang, H.; Vignali, D. A. A.; Gallagher, E.; Karin, M.: Essential
cytoplasmic translocation of a cytokine receptor-assembled signaling
complex. Science 321: 663-668, 2008. Note: Erratum: Science 322:
375 only, 2008.

10. Mosialos, G.; Birkenbach, M.; Yalamanchili, R.; VanArsdale, T.;
Ware, C.; Kieff, E.: The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein
LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor
family. Cell 80: 389-399, 1995.

11. Oganesyan, G.; Saha, S. K.; Guo, B.; He, J. Q.; Shahangian, A.;
Zarnegar, B.; Perry, A.; Cheng, G.: Critical role of TRAF3 in the
Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. Nature 439:
208-211, 2006.

12. Perez de Diego, R.; Sancho-Shimizu, V.; Lorenzo, L.; Puel, A.;
Plancoulaine, S.; Picard, C.; Herman, M.; Cardon, A.; Durandy, A.;
Bustamante, J.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Bravo, J.; and 12 others: Human
TRAF3 adaptor molecule deficiency leads to impaired Toll-like receptor
3 response and susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis. Immunity 33:
400-411, 2010.

13. Sato, T.; Irie, S.; Reed, J. C.: A novel member of the TRAF family
of putative signal transducing proteins binds to the cytoplasmic domain
of CD40. FEBS Lett. 358: 113-118, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/21/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/5/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/11/1999

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 3/20/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/02/2013
terry: 3/21/2013
joanna: 12/7/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
terry: 10/4/2012
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/22/2009
alopez: 11/18/2008
mgross: 8/28/2008
terry: 8/28/2008
alopez: 5/7/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 5/3/2006
terry: 5/1/2006
mgross: 11/13/2003
alopez: 6/11/1999
carol: 6/18/1998
mark: 9/9/1997
alopez: 8/1/1997
alopez: 7/23/1997

613368	TITLE *613368 CARNOSINE SYNTHASE 1; CARNS1
;;ATP-GRASP DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; ATPGD1;;
KIAA1394
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CARNS1 (EC 6.3.2.11), a member of the ATP-grasp family of ATPases,
catalyzes the formation of carnosine (beta-alanyl-L-histidine) and
homocarnosine (gamma-aminobutyryl-L-histidine), which are found mainly
in skeletal muscle and the central nervous system, respectively (Drozak
et al., 2010).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned CARNS1, which they designated
KIAA1394. RT-PCR ELISA detected very high CARNS1 expression in whole
adult and fetal brain and in all specific adult brain regions examined.
High expression was also detected in heart and skeletal muscle, with
much lower expression in other tissues examined.

By searching databases for orthologs of chicken Atpgd1, followed by PCR
of mouse muscle/brain and human brain cDNA libraries, Drozak et al.
(2010) cloned mouse and human CARNS1, which they called ATPGD1. The
deduced proteins contain 957 and 950 amino acids, respectively, and both
contain 2 ATP-grasp domains, with highest conservation in the C-terminal
catalytic domain. Gel filtration analysis showed that mouse Atpgd1, like
the chicken enzyme, was expressed as a homotetramer of about 430 kD in
transfected HEK293 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Drozak et al. (2010) showed that, in the presence of L-histidine and
ATP, purified chicken Atpgd1 converted beta-alanine to carnosine plus
ADP and inorganic phosphate. Mouse and human ATPGD1 catalyzed the same
reaction following expression in HEK293 cells. All 3 enzymes were not
specific with respect to the amino acid serving as the acceptor,
although L-histidine was preferred, and all 3 were also more efficient
in synthesizing carnosine than homocarnosine and other dipeptides.
Drozak et al. (2010) suggested that the lower catalytic efficiency of
homocarnosine synthesis is compensated for by the high concentration of
gamma-aminobutyric acid substrate in brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Drozak et al. (2010) determined that CARNS1 contains 9 coding exons.
Exon 1 encodes the initiator ATG only.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Drozak et al. (2010) mapped the CARNS1
gene to chromosome 11q13. They mapped the mouse Carns1 gene to
chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Drozak, J.; Veiga-da-Cunha, M.; Vertommen, D.; Stroobant, V.; Van
Schaftingen, E.: Molecular identification of carnosine synthase as
ATP-grasp domain-containing protein 1 (ATPGD1). J. Biol. Chem. 285:
9346-9356, 2010.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/19/2010

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2010

600925	TITLE *600925 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, RECEPTOR-TYPE, J; PTPRJ
;;DEP1;;
PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, ETA;;
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO COLON CANCER 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SCC1;;
CD148
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Experimental evidence indicates that specific protein-tyrosine
phosphatases (PTPases) interact with members of cascades to modulate
biologic function differentiation and development. Experiments suggested
that the PTPases PTP-beta (176882) and PTP-epsilon (600926) are involved
in the early molecular events for in vitro differentiation of mouse
erythroleukemia (MEL) as well as embryonic carcinoma (F9) cells
(Watanabe et al., 1995).

CLONING

A human homolog of mouse Ptprj, encoding PTP-beta-2, was identified by
Ostman et al. (1994).

Honda et al. (1994) cloned and characterized the PTPRJ gene, which they
designated HPTP-eta. The predicted protein has a molecular mass of
approximately 220 to 250 kD and contains an extracellular region
homologous to fibronectin type III repeats, a transmembrane region, and
a cytoplasmic region containing a single PTPase-like domain.

MAPPING

Honda et al. (1994) mapped the PTPRJ gene to chromosome 11p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Using mouse cDNA for PTP-beta-2 and PTP-epsilon, Watanabe et al. (1995)
assigned the genes, Ptprj and Ptpre, to chromosome 2 and chromosome 7,
respectively.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nonfamilial, 'sporadic' cancers, which represent most cancer cases, have
a significant hereditary component, but the genes involved have low
penetrance and are extremely difficult to detect. Therefore, mapping and
cloning of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for cancer susceptibility in
animals may help identify homologous genes in humans. For example,
several cancer susceptibility QTLs were mapped in mouse and rat. One of
these, the mouse gene Scc1 (susceptibility to colon cancer-1), was
positionally cloned by Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) and identified as Ptprj,
which encodes a receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase. Furthermore,
in human cancers of colon, lung, and breast, Ruivenkamp et al. (2002)
found frequent deletions, loss of heterozygosity, and missense mutations
in the PTPRJ gene (see, e.g., 600925.0001-600925.0002).

Lesueur et al. (2005) assessed common SNPs and haplotypes of the PTPRJ
gene in 4,512 breast cancer (114480) patients and 4,554 controls from
East Anglia, U.K. The authors observed a difference in the haplotype
frequency distributions between patients and controls (P = 0.0023; OR =
0.81; range 0.72-0.92). They concluded that carrying a specific PTPRJ
haplotype may confer a protective effect on the risk of breast cancer.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
PTPRJ, ARG214CYS

Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) identified 5 somatic missense mutations in the
PTPRJ gene in colon cancer (see 114500). Sequence alignments, secondary
structure prediction, and homology modeling predicted with high
confidence levels that most of these in the extracellular portion of the
gene product occur in exposed regions available for interactions with
ligands or other proteins and could affect the signaling process. One of
these missense mutations was an arg214-to-cys mutation (R214C) that
resulted in loss of a positive charge.

.0002
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
PTPRJ, GLN276PRO

In a colon cancer (see 114500), Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) found a
gln276-to-pro (Q276P) mutation in exon 5 of the PTPRJ gene. The change
was predicted to result in torsional stress.

REFERENCE 1. Honda, H.; Inazawa, J.; Nishida, J.; Yazaki, Y.; Hirai, H.: Molecular
cloning, characterization, and chromosomal localization of a novel
protein-tyrosine phosphatase, HPTP eta. Blood 84: 4186-4194, 1994.

2. Lesueur, F.; Pharoah, P. D.; Laing, S.; Ahmed, S.; Jordan, C.;
Smith, P. L.; Luben, R.; Wareham, N. J.; Easton, D. F.; Dunning, A.
M.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Allelic association of the human homologue
of the mouse modifier Ptprj with breast cancer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
2349-2356, 2005.

3. Ostman, A.; Yang, Q.; Tonks, N. K.: Expression of DEP-1, a receptor-like
protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, is enhanced with increasing cell density. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9680-9684, 1994.

4. Ruivenkamp, C. A. L.; van Wezel, T.; Zanon, C.; Stassen, A. P.
M.; Vlcek, C.; Csikos, T.; Klous, A. M.; Tripodis, N.; Perrakis, A.;
Boerrigter, L.; Groot, P. C.; Lindeman, J.; Mooi, W. J.; Meijjer,
G. A.; Scholten, G.; Dauwerse, H.; Paces, V.; van Zandwijk, N.; van
Ommen, G. J. B.; Demant, P.: Ptprj is a candidate for the mouse colon-cancer
susceptibility locus Scc1 and is frequently deleted in human cancers. Nature
Genet. 31: 295-300, 2002.

5. Watanabe, T.; Mukouyama, Y.; Rhodes, M.; Thomas, M.; Kume, T.;
Oishi, M.: Chromosomal location of murine protein tyrosine phosphatase
(Ptprj and Ptpre) genes. Genomics 29: 793-795, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/9/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/2/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2011
wwang: 1/9/2009
carol: 4/18/2005
alopez: 6/24/2002
terry: 6/19/2002
carol: 4/2/1999
joanna: 1/7/1999
dkim: 7/23/1998
alopez: 8/7/1997
terry: 11/7/1995

612502	TITLE *612502 COLLECTIN 11; COLEC11
;;COLLECTIN, KIDNEY, 1; CLK1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

COLEC11 is a member of the collectin family of C-type lectins, which
contain a collagen-like domain and a carbohydrate recognition domain,
and play a role in host-defense (Keshi et al., 2006).

CLONING

By EST database screening using the carbohydrate recognition domain
(CRD) of human liver collectin, CLL1 (COLEC10; 607620), followed by
5-prime RACE of human kidney cDNA libraries, Keshi et al. (2006) cloned
COLEC11, which they called CLK1. The deduced 271-amino acid COLEC11
protein contains an N-terminal region with a cysteine residue, a
collagen-like sequence, a neck region, a CRD, and a predicted signal
peptide of 25-amino acids; the mature predicted protein consists of 246
amino acids. By RT-PCR analysis, Keshi et al. (2006) isolated putative
splice variants for transcripts lacking exon 2, exon 3, and both exons 2
and 3. RT-PCR analysis detected COLEC11 transcripts in most tissues
examined, with high expression in kidney, liver, fetal liver, small
intestine, thymus, spinal cord, placenta, adrenal gland, pancreas, and
several cell lines. No expression was detected in skeletal muscle, bone
marrow, or in the human embryonic kidney cell line HEK293. Keshi et al.
(2006) localized COLEC11 to the Golgi-endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
Western analysis determined that COLEC11 is a secreted protein, and that
all COLEC11 isoforms have oligomeric structures created through
disulfide bonding. Keshi et al. (2006) detected native COLEC11 protein
in human serum.

Rooryck et al. (2011) observed broadly distributed expression of Clk1 in
mouse tissues at embryonic day (E) 13.5, including craniofacial
cartilage, (nasal septum, Meckel cartilage, and posterior palate),
heart, bronchi, kidney, and vertebral bodies. They also observed
expression in palatal structures at E13.5 and E15.5. Examination of
zebrafish embryos revealed colec11 expression in the pronephric duct,
lateral hindbrain, and liver.

GENE FUNCTION

Using recombinant COLEC11, Keshi et al. (2006) showed that COLEC11
displays Ca(2+)-dependent binding to fucose, weaker binding to mannose,
and does not bind N-acetyl-galactosamine, N-acetyl-glucosamine, or
glucose. COLEC11 binds a variety of microbial saccharides including LPS
from E. coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, as well as S. cerevisiae mannan.

Rooryck et al. (2011) evaluated cellular localization of Clk1 in a
murine chondrocyte cell line and observed specific localization in the
Golgi apparatus, consistent with a secreted peptide. Using antisense
morpholinos against the initiation site and the exon 2/intron 2 splice
site in zebrafish embryos, Rooryck et al. (2011) found that the effect
was dose-dependent, with higher doses producing heart edema, pronephric
cyst formation, curved body axis, disorganized pigment distribution, and
high mortality. Staining of cartilage in zebrafish morphants at 5 days
postfertilization revealed reduced mandibular length, malformation of
the anterior neurocranium with shortening of the trabeculae and ethmoid
plate, and shortening and abnormal angulation of the ceratohyal
cartilage compared to controls. Rooryck et al. (2011) tested for
epistasis between COLEC11 and MASP1 (600521) by injection of suboptimal
doses (below which no phenotype is seen when injected alone) of both
colec11 and masp1 morpholinos into single-cell-stage zebrafish embryos,
and found that approximately 73% developed severe craniofacial
abnormalities and some developed clefts in the ethmoid plate. These
results suggested that the COLEC11 and MASP1 gene products function in
the same pathway.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 4 consanguineous families with 3MC syndrome mapping to chromosome
2p25 (3MC2; 265050), Rooryck et al. (2011) analyzed candidate genes and
identified homozygosity for 1 nonsense and 2 missense mutations and 1
in-frame deletion in the COLEC11 gene (612502.0001-612502.0004,
respectively). Analysis of COLEC11 in additional 3MC patients revealed
homozygous mutations in 3 more probands (see, e.g., 612502.0005 and
612502.0006).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
3MC SYNDROME 2
COLEC11, SER169PRO

In a brother and sister from a consanguineous Tunisian family with 3MC
syndrome-2 (3MC2; 265050), Rooryck et al. (2011) identified homozygosity
for a 496T-C transition in exon 8 of the COLEC11 gene, resulting in a
ser169-to-pro (S169P) substitution at a conserved residue. The mutated
alleles segregated with the disorder in the family and the mutation was
not found in 60 Tunisian or 284 northern European control chromosomes.

.0002
3MC SYNDROME 2
COLEC11, 1-BP DEL, 45C

In a sister and brother from a consanguineous Bangladeshi family with
3MC syndrome-2 (3MC2; 265050), Rooryck et al. (2011) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (45delC) in exon 2 of the COLEC11 gene,
causing a frameshift predicted to result in premature termination. The
mutated alleles segregated with the disorder in the family and the
mutation was not found in 94 Bangladeshi or 284 northern European
control chromosomes.

.0003
3MC SYNDROME 2
COLEC11, GLY204SER

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Afghan family with 3MC syndrome-2
(3MC2; 265050), Rooryck et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a
610G-A transition in exon 8 of the COLEC11 gene, resulting in a
gly204-to-ser (G204S) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
carbohydrate recognition domain. The G204S mutation was also detected in
homozygosity in a Pakistani 3MC patient. The mutated alleles segregated
with the disorder in both families and the mutation was not found in 72
Bangladeshi or 284 northern European control chromosomes. Using protein
blotting, Rooryck et al. (2011) did not detect any secreted CLK1 in
serum from the 2 affected Afghan brothers, in contrast to control
samples, suggesting that the G204S substitution leads to cellular
retention of the protein.

.0004
3MC SYNDROME 2
COLEC11, 3-BP DEL, 648CTC

In a Saudi Arabian patient with 3MC syndrome-2 (265050), Rooryck et al.
(2011) identified homozygosity for a 3-bp in-frame deletion (648CTC) in
exon 8 of the COLEC11 gene, resulting in the deletion of a highly
conserved serine residue (ser217del) in the carbohydrate recognition
domain. The mutated alleles segregated with the disorder in the family,
and the mutation was not found in 192 Saudi control chromosomes.

.0005
3MC SYNDROME 2
COLEC11, 1-BP DEL, 300T

In a female patient with 3MC syndrome-2 (265050) from the Italian family
originally reported by Mingarelli et al. (1996), Rooryck et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (300delT) in exon 6 of the
COLEC11 gene, causing a frameshift predicted to result in premature
termination within the neck domain. The mutated alleles segregated with
the disorder in the family, and the mutation was not found in 334
northern European control chromosomes.

.0006
3MC SYNDROME 2
COLEC11, EX1-3DEL

In a male patient with 3MC syndrome-2 (265050) from the Italian family
originally reported by Carnevale et al. (1989), Rooryck et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 27-kb deletion encompassing exons 1 to 3
of the COLEC11 gene, predicted to result in complete loss of the N
terminus and partial loss of the collagen-like domains of the protein.
Sequence analysis of the proximal and distal breakpoints of the junction
fragment revealed low copy repeat sequences (LCRs) corresponding to long
interspersed nuclear elements, suggesting that nonallelic homologous
recombination between these LCRs is the most probable mechanism
mediating this microdeletion in COLEC11. The mutated alleles segregated
with the disorder in the family and the mutation was not found in 286
northern European control chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Carnevale, F.; Krajewska, G.; Fischetto, R.; Greco, M. G.; Bonvino,
A.: Ptosis of eyelids, strabismus, diastasis recti, hip defect, cryptorchidism,
and developmental delay in two sibs. Am. J. Med. Genet. 33: 186-189,
1989.

2. Keshi, H.; Sakamoto, T.; Kawai, T.; Ohtani, K.; Katoh, T.; Jang,
S.-J.; Motomura, W.; Yoshizaki, T.; Fukuda, M.; Koyama, S.; Fukuzawa,
J.; Fukuoh, A.; Yoshida, I.; Suzuki, Y.; Wakamiya, N.: Identification
and characterization of a novel human collectin CL-K1. Microbiol.
Immunol. 50: 1001-1013, 2006.

3. Mingarelli, R.; Castriota Scanderbeg, A.; Dallapiccola, B.: Two
sisters with a syndrome of ocular, skeletal, and abdominal abnormalities
(OSA syndrome). J. Med. Genet. 33: 884-886, 1996.

4. Rooryck, C.; Diaz-Font, A.; Osborn, D. P. S.; Chabchoub, E.; Hernandez-Hernandez,
V.; Shamseldin, H.; Kenny, J.; Waters, A.; Jenkins, D.; Al Kaissi,
A.; Leal, G. F.; Dallapiccola, B.; and 9 others: Mutations in lectin
complement pathway genes COLEC11 and MASP1 cause 3MC syndrome. Nature
Genet. 43: 197-203, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/18/2011

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/22/2008

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
terry: 11/15/2012
terry: 3/23/2011
terry: 3/22/2011
carol: 3/18/2011
alopez: 12/22/2008

614760	TITLE *614760 PQ LOOP REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; PQLC2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a human database for sequences similar to the C. elegans
lysosomal amino acid transporter Laat1, followed by PCR of a HEK293 cDNA
library, Liu et al. (2012) cloned PQLC2. The deduced protein contains
291 amino acids. Both PQLC2 and Laat1 contain 7 transmembrane domains, 2
PQ loop repeats characteristic of lysosomal cystine transporters, and a
putative lysosomal sorting motif near the C terminus. PQLC2 localized to
lysosomes in transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Cystinosis (219800) is caused by intralysosomal accumulation of free
cystine due to a mutation in the lysosomal cystine transporter (CTNS;
606272). The aminothiol cysteamine, used to treat cystinosis, converts
lysosomal cystine to cysteine and the mixed disulfide of
cysteine-cysteamine, which is believed to be exported from lysosomes by
a lysine-cationic amino acid transporter. Using transfected human cell
lines and mutant worms, Liu et al. (2012) found that human PQLC2 and C.
elegans Laat1 functioned as the necessary lysine-cationic amino acid
transporter. Knockout of Laat1 in worms caused elevated lysosomal lysine
and arginine content, although cystine content was normal. Laat1-Ctns
double mutation resulted in additional cystine accumulation that was
resistant to cysteamine treatment. In transfection experiments with
COS-7 cells, deletion of the lysosomal sorting motif of PQLC2 or Laat1
resulted in proteins that were redirected to the plasma membrane. The
deletion also increased cellular lysine and arginine uptake, which was
abolished when the invariant pro in the first PQ loop was mutated to leu
in PQLC2 or Laat1.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the PQLC2 gene to chromosome 1p36.13 based on an
alignment of the PQLC2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000327) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/14/2012.

2. Liu, B.; Du, H.; Rutkowski, R.; Gartner, A.; Wang, X.: LAAT-1
is the lysosomal lysine/arginine transporter that maintains amino
acid homeostasis. Science 337: 351-354, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/14/2012

EDITED carol: 08/14/2012
carol: 8/14/2012

607199	TITLE *607199 INTERFERON REGULATORY FACTOR 6; IRF6
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FAMILY

Interferon regulatory factor-6 (IRF6) belongs to a family of 9
transcription factors that share a highly-conserved helix-turn-helix
DNA-binding domain and a less conserved protein-binding domain. This
domain, called SMIR (for SMAD (see 601366)-IRF-binding domain), is also
found in IRF3 (603734) and IRF7 (605047). Other interferon regulatory
factors include IRF1 (147575) on 5q, IRF2 (147576) on 4q, IRF3 on 19q,
and IRF4 (601900) on 6p. Most IRFs regulate the expression of
interferon-alpha (see 147660) and -beta (see 147640) after viral
infection.

CLONING

Kondo et al. (2002) cloned human IRF6. The deduced protein contains an
N-terminal winged-helix DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal SMIR
(Smad-interferon regulatory factor-binding) domain. RT-PCR analysis
showed that Irf6 is broadly expressed in embryonic and adult mouse
tissues. A similar expression pattern was seen in human fetal and adult
tissues. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos demonstrated that Irf6
is highly expressed in the medial edges of the paired palatal shelves
immediately before, and during, their fusion. High Irf6 expression was
also detected in hair follicles, palatal rugae, tooth germ and
thyroglossal duct, external genitalia, and in skin throughout the body.

Ben et al. (2005) determined that the human IRF6 protein contains 517
amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kondo et al. (2002) determined that the IRF6 gene contains 10 exons.
Exons 1, 2, and 10 are noncoding.

Ben et al. (2005) found strong structural conservation among human,
mouse, zebrafish and Fugu Irf6 orthologs, especially in the 7 coding
exons.

MAPPING

Kondo et al. (2002) identified the IRF6 gene within the VWS critical
region at 1q32-q41.

GENE FUNCTION

Mutation in the IRF6 gene can cause van der Woude syndrome (VWS1;
119300) and popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS; 119500). VWS is an
autosomal dominant form of cleft lip and palate associated with lip
pits, and is the most common syndromic form of cleft lip or palate. PPS
is a disorder with a similar orofacial phenotype that also includes skin
and genital anomalies. Phenotypic overlap and linkage data had suggested
that these 2 disorders are allelic. To correlate the expression of IRF6
with the phenotypes of VWS and PPS, Kondo et al. (2002) conducted
expression analyses in mice. Studies showed high levels of Irf6 mRNA
along the medial edge of the fusing palate, tooth buds, hair follicles,
genitalia, and skin. Their observations demonstrated that
haploinsufficiency of IRF6 disrupts orofacial development and were
consistent with dominant-negative mutations disturbing development of
the skin and genitalia.

Little et al. (2009) determined the DNA sequence to which IRF6 binds and
used this sequence to analyze the effect of VWS- and PPS-associated
missense mutations (see, e.g., 607199.0004) in the DNA-binding domain of
IRF6. They showed that IRF6 functions as a cooperative transcriptional
activator and that mutations in the protein interaction domain (residues
226 to 467) of IRF6 disrupt this activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Van der Woude Syndrome

To identify the locus associated with van der Woude syndrome (119300),
Kondo et al. (2002) did a direct sequence analysis of genes and
presumptive transcripts in the 350-kb critical region on 1q identified
by linkage mapping. This approach was confounded by SNPs that occurred
about once every 1,900 basepairs. To distinguish between putative
disease-causing mutations and SNPs, they studied a pair of monozygotic
twins who were discordant for the VWS phenotype and had unaffected
parents. Monozygotic status was confirmed by showing complete
concordance of genotype at 20 microsatellite loci. The authors concluded
that the only sequence difference between the twins resulted from a
somatic mutation in the affected twin. Kondo et al. (2002) found a
nonsense mutation in IRF6 in the affected twin (607199.0001).
Subsequently, they identified mutations in IRF6 in 45 additional
unrelated families affected with VWS.

Ghassibe et al. (2004) screened the IRF6 gene in 6 families with VWS and
identified 6 heterozygous missense mutations, respectively, all
affecting either the DNA-binding or the protein-binding domain. In a
4-generation VWS family in which affected individuals carried an L22P
mutation (607199.0014), 2 of the patients displayed additional features:
1 had finger syndactyly, and the other had toe syndactyly and oral
synechiae. Ghassibe et al. (2004) stated that because syndactyly and
synechiae are major signs for PPS, these 2 patients were considered to
have PPS, whereas the 6 other affected family members were classified as
VWS, thus demonstrating that a single mutation could be responsible for
both syndromes.

In a 16-year-old girl with a heart-shaped mass on her inner lower lip
but no pits, Yeetong et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a
nonsense mutation in the IRF6 gene (Q49X; 607199.0017).

- Popliteal Pterygium Syndrome

In affected members of 5 unrelated families with popliteal pterygium
syndrome (PPS; 119500), Kondo et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity
for an arg84-to-cys (R84C; 607199.0004) mutation in the IRF6 gene. In 2
other PPS families, they identified an arg84-to-his (R84H; 607199.0005)
substitution.

Matsuzawa et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous R84L mutation
(607199.0015) in a Japanese family with variable expression of
popliteal-pterygium syndrome. Mutations in the same codon, R84C and
R84H, have been reported in other patients with PPS (Kondo et al.,
2002), suggesting a hotspot for recurrent mutations.

- Van der Woude Syndrome-Popliteal Pterygium Syndrome Spectrum

De Medeiros et al. (2008) described a patient, conceived by in vitro
fertilization, with unilateral cleft lip and palate, ankyloblepharon,
paramedian lip pits, unilateral renal aplasia, and a coronal
hypospadias, with a novel heterozygous mutation (607199.0013) in the
IRF6 gene. The authors considered the patient to have a VWS-PPS spectrum
disorder. They were uncertain whether renal aplasia was related to the
mutation or the method of fertilization.

- Orofacial Cleft 6

Zucchero et al. (2004) found overtransmission of the ancestral allele of
the V274I polymorphism (dbSNP rs2235371), originally identified by Kondo
et al. (2002), to patients with nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate (OFC6;
608864) who were Asian but did not find it in groups of European
descent. Zucchero et al. (2004) noted that their findings suggested that
the V allele itself was not causal.

Rahimov et al. (2008) used multispecies sequence comparison to identify
a common SNP (dbSNP rs642961, G-A) in an IRF6 enhancer located in the
intergenic region between the start sites of the oppositely transcribed
IRF6 and C1ORF107 genes (genome coordinate 208,055,893; build 36.3) They
found that the A allele was significantly overtransmitted (p = 1 x
10(-11)) in families with nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate (OFC6; 608864),
particularly in those with cleft lip only. EMSA and CHIP assays
demonstrated that the risk allele disrupts the binding site of
transcription factor AP-2-alpha (TFAP2A; 107580), and expression
analysis in the mouse localized the enhancer activity to craniofacial
and limb structures. In luciferase reported assays in a human foreskin
keratinocyte cell line, the risk haplotype consistently increased the
luciferase expression more than the nonassociated haplotypes did, but
the difference did not reach statistical significance. Rahimov et al.
(2008) concluded that IRF6 and TFAP2A are in the same developmental
pathway and that this high frequency variant in a regulatory element
contributes substantially to a common, complex disorder.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Clefts of the lip with or without cleft palate and isolated cleft palate
are developmentally and genetically distinct (see 119520 and 119540,
respectively), yet VWS is a single-gene disorder that encompasses both
clefting phenotypes. To verify this point, Kondo et al. (2002) analyzed
22 pedigrees that had a single mutation in IRF6 and individuals with
both phenotypes. Genotype analysis of 1 family demonstrated that
affected individuals, regardless of their phenotype, shared the 18-bp
deletion (607199.0002) that occurred in the proband. They observed
similar results in the other families and concluded that a single
mutation in IRF6 can cause both types of clefting. Protein-truncation
mutations were significantly more common in VWS than in PPS (P = 0.004).
The lone exception was a nonsense mutation present in 1 family, glu393
to ter (607199.0003), which may be a dominant-negative mutation.

Kondo et al. (2002) found that missense mutations that cause VWS were
almost evenly divided between the DNA-binding domain and the
protein-binding domain, whereas most missense mutations that cause PPS
were found in the DNA-binding domain. Comparison of the positions of PPS
mutations with the crystal structure of the IRF1 DNA-binding domain
showed that every amino acid residue that was mutant in individuals with
PPS directly contacts the DNA, whereas only 1 of 7 of the residues
mutant in individuals with VWS contacts the DNA. Most notably, Kondo et
al. (2002) observed missense mutations involving the arg84 codon in 7
unrelated PPS families. The arg84 residue is comparable to the arg82
residue of IRF1. Variation in the phenotypic effects of mutations in the
IRF6 gene causing VWS and PPS suggested the operation of stochastic
factors or modifier genes influencing IRF6 function. Three sorts of
variation were observed. Thirty-two families had multiple combinations
of orofacial anomalies, 22 families had mixed clefting phenotypes
(individuals with cleft lip and individuals with cleft palate only in
the same family), and 4 families affected with PPS included individuals
who exhibited orofacial (VWS) features exclusively. Kondo et al. (2002)
identified a sequence variant, val274 to ile, occurring within an
absolutely conserved residue within the SMIR domain. This variant is
common in unaffected populations (3% in European-descended and 22% in
Asian populations) and was considered by them an attractive candidate
for a modifier of VWS, PPS, and other orofacial clefting disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

The epidermis is a highly organized structure, the integrity of which is
central to the protection of an organism. Development and subsequent
maintenance of this tissue depends critically on the intricate balance
between proliferation and differentiation of a resident stem cell
population. Richardson et al. (2006) undertook a study of the signals
controlling the proliferation-differentiation switch in vivo. They
showed that mice carrying a homozygous missense mutation in Irf6, the
homolog of the gene mutated in the human congenital disorders van der
Woude syndrome and popliteal pterygium syndrome, have a
hyperproliferative epidermis that fails to undergo terminal
differentiation, resulting in soft tissue fusions. They further
demonstrated that mice compound heterozygous for mutations in Irf6 and
the gene encoding the cell cycle regulator protein stratifin (SFN;
601290) show similar defects of keratinizing epithelia. The results
indicated that Irf6 is a key determinant of the keratinocyte
proliferation-differentiation switch and that Irf6 and Sfn interact
genetically in this process.

Ingraham et al. (2006) obtained Irf6-null mice at the expected mendelian
ratio. At embryonic day 17.5, Irf6-null mice had taut, shiny skin,
lacked external ears, and had snouts and jaws shorter and more rounded
than their wildtype littermates. Irf6-null embryos also had short
forelimbs that lacked visible digits and a single caudal projection that
lacked visible hindlimbs and tail. Histologic and gene expression
analyses showed that the primary defect was in keratinocyte
differentiation and proliferation. Ingraham et al. (2006) found that
abnormalities of epithelial differentiation that resulted in cleft
palate were a consequence of adhesion between the palatal shelves and
the tongue in both Irf6-null and homozygous missense mice.

Richardson et al. (2009) showed that Irf6/Jag2 (602570) doubly
heterozygous mice displayed a fully penetrant intraoral epithelial
adhesions, resulting in cleft palate. There was no evidence of direct
interaction between Irf6 and Jag2, suggesting that the mechanism
underlying the genetic interaction between Irf6 and Jag2 is the
consequence of their combined effects on periderm formation,
maintenance, and function. Notch1 (190198) and p63 (603273) expression
patterns in Irf6/Jag2 doubly heterozygous mouse embryos suggested that
Irf6 affects Jag2-Notch1 signaling during periderm maintenance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, GLU92TER

In the affected twin of a pair of monozygotic twins who were discordant
for van der Woude syndrome (VWS1; 119300), Kondo et al. (2002) found a
nonsense mutation in exon 4 of the IRF6 gene that was absent in both
parents and the unaffected twin: glu92 to ter (E92X).

.0002
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, 18-BP DEL/1-BP INS

In affected members of a family with van der Woude syndrome (119300),
Kondo et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity for an 18-bp deletion and
insertion of a single adenine occurring after nucleotide 870 of the IRF6
gene. Some affected members had cleft of the lip with cleft palate,
others had cleft of the lip without cleft palate, and yet others had
isolated cleft plate; regardless of the phenotype, all shared the 18-bp
deletion found in the proband.

.0003
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, GLN393TER

Kondo et al. (2002) found that protein-truncation mutations of the IRF6
gene were significantly more common in van der Woude syndrome (VWS;
119300) than in popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS; 119500) (P = 0.004).
The lone exception to this relationship was a nonsense mutation
introducing a stop codon in place of a glutamine codon at position 393
(Q393X), which may be a dominant-negative mutation, found in affected
members of a PPS family.

.0004
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, ARG84CYS

In affected members of 5 unrelated families with popliteal pterygium
syndrome (119500), Kondo et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity for a
250C-T transition in the IRF6 gene resulting in an arg84-to-cys (R84C)
change in the protein. In affected members of 2 other PPS families,
arg84 was changed to a different amino acid (607199.0005).

.0005
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, ARG84HIS

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with PPS (119500), Kondo et
al. (2002) found an arg84-to-his (R84H) missense mutation in the IRF6
gene. The arg84 residue, affected in the arg84-to-cys (607199.0004) and
arg84-to-his missense mutations, is 1 of 4 residues that make critical
contacts with the core sequence, GAAA, and is essential for the DNA
binding function of IRF6.

.0006
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ALA2VAL

Wang et al. (2003) screened 4 Chinese families with van der Woude
syndrome (119300) in 9 exons and their flanking splice junctions of the
IRF6 gene by direct sequencing. They identified 3 missense mutations,
including ala2-to-val (A2V), resulting from a 268C-T nucleotide change.
The A2V mutation had been reported previously in an American family by
Kondo et al. (2002).

.0007
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ARG6CYS

An arg6-to-cys (R6C) substitution in the IRF6 gene (279C-T in exon 3)
was found by Wang et al. (2003) in a Chinese family with van der Woude
syndrome (119300).

.0008
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, TRP379TER

In a Chinese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Wang et al.
(2003) found a nonsense mutation in the IRF6 gene: a TGG-to-TGA
(1400G-A) transition at codon 379 of exon 8, introducing a premature
stop codon in place of a tryptophan residue (W379X).

.0009
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ARG400TRP

In a Chinese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Wang et al.
(2003) found that affected members were carrying a missense mutation in
the IRF6 gene: a 1461C-T transition in exon 9, predicting a tryptophan
substitution for a highly conserved arginine at codon 400 (R400W).

.0010
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, 17-BP DEL

In a Japanese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Kayano et al.
(2003) found a 17-kb deletion in the IRF6 gene. On initial sequencing no
base change was found, but a deletion involving exons 4-9 was suggested
by multiplex PCR analysis. Further analyses revealed a heterozygous
17,162-bp deletion involving exons 4-9. Kayano et al. (2003) suggested
that since IRF6 mutations in a significant portion of VWS patients
remain undetected by conventional sequencing analysis, it may be
important to search for a large deletion in such patients.

.0011
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ARG45GLN

In a Japanese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Kayano et al.
(2003) found a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide 134 in exon 3 of the
IRF6 gene that resulted in an arg45-to-gln (R45Q) amino acid change.

.0012
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, PRO396SER

In a Japanese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Kayano et al.
(2003) found a C-to-T substitution at nucleotide 1186 in exon 9 of the
IRF6 gene that resulted in a pro396-to-ser (P396S) amino acid change.

.0013
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME, INCLUDED
IRF6, ARG339ILE

In a patient with overlapping features of van der Woude syndrome
(119300) and popliteal pterygium syndrome (119500) (unilateral cleft lip
and palate, ankyloblepharon, paramedian lip pits) as well as unilateral
renal aplasia and coronal hypospadias, de Medeiros et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for a 1016G-T transversion in the IRF6 gene,
resulting in an arg339-to-ile (R339I) substitution. The mutation was not
found in 60 unrelated control individuals. The patient and his brother,
who had hypospadias and nephrocalcinosis but no IRF6 mutation, were both
conceived by in vitro fertilization. De Medeiros et al. (2008) suggested
that the hypospadias and renal aplasia may have been due to the method
of fertilization rather than the IRF6 mutation. They noted that a lethal
PPS syndrome (263650) has renal aplasia as a feature.

.0014
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME, INCLUDED
IRF6, LEU22PRO

In affected individuals from a 4-generation family with van der Woude
syndrome (VWS1; 119300), Ghassibe et al. (2004) identified
heterozygosity for a 65T-C transition in exon 3 of the IRF6 gene,
resulting in a leu22-to-pro (L22P) substitution in the DNA-binding
domain. In addition to lip pits and clefting, 2 of the patients also had
syndactyly and synechiae, major signs for popliteal-pterygium syndrome
(PPS; 119500). Ghassibe et al. (2004) stated that these 2 patients were
considered to have PPS, whereas the 6 other affected family members were
classified as VWS, thus demonstrating that a single mutation could be
responsible for both syndromes.

.0015
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, ARG84LEU

In a Japanese boy with popliteal-pterygium syndrome (119500), Matsuzawa
et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 251G-T transversion in exon 4 of
the IRF6 gene, resulting in an arg84-to-leu (R84L) substitution in a
critical site for DNA binding. The boy had lip pits, bilateral cleft lip
and palate, syngnathia, syndactyly, popliteal webbing, and atrophic
testes. His father, who also carried the mutation, had bilateral cleft
lip and palate only. Family history revealed a paternal grandfather and
aunt with bifid uvula and cleft palate. Thus, variable expressivity was
clinically evident in this family. The mutation was not detected in the
mother or in 90 healthy Japanese controls. The R84C (607199.0004) and
R84H (607199.0005) mutations in the same codon were previously reported
by Kondo et al. (2002) in other patients with PPS, suggesting a hotspot
for recurrent mutations.

.0016
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, SER424LEU

In a Japanese boy and his mother with PPS (119500), Matsuzawa et al.
(2010) identified a heterozygous 1271C-T transition in exon 9 of the
IRF6 gene, resulting in a ser424-to-leu (S424L) substitution. The
mutation was not found in 200 Japanese controls. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein had 6% residual
activity, consistent with a loss of function. The boy had cleft palate,
syngnathia, unclear scrotum, syndactyly, and mild popliteal webbing,
whereas his mother had cleft lip and palate, syngnathia, syndactyly, and
hypoplasia of the labia majora.

.0017
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, GLN49TER

In a 16-year-old girl with a heart-shaped mass on her inner lower lip
(VWS1; 119300) but no pits, oral clefts, or hypodontia, Yeetong et al.
(2009) identified heterozygosity for a 145C-T transition in exon 3 of
the IRF6 gene, resulting in a gln49-to-ter (Q49X) substitution in the
highly conserved DNA-binding domain. Her mother and other relatives were
reported to have similar findings, but were unavailable for evaluation.

REFERENCE 1. Ben, J.; Jabs, E. W.; Chong, S. S.: Genomic, cDNA and embryonic
expression analysis of zebrafish IRF6, the gene mutated in the human
oral clefting disorders Van der Woude and popliteal pterygium syndromes. Gene
Expr. Patterns 5: 629-638, 2005.

2. de Medeiros, F.; Hansen, L.; Mawlad, E.; Eiberg, H.; Asklund, C.;
Tommerup, N.; Jakobsen, L. P.: A novel mutation in IRF6 resulting
in VWS-PPS spectrum disorder with renal aplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
1605-1608, 2008.

3. Ghassibe, M.; Revencu, N.; Bayet, B.; Gillerot, Y.; Vanwijck, R.;
Verellen-Dumoulin, C.; Vikkula, M.: Six families with van der Woude
and/or popliteal pterygium syndrome: all with a mutation in the IRF6
gene. J. Med. Genet. 41: e15, 2004. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Ingraham, C. R.; Kinoshita, A.; Kondo, S.; Yang, B.; Sajan, S.;
Trout, K. J.; Malik, M. I.; Dunnwald, M.; Goudy, S. L.; Lovett, M.;
Murray, J. C.; Schutte, B. C.: Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
morphogenesis in mice deficient for interferon regulatory factor 6
(Irf6). Nature Genet. 38: 1335-1340, 2006.

5. Kayano, S.; Kure, S.; Suzuki, Y.; Kanno, K.; Aoki, Y.; Kondo, S.;
Schutte, B. C.; Murray, J. C.; Yamada, A.; Matsubara, Y.: Novel IRF6
mutations in Japanese patients with van der Woude syndrome: two missense
mutations (R45Q and P396S) and a 17-kb deletion. J. Hum. Genet. 48:
622-628, 2003.

6. Kondo, S.; Schutte, B. C.; Richardson, R. J.; Bjork, B. C.; Knight,
A. S.; Watanabe, Y.; Howard, E.; Ferreira de Lima, R. L. L.; Daack-Hirsch,
S.; Sander, A.; McDonald-McGinn, D. M.; Zackai, E. H.; and 14 others
: Mutations in IRF6 cause Van der Woude and popliteal pterygium syndromes.
(Letter) Nature Genet. 32: 285-289, 2002.

7. Little, H. J.; Rorick, N. K.; Su, L.-I.; Baldock, C.; Malhotra,
S.; Jowitt, T.; Gakhar, L.; Subramanian, R.; Schutte, B. C.; Dixon,
M. J.; Shore, P.: Missense mutations that cause Van der Woude syndrome
and popliteal pterygium syndrome affect the DNA-binding and transcriptional
activation functions of IRF6. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 535-545, 2009.
Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 1544 only, 2009.

8. Matsuzawa, N.; Kondo, S.; Shimozato, K.; Nagao, T.; Nakano, M.;
Tsuda, M.; Hirano, A.; Niikawa, N.; Yoshiura, K.: Two missense mutations
of the IRF6 gene in two Japanese families with popliteal pterygium
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2262-2267, 2010.

9. Rahimov, F.; Marazita, M. L.; Visel, A.; Cooper, M. E.; Hitchler,
M. J.; Rubini, M.; Domann, F. E.; Govil, M.; Christensen, K.; Bille,
C.; Melbye, M.; Jugessur, A.; and 11 others: Disruption of an AP-2-alpha
binding site in an IRF6 enhancer is associated with cleft lip. Nature
Genet. 40: 1341-1347, 2008.

10. Richardson, R. J.; Dixon, J.; Jiang, R.; Dixon, M. J.: Integration
of IRF6 and Jagged2 signalling is essential for controlling palatal
adhesion and fusion competence. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2632-2642,
2009.

11. Richardson, R. J.; Dixon, J.; Malhotra, S.; Hardman, M. J.; Knowles,
L.; Boot-Handford, R. P.; Shore, P.; Whitmarsh, A.; Dixon, M. J.:
Irf6 is a key determinant of the keratinocyte proliferation-differentiation
switch. Nature Genet. 38: 1329-1334, 2006.

12. Wang, X.; Liu, J.; Zhang, H.; Xiao, M.; Li, J.; Yang, C.; Lin,
X.; Wu, Z.; Hu, L.; Kong, X.: Novel mutations in the IRF6 gene for
Van der Woude syndrome. Hum. Genet. 113: 382-386, 2003.

13. Yeetong, P.; Mahatumarat, C.; Siriwan, P.; Rojvachiranonda, N.;
Suphapeetiporn, K.; Shotelersuk, V.: Three novel mutations of the
IRF6 gene with one associated with an unusual feature in van der Woude
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2489-2492, 2009.

14. Zucchero, T. M.; Cooper, M. E.; Maher, B. S.; Daack-Hirsch, S.;
Nepomuceno, B.; Ribeiro, L.; Caprau, D.; Christensen, K.; Suzuki,
Y.; Machida, J.; Natsume, N.; Yoshiura, K.-I.; and 17 others: Interferon
regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene variants and the risk of isolated
cleft lip or palate. New Eng. J. Med. 351: 769-780, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/21/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/15/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/6/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/1/2010
Nara Sobreira - updated: 11/20/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/31/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/24/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/2/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/21/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/3/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/5/2002

EDITED joanna: 07/22/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
carol: 2/21/2013
carol: 7/6/2011
wwang: 6/30/2011
ckniffin: 6/15/2011
wwang: 4/19/2011
terry: 4/6/2011
wwang: 4/14/2010
terry: 4/1/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
carol: 11/24/2009
terry: 11/20/2009
wwang: 8/14/2009
terry: 7/31/2009
alopez: 11/24/2008
mgross: 1/2/2007
alopez: 11/27/2006
terry: 11/21/2006
wwang: 10/10/2005
terry: 10/3/2005
ckniffin: 12/21/2004
alopez: 12/16/2004
terry: 12/15/2004
carol: 8/25/2004
ckniffin: 8/23/2004
alopez: 4/7/2004
terry: 4/5/2004
alopez: 10/3/2003
terry: 10/1/2003
alopez: 10/18/2002
alopez: 9/16/2002
alopez: 9/6/2002

602572	TITLE *602572 ANNEXIN A11; ANXA11
;;ANNEXIN XI; ANX11;;
AUTOANTIGEN, 56-KD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANXA11 is a member of the annexin family of calcium-dependent
phospholipid-binding proteins. Annexins have unique N-terminal domains
and homologous C-terminal domains containing the calcium-dependent
phospholipid-binding sites.

CLONING

To identify a 56-kD antigen recognized by sera from patients with
autoimmune diseases, Misaki et al. (1994) screened a human
teratocarcinoma cDNA expression library with the anti-56-kD antigen
autoantibodies. They isolated a cDNA predicting a 505-amino acid protein
with 60% identity to other annexins in the conserved C-terminal domain
and 92.5% identity to bovine annexin XI over the entire protein. Misaki
et al. (1994) concluded that the 56-kD autoantigen is human annexin XI,
or ANXA11.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bances et al. (2000) determined that the mouse Anxa11 gene contains 15
exons and spans 40 kB. Exon 1 is untranslated, and intron 1 spans about
20 kb. The human ANXA11 gene has the same general structure as the mouse
gene; however, EST database analysis indicated that human ANXA11
transcripts also use variably spliced exons 1b and 1c, which can
lengthen the 5-prime UTR. The intronic sequences of the mouse and human
ANXA11 genes contain several types of repetitive elements, including
retroviral long terminal repeats. The mouse promoter region contains a
remnant LINE-1 insertion not found in the human gene. The 5-prime
flanking region of the ANXA11 gene contains a CpG island and MYOD
(159970), SP1 (189906), and glucocorticoid response elements, but no
proximal TATA or CAAT boxes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the ANXA11
gene and susceptibility to sarcoidosis, see SS3 (612388).

MAPPING

Morgan et al. (1998) mapped the ANXA11 gene to 10q22.3-q23.1 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

By genomic sequence analysis, Bances et al. (2000) mapped the mouse
Anxa11 gene to chromosome 14.

REFERENCE 1. Bances, P.; Fernandez, M.-R.; Rodriguez-Garcia, M.-I.; Morgan,
R. O.; Fernandez, M.-P.: Annexin A11 (ANXA11) gene structure as the
progenitor of paralogous annexins and source of orthologous cDNA isoforms. Genomics 69:
95-103, 2000.

2. Misaki, Y.; Pruijn, G. J. M.; van der Kemp, A. W. C. M.; van Venrooij,
W. J.: The 56K autoantigen is identical to human annexin XI. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 4240-4246, 1994.

3. Morgan, R. O.; Bell, D. W.; Testa, J. R.; Fernandez, M. P.: Genomic
locations of ANX11 and ANX13 and the evolutionary genetics of human
annexins. Genomics 48: 100-110, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/27/1998

EDITED carol: 11/30/2009
carol: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/12/2009
terry: 10/22/2008
wwang: 6/22/2005
wwang: 6/17/2005
terry: 6/7/2005
carol: 8/4/2003
mgross: 9/17/1999
psherman: 4/27/1998

600921	TITLE *600921 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR 9; FGF9
;;GLIA-ACTIVATING FACTOR; GAF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) gene family, such as FGF9,
are peptide regulatory factors that act through distinct tyrosine kinase
receptors and are involved in various biologic processes during
embryogenesis and adult life, including implantation, morphogenesis,
angiogenesis, and possibly tumorigenesis (Miyamoto et al., 1993; Mattei
et al., 1995).

CLONING

Miyamoto et al. (1993) purified a 30-kD heparin-binding polypeptide in
the culture supernatant of a human glioma cell line. By PCR of the
isolated N-terminal sequence, followed by screening a human foreskin
cDNA library, Miyamoto et al. (1993) cloned FGF9. The deduced 208-amino
acid protein shares 94% sequence homology with rat Fgf9. Northern blot
analysis in human glioma cells detected a major 4.3-kb band and minor
3.4- and 2.7-kb bands. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues detected
strong expression in kidney and low expression in brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wu et al. (2009) stated that the FGF9 gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By radioactive chromosomal in situ hybridization, Mattei et al. (1995)
mapped the FGF9 gene to chromosome 13q11-q12.

By genomic sequence analysis, Katoh and Katoh (2005) mapped the FGF9
gene to chromosome 13q12.11 in a head-to-head orientation with the EFHA1
gene (610632). They determined that the FGF9-EFHA1 locus and the FGF20
(605558)-EFHA2 (610633) locus on chromosome 8p22 are paralogous regions
within the human genome.

GENE FUNCTION

Using the Cre/loxP system, Sun et al. (2000) found that maintenance of
Fgf9 and Fgf17 (603725) expression is dependent on Shh (600725), whereas
Fgf8 (600483) expression is not. Sun et al. (2000) developed a model in
which no individual Fgf expressed in the apical ectodermal ridge is
solely necessary to maintain Shh expression, but instead the combined
activity of 2 or more apical ectodermal ridge Fgfs function in a
positive feedback loop with Shh to control limb development.

Mariani et al. (2008) demonstrated that mouse limbs lacking Fgf4
(164980), Fgf9, and Fgf17 have normal skeletal pattern, indicating that
Fgf8 is sufficient among apical ectodermal ridge fibroblast growth
factors (AER-FGFs) to sustain normal limb formation. Inactivation of
Fgf8 alone causes a mild skeletal phenotype; however, when Mariani et
al. (2008) also removed different combinations of the other AER-FGF
genes, they obtained unexpected skeletal phenotypes of increasing
severity, reflecting the contribution that each FGF can make to the
total AER-FGF signal. Analysis of the compound mutant limb buds revealed
that, in addition to sustaining cell survival, AER-FGFs regulate
proximal-distal patterning gene expression during early limb bud
development, providing genetic evidence that AER-FGFs function to
specify a distal domain and challenging the longstanding hypothesis that
AER-FGF signaling is permissive rather than instructive for limb
patterning. Mariani et al. (2008) also developed a 2-signal model for
proximal-distal patterning to explain early specification.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a 5-generation Chinese family with autosomal dominant multiple
synostoses syndrome mapping to chromosome 13q11-q12 (SYNS3; 612961), Wu
et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the FGF9
gene (600921.0001) that segregated with disease and was not found in 250
unrelated ethnically matched controls.

ANIMAL MODEL

Colvin et al. (2001) reported male-to-female sex reversal in mice
lacking Fgf9, demonstrating a novel role for FGF signaling in testicular
embryogenesis. Fgf9 -/- mice also exhibited lung hypoplasia and died at
birth. Reproductive system phenotypes ranged from testicular hypoplasia
to complete sex reversal, with most Fgf9 -/- XY reproductive systems
appearing grossly female at birth. Fgf9 appeared to act downstream of
Sry (480000) to stimulate mesenchymal proliferation, mesonephric cell
migration, and Sertoli cell differentiation in the embryonic testis.
While Sry is found only in some mammals, Fgfs are highly conserved.
Thus, Fgfs may function in sex determination and reproductive system
development in many species.

The dominant mouse mutant 'elbow knee synostosis' (Eks) is characterized
by radiohumeral and tibiofemoral synostosis, craniosynostosis, and lung
hypoplasia. Harada et al. (2009) identified a mutation in the Fgf9 gene
that resulted in an asn143-to-thr substitution in Eks mice. The
Fgf9(Eks) mutation prevented homodimerization of Fgf9, consequently
decreasing the affinity of Fgf9 for heparin. As a result, Fgf9(Eks) was
more diffusible in developing tissues, leading to ectopic Fgf9 signaling
in prospective joints and sutures, where it repressed development. The
reduction in Fgf9 affinity for heparin appeared to be due to the
predominance of the monomeric form rather than to changes in its
intrinsic affinity for heparin. Harada et al. (2009) concluded that the
affinity of FGF9 for heparin sulfate proteoglycan, and therefore the
range of FGF9 signaling in developing tissue, is controlled, at least in
part, by FGF9 monomer-dimer equilibrium.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MULTIPLE SYNOSTOSES SYNDROME 3
FGF9, SER99ASN

In 12 affected members of a 5-generation Chinese family with autosomal
dominant multiple synostoses syndrome (SYNS3; 612961), Wu et al. (2009)
identified heterozygosity for a 296G-A transition in exon 2 of the FGF9
gene, resulting in a ser99-to-asn (S99N) substitution predicted to alter
binding to FGFR3 (134934). The mutation was not found in unaffected
family members or in 250 unrelated ethnically matched controls. In vitro
studies demonstrated that mutant FGF9 was expressed and secreted as
efficiently as wildtype in transfected cells; however, it induced
compromised chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, accompanied
by enhanced osteogenic differentiation and matrix mineralization of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Biochemical analysis revealed
that the S99N mutation caused significantly impaired FGF signaling, as
evidenced by diminished activity of the ERK1/2 pathway (see 176948) and
decreased beta-catenin (116806) and c-MYC (190080) expression when
compared with wildtype FGF9. Binding of mutant protein to the receptor
FGFR3 was severely impaired, although homodimerization of mutant FGF9 to
itself or wildtype was not detectably affected, providing a basis for
the observed defective FGF9 signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Colvin, J. S.; Green, R. P.; Schmahl, J.; Capel, B.; Ornitz, D.
M.: Male-to-female sex reversal in mice lacking fibroblast growth
factor 9. Cell 104: 875-889, 2001.

2. Harada, M.; Murakami, H.; Okawa, A.; Okimoto, N.; Hiraoka, S.;
Nakahara, T.; Akasaka, R.; Shiraishi, Y.; Futatsugi, N.; Mizutani-Koseki,
Y.; Kuroiwa, A.; Shirouzu, M.; Yokoyama, S.; Taiji, M.; Iseki, S.;
Ornitz, D. M.; Koseki, H.: FGF9 monomer-dimer equilibrium regulates
extracellular matrix affinity and tissue diffusion. Nature Genet. 41:
289-298, 2009.

3. Katoh, M.; Katoh, M.: Comparative genomics on FGF20 orthologs. Oncol.
Rep. 14: 287-290, 2005.

4. Mariani, F. V.; Ahn, C. P.; Martin, G. R.: Genetic evidence that
FGFs have an instructive role in limb proximal-distal patterning. Nature 453:
401-405, 2008.

5. Mattei, M.-G.; Penault-Llorca, F.; Coulier, F.; Birnbaum, D.:
The human FGF9 gene maps to chromosomal region 13q11-q12. Genomics 29:
811-812, 1995.

6. Miyamoto, M.; Naruo, K.-I.; Seko, C.; Matsumoto, S.; Kondo, T.;
Kurokawa, T.: Molecular cloning of a novel cytokine cDNA encoding
the ninth member of the fibroblast growth factor family, which has
a unique secretion property. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 4251-4259, 1993.

7. Sun, X.; Lewandoski, M.; Meyers, E. N.; Liu, Y.-H.; Maxson, R.
E., Jr.; Martin, G. R.: Conditional inactivation of Fgf4 reveals
complexity of signalling during limb bud development. Nature Genet. 25:
83-86, 2000.

8. Wu, X.; Gu, M.; Huang, L.; Liu, X.; Zhang, H.; Ding, X.; Xu, J.;
Cui, B.; Wang, L.; Lu, S; Chen, X.; Zhang, H.; Huang, W.; Yuan, W.;
Yang, J.; Gu, Q.; Fei, J.; Chen, Z.; Yuan, Z.; Wang, Z.: Multiple
synostoses syndrome is due to a missense mutation in exon 2 of FGF9
gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 53-63, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/30/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/6/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 12/7/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/16/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1995

EDITED carol: 10/13/2011
wwang: 8/13/2009
terry: 7/30/2009
mgross: 5/8/2009
terry: 5/6/2009
alopez: 6/19/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 12/7/2006
mgross: 4/16/2001
alopez: 5/1/2000
psherman: 4/12/1999
psherman: 4/15/1998
terry: 11/8/1995
mark: 11/7/1995

606818	TITLE *606818 DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE III; DPP3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DPP3 (EC 3.4.14.4) is one of the dipeptidyl aminopeptidases that remove
N-terminal dipeptides from physiologically active peptides such as
angiotensin (see 106150) or enkephalin (131330).

CLONING

Fukasawa et al. (1999) isolated a partial DPP3 cDNA clone from a
placenta cDNA library, using antibody to the purified protein as probe.
By mass spectrometry, Abramic et al. (2000) determined that the
molecular mass of full-length DPP3 is 82.5 kD; by SDS-PAGE, the apparent
molecular mass is 81.2 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation and enzyme analysis of the rat recombinant DPP3 protein,
Fukasawa et al. (1999) found that DPP3 shows zinc-dependent
metalloprotease activity and contains a conserved HELLGH motif with
similarity to the zincin HExxH consensus motif. Abramic et al. (2000)
noted that whereas the enzymes purified from rat and human erythrocytes
show the same molecular mass, pI, and enzyme substrates, they differ
significantly in their temperature stability, pH optima, kinetic
parameters, and sensitivity to divalent cations, sulfhydryl reagents,
and microbial protease inhibitors.

MAPPING

Fukasawa et al. (2000) mapped the DPP3 gene to chromosome 11q12-q13.1 by
FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Abramic, M.; Schleuder, D.; Dolovcak, L.; Schroder, W.; Strupat,
K.; Sagi, D.; Peter-Katalini, J.; Vitale, L.: Human and rat dipeptidyl
peptidase III: biochemical and mass spectrometric arguments for similarities
and differences. Biol. Chem. 381: 1233-1243, 2000.

2. Fukasawa, K.; Fukasawa, K. M.; Iwamoto, H.; Hirose, J.; Harada,
M.: The HELLGH motif of rat liver dipeptidyl peptidase III is involved
in zinc coordination and the catalytic activity of the enzyme. Biochemistry 38:
8299-8303, 1999.

3. Fukasawa, K. M.; Fukasawa, K.; Harada, M.: Assignment of the dipeptidyl
peptidase III gene (DPP3) to human chromosome 11 band q12-q13.1 by
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 88: 99-100, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/3/2002

EDITED wwang: 10/14/2008
carol: 4/4/2002
carol: 4/3/2002

600172	TITLE *600172 METAL-REGULATORY TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 1; MTF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The metallothioneins are small cysteine-rich proteins that bind heavy
metal ions such as zinc, cadmium, and copper with high affinity, and
have been functionally implicated in heavy metal detoxification and
radical scavenging. Transcription of metallothionein genes is induced by
exposure of cells to heavy metals. This induction is mediated by
metal-responsive promoter elements (MREs). Westin and Schaffner (1988)
and Radtke et al. (1993) cloned a mouse transcription factor, designated
Mtf-1, that binds to these metal-responsive promoter elements. Brugnera
et al. (1994) cloned the human counterpart of the mouse gene. The human
protein has 753 amino acids with 93% amino acid sequence identity to the
mouse protein and has an extension of 78 amino acids at the C terminus
without counterpart in the mouse. In the 2 species the factor has the
same overall structure, including 6 zinc fingers in the DNA binding
domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Brugnera et al. (1994) found that, in transfected cells, the human MTF1
gene mediated a more pronounced metal response of a reporter gene than
did the mouse factor, indicating that it is critically involved in zinc
induction of metallothionein genes.

Selvaraj et al. (2005) found that copper depletion in Drosophila
resulted in Mtf1-mediated activation of Ctr1b, which encodes a copper
importer. Activation depended on the same type of upstream MRE motifs as
are normally required for metal induction during copper toxicity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Brugnera et al. (1994) mapped the
MTF1 gene to 1p34-p32, with 1p33 as the most likely location.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gunes et al. (1998) generated mice deficient in MTF1 by targeted
disruption. Embryos lacking MTF1 died in utero at approximately day 14
of gestation. They showed impaired development of hepatocytes and, at
later stages, liver decay and generalized edema. Mtf1 -/- embryos failed
to transcribe metallothionein I and II genes, and also showed diminished
transcripts of the gene which encodes the heavy-chain subunit of the
gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase, a key enzyme for glutathione
biosynthesis. Metallothionein and glutathione are involved in heavy
metal homeostasis and detoxification processes, such as scavenging
reactive oxygen intermediates. Accordingly, primary mouse embryo
fibroblasts lacking MTF1 show increased susceptibility to the cytotoxic
effects of cadmium or hydrogen peroxide. Thus, Gunes et al. (1998)
concluded that MTF1 may help to control metal homeostasis and probably
cellular redox state, especially during liver development. They also
noted that the Mtf1-null mutant phenotype bears some similarity to those
of 2 other regulators of cellular stress response, namely c-jun and
NF-kappa-B (NFKB3; 164014).

REFERENCE 1. Brugnera, E.; Georgiev, O.; Radtke, F.; Heuchel, R.; Baker, E.;
Sutherland, G. R.; Schaffner, W.: Cloning, chromosomal mapping and
characterization of the human metal-regulatory transcription factor
MTF-1. Nucleic Acids Res. 22: 3167-3173, 1994.

2. Gunes, C.; Heuchel, R.; Georgiev, O.; Muller, K.-H.; Lichtlen,
P.; Bluthmann, H.; Marino, S.; Aguzzi, A.; Schaffner, W.: Embryonic
lethality and liver degeneration in mice lacking the metal-responsive
transcriptional activator MTF-1. EMBO J. 17: 2846-2854, 1998.

3. Radtke, F.; Heuchel, R.; Georgiev, O.; Hergersberg, M.; Gariglio,
M.; Dembic, Z.; Schaffner, W.: Cloned transcription factor MTF-1
activates the mouse metallothionein I promoter. EMBO J. 12: 1355-1362,
1993.

4. Selvaraj, A.; Balamurugan, K.; Yepiskoposyan, H.; Zhou, H.; Egli,
D.; Georgiev, O.; Thiele, D. J.; Schaffner, W.: Metal-responsive
transcription factor (MTF-1) handles both extremes, copper load and
copper starvation, by activating different genes. Genes Dev. 19:
891-896, 2005.

5. Westin, W.; Schaffner, W.: A zinc-responsive factor interacts
with a metal-regulated enhancer element (MRE) of the mouse metallothionein-I
gene. EMBO J. 7: 3763-3770, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/18/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/1/1994

EDITED wwang: 07/07/2005
terry: 6/13/2005
carol: 8/21/2000
terry: 8/18/2000
terry: 11/1/1994

612414	TITLE *612414 LEUCINE-RICH TRANSMEMBRANE O-METHYLTRANSFERASE; LRTOMT
;;LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 51; LRRC51;;
CATECHOL-O-METHYL-TRANSFERASE-2; COMT2
LEUCINE-RICH TRANSMEMBRANE O-METHYLTRANSFERASE 1, INCLUDED; LRTOMT1,
INCLUDED;;
LEUCINE-RICH TRANSMEMBRANE O-METHYLTRANSFERASE 2, INCLUDED; LRTOMT2,
INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By positional cloning of a candidate region for autosomal recessive
deafness-63 (DFNB63; 611451) on chromosome 11q13, Ahmed et al. (2008)
identified the LRRC51 gene, which they termed LRTOMT. Analysis of
corresponding clones isolated from a human liver cDNA library showed 5
alternatively spliced transcripts of LRTOMT that were widely expressed.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ahmed et al. (2008) determined that the LRTOMT gene contains 10 exons.
Exons 5, 7, and 8 have dual reading frames. LRTOMT has 2 alternative
reading frames and encodes 2 different proteins, LRTOMT1 and LRTOMT2,
that differ by translation start codons. When translation starts in exon
3, the encoded protein has a predicted transmembrane domain, 2
leucine-rich repeats, and is named LRTOMT1. Translation beginning in
exon 5 produces LRTOMT2, which is predicted to have a
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT; 116790) domain. Depending on the use
of an alternative acceptor splice site in exon 8, LRTOMT2 may have a
predicted transmembrane helix.

EVOLUTION

Ahmed et al. (2008) noted that unlike humans, mice have 2 genes, Lrrc51
and Tomt, that correspond to human LRTOMT. These genes are not fused.
Mouse Lrrc51 has 6 exons and is predicted to encode a 253-residue
protein with 2 leucine-rich repeats. Mouse Tomt contains 4 exons and is
predicted to encode a 258-residue protein with 1 transmembrane helix and
a COMT domain. Mouse Lrrc51 and human LRTOMT1 share 85% amino acid
identity, whereas mouse Tomt and isoform D-prime (residues 34 to 291) of
human LRTOMT2 share 91% amino acid identity. In protein from human liver
and kidney, antisera against mouse Tomt recognized a 38-kD LRTOMT2
protein. The findings indicated that mouse Lrrc51 and Tomt are separate
genes encoding 2 different proteins, and that human LRTOMT is a larger
fusion gene with transcripts that are translated in 2 different reading
frames giving rise to LRTOMT1 and LRTOMT2, which have no sequence
similarity to one another. Tomt expression was observed in mouse embryo
sensory cells of the cochlea, utricle, and saccule. Lrrc51 was detected
in inner and outer hair cells of the inner ear.

MAPPING

The LRTOMT gene maps to chromosome 11q13.3-q13.4 (Ahmed et al., 2008).
The mouse Lrrc51 and Tomt genes, which together are orthologous to human
LRTOMT, are located on chromosome 7qE3, which shows conserved synteny
with human 11q13.3-q13.4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with autosomal recessive
deafness 63, Ahmed et al. (2008) identified 4 different homozygous
mutations in the LRTOMT gene (612414.0001-612414.0004). The families
were of Turkish, Tunisian, and Pakistani origin.

Du et al. (2008) directly sequenced the 5 exons of the LRTOMT gene in
192 unrelated congenitally deaf progeny of consanguineous Iranian
parentage and identified homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in 1
family (612414.0005). A homozygous missense mutation was identified in
another family, but the effect of the mutation on protein and
methyltransferase activity was unclear.

ANIMAL MODEL

In 'add' homozygous mice, which exhibit hyperkinetic behavior that
includes circling, head tossing, and repetitive, short-lasting arching
of the neck, Du et al. (2008) performed mapping studies that localized
the region of interest to a 1.1-Mb interval on distal chromosome 7 and
identified a missense mutation at a highly conserved residue in the
4-exon Tomt gene. Formal behavioral and electrophysiologic tests
revealed that 'add' mice have profound sensorineural deafness and
vestibular impairment. In situ hybridization studies showed strong
expression of Tomt in the outer and inner hair cells of the cochlea and
vestibule, with no expression in any other tissue, including the CNS.
Electron microscopy demonstrated progressive deterioration of the organ
of Corti in 'add' homozygous mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 63
LRTOMT, IVS8DS, A-C, +4

In affected individuals of a Turkish family with DFNB63 (611451), Ahmed
et al. (2008) identified a homozygous A-to-C transversion in the splice
donor site of intron 8 (358+4A-C), resulting in the skipping of exon 8
and premature protein truncation (A29SfsX54).

.0002
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 63
LRTOMT, ARG81GLN

In affected individuals of a Tunisian family with DFNB63 (611451), Ahmed
et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 242G-A transition in exon 8 of the
LRTOMT gene, resulting in an arg81-to-gln (R81Q) substitution predicted
to alter the COMT domain of LRTOMT2.

.0003
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 63
LRTOMT, TRP105ARG

In affected individuals of a Tunisian family with DFNB63 (611451), Ahmed
et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 313T-C transition in exon 8 of the
LRTOMT gene, resulting in a trp105-to-arg (W105R) substitution predicted
to alter the COMT domain of LRTOMT2.

.0004
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 63
LRTOMT, GLU110LYS

In affected individuals of a Pakistani family with DFNB63 (611451),
Ahmed et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 328G-A transition in exon 8
of the LRTOMT gene, resulting in a glu110-to-lys (E110K) substitution
predicted to alter the COMT domain of LRTOMT2.

.0005
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 63
LRTOMT, TYR71TER

In the congenitally deaf proband of a consanguineous Iranian family
(DFNB63; 611451), Du et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a 213C-G
transversion in exon 3 of the LRTOMT gene, predicted to truncate the
protein before the catalytic domain, likely affecting methyltransferase
activity. The mutation was not found 192 ethnically matched controls.

REFERENCE 1. Ahmed, Z. M.; Masmoudi, S.; Kalay, E.; Belyantseva, I. A.; Mosrati,
M. A.; Collin, R. W. J.; Riazuddin, S.; Hmani-Aifa, M.; Venselaar,
H.; Kawar, M. N.; Tlili, A.; van der Zwaag, B.; and 14 others:
Mutations of LRTOMT, a fusion gene with alternative reading frames,
cause nonsyndromic deafness in humans. Nature Genet. 40: 1335-1340,
2008.

2. Du, X.; Schwander, M.; Moresco, E. M. Y.; Viviani, P.; Haller,
C.; Hildebrand, M. S.; Pak, K.; Tarantino, L.; Roberts, A.; Richardson,
H.; Koob, G.; Najmabadi, H.; Ryan, A. F. Smith, R. J. H.; Muller,
U.; Beutler, B.: A catechol-O-methyltransferase that is essential
for auditory function in mice and humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105:
14609-14614, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/10/2009

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 11/18/2008

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2010
wwang: 9/23/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
alopez: 11/24/2008
ckniffin: 11/19/2008
ckniffin: 11/18/2008

604688	TITLE *604688 A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN 5; AKAP5
;;A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN, 79-KD; AKAP79;;
AKAP75, BOVINE, HOMOLOG OF;;
AKAP150, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

A-kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs), such as AKAP5, ensure the fidelity of
second messenger signaling events by directing protein kinases and
phosphatases toward their preferred substrates. AKAP5 brings protein
kinase A (PKA; see 176911), the calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase
PP2B (see 114105), and protein kinase C (PKC; see 176960) to
postsynaptic membranes, where they facilitate phosphorylation-dependent
modulation of ion channels (summary by Tunquist et al., 2008).

CLONING

By screening a human thyroid cDNA library for PKA type II regulatory
(RII) subunit anchoring proteins, Carr et al. (1991) isolated a cDNA
encoding a novel member of the AKAP family, AKAP5, which the authors
designated H21. The deduced AKAP5 protein contains 427 amino acids with
an amphipathic helix of 14 amino acids that is the critical secondary
structure for RII binding.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Tunquist et al. (2008) found that
the mouse homolog of AKAP5, Akap150, was expressed in several
hippocampal structures, including CA1, CA3, and dentate gyrus. In
cultured hippocampal neurons, Akap150 was concentrated in dendrites and
spines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using binding studies of human AKAP79 and its bovine homolog, Akap75, to
RII-beta, Hirsch et al. (1992) determined that these proteins are
associated with particulate intracellular structures. Helical wheel
analysis revealed the potential for an amphipathic helix within the
N-terminal 179 amino acids.

By Western blot analysis, Carr et al. (1992) demonstrated that AKAP5 is
predominantly expressed in cerebral cortex and is a component of
fractions enriched for postsynaptic densities (PSD) where RII PKA
colocalizes. Mutation analysis demonstrated that substitution of proline
at a number of positions in the amphipathic helix but not elsewhere in
the protein disrupted RII binding. The authors suggested that AKAP5 may
anchor RII PKA at PSD and be involved in the regulation of postsynaptic
events.

Using an RII overlay assay and confocal microscopy, Schillace et al.
(2002) demonstrated AKAP5 expression in T lymphocytes. They suggested
that AKAP5 may function to inhibit interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680)
transcription by disrupting calcineurin (see 114105)-dependent
dephosphorylation of NFAT (see 600489).

Using RII overlay analysis, Williams (2002) identified at least 8 AKAPs
in mouse T cells, including Akap5. Using an inhibitor of AKAP binding to
PKA, the author observed the production of increased levels of Il2
(147680), Il4 (147780), Il5 (147850), and Ifng (147570) production, as
well as T cell proliferation, particularly in the presence of antigen.
Williams (2002) concluded that AKAPs are important in regulating the
activity of T lymphocytes and in determining their sensitivity to
incoming cAMP signals.

M-type potassium channels exert negative control over neuronal
excitability and can be suppressed by G protein-coupled receptors. Hoshi
et al. (2003) showed that Akap150 serves as an anchor for PKC and binds
directly to an intracellular region of the Kcnq2 (602235) M-type
potassium channel subunit. Functional studies showed that Akap150
promoted PKC-induced serine phosphorylation of Kcnq2, which in turn
facilitated the muscarinic receptor-induced suppression of M currents in
rat superior cervical ganglion neurons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium assigned the AKAP5
gene to chromosome 14q21-q24 (TMAP M90359).

ANIMAL MODEL

Tunquist et al. (2008) obtained Akap150 -/- mice at the expected
frequency. Akap150 -/- brains had no obvious morphologic abnormalities,
and cultured Akap150 -/- hippocampal neurons showed normal morphology
and number of dendritic spines. However, lack of Akap150 perturbed
targeting of the PKA holoenzyme to dendritic spines, with accumulation
of PKA to dendritic shafts. Mislocalization of PKA reduced
phosphorylation of the Glur1 (GRIA1; 138248) subunit of the postsynaptic
AMPA receptor, resulting in pronounced agonist-dependent downregulation
of the receptor and altered synaptic transmission. Compared with
wildtype mice, Akap150 -/- mice showed deficits in spatial memory and
motor coordination and strength, reduced anxiety, and altered muscarinic
agonist-induced seizures.

REFERENCE 1. Carr, D. W.; Stofko-Hahn, R. E.; Fraser, I. D.; Bishop, S. M.;
Acott, T. S.; Brennan, R. G.; Scott, J. D.: Interaction of the regulatory
subunit (RII) of cAMP-dependent protein kinase with RII-anchoring
proteins occurs through an amphipathic helix binding motif. J. Biol.
Chem. 266: 14188-14192, 1991.

2. Carr, D. W.; Stofko-Hahn, R. E.; Fraser, I. D. C.; Cone, R. D.;
Scott, J. D.: Localization of the cAMP dependent protein kinase to
the postsynaptic densities by A-kinase anchoring proteins. Characterization
of AKAP79. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 16816-16823, 1992.

3. Hirsch, A. H.; Glantz, S. B.; Li, Y.; You, Y.; Rubin, C. S.: Cloning
and expression of an intron-less gene for AKAP 75, an anchor protein
for the regulatory subunit of cAMP dependent protein kinase II beta. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 2131-2134, 1992.

4. Hoshi, N.; Zhang, J.-S.; Omaki, M.; Takeuchi, T.; Yokoyama, S.;
Wanaverbecq, N.; Langeberg, L. K.; Yoneda, Y.; Scott, J. D.; Brown,
D. A.; Higashida, H.: AKAP150 signaling complex promotes suppression
of the M-current by muscarinic agonists. Nature Neurosci. 6: 564-571,
2003.

5. Schillace, R. V.; Andrews, S. F.; Liberty, G. A.; Davey, M. P.;
Carr, D. W.: Identification and characterization of myeloid translocation
gene 16b as a novel A kinase anchoring protein in T lymphocytes. J.
Immun. 168: 1590-1599, 2002.

6. Tunquist, B. J.; Hoshi, N.; Guire, E. S.; Zhang, F.; Mullendorff,
K.; Langeberg, L. K.; Raber, J.; Scott, J. D.: Loss of AKAP150 perturbs
distinct neuronal processes in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105:
12557-12562, 2008.

7. Williams, R. O.: Cutting edge: A-kinase anchor proteins are involved
in maintaining resting T cells in an inactive state. J. Immun. 168:
5392-5396, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/19/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/27/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/16/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/02/2009
terry: 11/19/2009
cwells: 8/4/2003
alopez: 6/3/2003
carol: 5/23/2003
ckniffin: 5/20/2003
mgross: 3/27/2002
carol: 3/17/2000

601655	TITLE *601655 EYES ABSENT 3; EYA3
;;EYES ABSENT, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 3
DESCRIPTION Abdelhak et al. (1997) identified 3 members of a novel family homologous
to Drosophila 'eyes absent' gene (eya). One of these, EYA1 (601653), was
demonstrated to be mutant in cases of branchiootorenal dysplasia (BOR;
113650). EYA2 (601654) and EYA3, like EYA1, are expressed in the ninth
week of human development and may also underlie developmental defects.

Xu et al. (1997) showed that in the limbs of 10.5-day mouse embryos,
Eya1 expression was largely restricted to the flexor tendons, whereas
Eya2 was expressed in the extensor tendons and probably also in the
ligments of the phalanges. They demonstrated that the
proline/serine/threonine-rich N-terminal regions of the protein products
of the Eya1, Eya2, and Eya3 genes have transcriptional activator
activity. These results supported a role for the Eya genes in connective
tissue patterning in the limbs.

Zimmerman et al. (1997) mapped the murine Eya3 gene to mouse chromosome
4 in the region syntenic with human 1p36. In the mouse, no recombination
was detected between the Eya3 gene and the gene encoding the oncogene
FGR (164940) which is located on 1p36.2-p36.1. By fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Zimmerman et al. (1997) established that the human EYA3
gene is on 1p36.

REFERENCE 1. Abdelhak, S.; Kalatzis, V.; Heilig, R.; Compain, S.; Samson, D.;
Vincent, C.; Weil, D.; Cruaud, C.; Sahly, I.; Leibovici, M.; Bitner-Glindzicz,
M.; Francis, M.; Lacombe, D.; Vigneron, J.; Charachon, R.; Boven,
K.; Bedbeder, P.; Van Regemorter, N.; Weissenbach, J.; Petit, C.:
A human homologue of the Drosophila eyes absent gene underlies branchio-oto-renal
(BOR) syndrome and identifies a novel gene family. Nature Genet. 15:
157-164, 1997.

2. Xu, P.-X.; Cheng, J.; Epstein, J. A.; Maas, R. L.: Mouse Eya genes
are expressed during limb tendon development and encode a transcriptional
activation function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 11974-11979, 1997.

3. Zimmerman, J. E.; Bui, Q. T.; Steingrimsson, E.; Nagle, D. L.;
Fu, W.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N. B.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.;
Bucan, M.; Bonini, N. M.: Cloning and characterization of two vertebrate
homologs of the Drosophila eyes absent gene. Genome Res. 7: 128-141,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/14/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/2/1997

EDITED terry: 01/22/2001
carol: 7/16/1999
kayiaros: 7/14/1999
carol: 5/1/1998
mark: 6/20/1997
mark: 4/8/1997
terry: 4/2/1997
mark: 2/2/1997
terry: 1/31/1997
mark: 1/31/1997

611412	TITLE *611412 N-ACETYLNEURAMINATE PYRUVATE LYASE; NPL
;;CHROMOSOME 1 OPEN READING FRAME 13; C1ORF13;;
DIHYDRODIPICOLINATE SYNTHASE;;
C112
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

N-acetylneuraminate pyruvate lyase (EC 4.1.3.3) controls the cellular
concentration of sialic acid by catalyzing the conversion of sialic acid
into acylmannosamines and pyruvate (Wu et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching for genes in a region of chromosome 1 associated with
hereditary prostate cancer (HPC1; 601518), followed by screening cDNA
libraries, Sood et al. (2001) cloned NPL, which they called C112. The
deduced protein contains 320 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
detected weak expression of a 5-kb transcript in all human tissues
examined.

By large-scale sequence analysis of clones obtained from a fetal brain
cDNA library, Wu et al. (2005) cloned a splice variant of NPL. The
deduced 301-amino acid splice variant, which they called NPLV2, contains
an N-terminal dihydrodipicolinate synthase (DHDPS) domain and 5 putative
N-terminal phosphorylation sites. RT-PCR detected highest expression in
liver, kidney, and peripheral blood leukocytes, and lower expression in
placenta, pancreas, spleen, thymus, ovary, and small intestine. By
database analysis, Wu et al. (2005) identified 3 other NPL splice
variants.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wu et al. (2005) determined that the NPL gene contains 11 exons and
spans over 40 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sood et al. (2001) mapped the NPL gene to
chromosome 1q25.

REFERENCE 1. Sood, R.; Bonner, T. I.; Makalowska, I.; Stephan, D. A.; Robbins,
C. M.; Connors, T. D.; Morgenbesser, S. D.; Su, K.; Faruque, M. U.;
Pinkett, H.; Graham, C.; Baxevanis, A. D.; Klinger, K. W.; Landes,
G. M.; Trent, J. M.; Carpten, J. D.: Cloning and characterization
of 13 novel transcripts and the human RGS8 gene from the 1q25 region
encompassing the hereditary prostate cancer (HPC1) locus. Genomics 73:
211-222, 2001.

2. Wu, M.; Gu, S.; Xu, J.; Zou, X.; Zheng, H.; Jin, Z.; Xie, Y.; Ji,
C.; Mao, Y.: A novel splice variant of human gene NPL, mainly expressed
in human liver, kidney and peripheral blood leukocyte. DNA Seq. 16:
137-142, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/7/2007

EDITED wwang: 09/07/2007

602741	TITLE *602741 PROTEIN KINASE, AMP-ACTIVATED, NONCATALYTIC, BETA-2; PRKAB2
;;AMP-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE, NONCATALYTIC, BETA-2;;
AMPK-BETA-2
DESCRIPTION The mammalian 5-prime-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) appears to act
as a metabolic stress-sensing protein kinase. AMPK is a heterotrimeric
protein composed of a catalytic alpha subunit, a noncatalytic beta
subunit, and a noncatalytic gamma subunit. See PRKAA1 (602739) and
PRKAB1 (602740) for additional background.

CLONING

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with
AMPK-alpha-2 (PRKAA2; 600497), Thornton et al. (1998) isolated human
skeletal muscle cDNAs encoding AMPK-beta-2 (PRKAB2). The predicted
272-amino acid AMPK-beta-2 protein has 71% sequence identity with
AMPK-beta-1 (PRKAB1). Northern blot analysis revealed that AMPK-beta-2
is expressed as a 7.5-kb mRNA in a variety of human tissues, with the
highest levels in skeletal and cardiac muscle. Based on their different
expression patterns in rat, Thornton et al. (1998) suggested that the
Ampk-beta-1 and Ampk-beta-2 isoforms have tissue-specific roles.

REFERENCE 1. Thornton, C.; Snowden, M. A.; Carling, D.: Identification of a
novel AMP-activated protein kinase beta subunit isoform that is highly
expressed in skeletal muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 12443-12450, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/22/1998

EDITED alopez: 05/03/2010
terry: 5/20/1999
psherman: 6/24/1998

601310	TITLE *601310 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IVA, POLYPEPTIDE 11; CYP4A11
;;OMEGA-HYDROXYLASE, FATTY ACID;;
CYP4AII
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The human P450 enzymes encoded by CYP4 genes (see 124075) represent a
distinct lineage of the P450 family. The CYP4A subfamily is involved in
the metabolism of medium- and long-chain fatty acids (Cho et al., 2005).

CLONING

Palmer et al. (1993) noted that mammalian CYP4A enzymes catalyze
selective hydroxylation of a primary carbon-hydrogen bond in medium- and
long-chain fatty acids. Palmer et al. (1993) cloned and characterized a
CYP4A-encoding gene, designated CYP4AII, by screening a human kidney
cDNA library using a rabbit CYP4A cDNA probe. By Northern and RNase
protection analysis, they showed that the gene is expressed
predominantly in kidney and somewhat in liver.

Bell et al. (1993) cloned human, mouse, and guinea pig CYP4A cDNAs,
including human CYP4A11.

Kawashima et al. (1994) purified CYP4A fatty acid omega-hydroxylase,
named P450HL-omega by them, from human liver. They cloned a CYP4A11 cDNA
by screening a human liver cDNA library with a rabbit CYP4A5 cDNA. The
CYP4A11 cDNA encodes a predicted 519-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 59.4 kD. The deduced sequence of residues 5
through 25 was identical to the N-terminal amino acid sequence of
purified P450HL-omega, except for 1 undetermined residue. By Western
blot analysis of transfected yeast microsomes, Kawashima et al. (1994)
detected a specific protein with a mass of 52 kD, which is identical to
that of purified P450HL-omega. Northern blot analysis showed that
CYP4A11 is expressed as a 2.6-kb transcript.

Imaoka et al. (1993) cloned a variant cDNA of CYP4A11, termed CYP4A11v,
from a human kidney cDNA library. The CYP4A11v cDNA contains a deletion
of a single adenine residue, resulting in a frameshift and the
production of a predicted 591-amino acid protein. Several differences in
the 3-prime untranslated region of the CYP4A11v cDNA were also detected.
Baculovirus-mediated expression of the CYP4A11v cDNA yielded an unstable
protein that did not efficiently metabolize lauric acid.

Using PCR analysis, Savas et al. (2003) found that both CYP4A11 and
CYP4A22 (615341) were expressed in 100 human liver tissue samples.
Quantitative real-time PCR of 7 samples revealed that the enzymes were
independently and variably expressed and that expression of CYP4A11 was
significantly higher than that of CYP4A22.

GENE FUNCTION

Palmer et al. (1993) characterized the catalytic activity of expressed
recombinant CYP4A11 on various fatty acids and prostaglandins and
concluded that the enzyme is a fatty acid omega-hydroxylase with
turnover numbers of 9.8, 2.2, and 0.55 per min for lauric, palmitic, and
arachidonic acids, respectively.

Powell et al. (1996) demonstrated that CYP4A11 is the principal lauric
acid omega-hydroxylase expressed in human liver.

Pikuleva and Waterman (2013) stated that CYP4A11 and CYP4A22 (615341)
oxidize arachidonic acid to 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid in the
endoplasmic reticulum of kidney tubules.

Savas et al. (2003) found that expression of CYP4A11 was undetectable in
subconfluent human hepatoma HepG2 cells expressing human PPAR-alpha
(PPARA; 170998) or a murine Ppar-alpha mutant with compromised
ligand-dependent transactivation. However, upon attaining confluence,
CYP4A11, but not CYP4A22, was upregulated in HepG2 cells expressing
mutant Ppar-alpha following exposure to a Ppar-alpha agonist.
Dexamethasone also induced CYP4A11, but not CYP4A22, expression, and
dexamethasone-induced CYP4A11 was independent of PPAR-alpha.

MAPPING

Bell et al. (1993) mapped the human CYP4A11 gene to chromosome 1 by PCR
of somatic cell hybrid DNAs.

By genomic sequence analysis, Nelson et al. (2004 ) mapped the CYP4A11
gene to a cluster of cytochrome P450 genes on chromosome 1p33.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cho et al. (2005) presented 70 genetic variants of the CYP4A11 gene
identified in 24 DNA samples from the Korean population. Sixty variants
were intronic.

- Association with Essential Hypertension

Gainer et al. (2005) screened the CYP4A11 gene and identified 9 variants
with allelic frequencies greater than 1%, among them an 8590C-T
transition in exon 11 resulting in a phe434-to-ser (F434S) substitution.
Functional studies revealed that the ser434 replacement reduced by more
than half the 20-HETE synthase activity of CYP4A11. In a population of
392 white individuals from Tennessee, Gainer et al. (2005) found that
the age, BMI, and gender-adjusted odds ratio of hypertension (see
145500) attributable to the 8590C variant was 2.31 compared with the
reference 8590TT genotype. In 1,538 individuals from the Framingham
Heart Study, the adjusted odds ratio of hypertension associated with the
8590C variant was 1.23, and it was 1.33 when individuals with diabetes
were excluded. The variant was not associated with hypertension in a
population of 120 black individuals.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nakagawa et al. (2006) created mice lacking Cyp4a10, an ortholog of
human CYP4A11. Homozygous mutant mice developed normally and lacked
obvious symptoms of disease or organ malformation, and disruption of the
Cyp4a10 gene had little or no effect on kidney morphology or renal
function before or after animal salt loading. Cyp4a10-null mice fed a
low-salt diet were normotensive, but they became hypertensive when fed
normal or high-salt diets. Hypertensive Cyp4a10-null mice had a
dysfunctional kidney epithelial sodium channel (see SCNN1D; 601328) and
became normotensive when administered amiloride, a selective inhibitor
of this channel. Nakagawa et al. (2006) concluded that arachidonate
monooxygenases alter renal sodium reabsorption and blood pressure and
have a direct role in the gating activity of the kidney epithelial
sodium channel.

Using transgenic mice expressing human CYP4A11, Savas et al. (2009)
confirmed that expression of CYP4A11 was regulated by Ppar-alpha.
Fasting or dietary administration of a PPAR-alpha agonist increased
hepatic and renal CYP4A11 expression, and these responses were abrogated
in Ppar-alpha -/- mice. Basal liver CYP4A11 levels were reduced
differentially in Ppar-alpha -/- females (over 95%) and males (less than
50%). In Ppar-alpha -/- males, continuous infusion of growth hormone
(see GH1, 139250) to mimic the female growth hormone pattern reduced
expression of CYP4A11 to near female levels. Treatment with growth
hormone decreased expression of CYP4A11 equally in both male and female
wildtype mice.

NOMENCLATURE

The gene encoding this enzyme has also been called CYP4A2, which is
presumably a derivation of CYP4AII.

REFERENCE 1. Bell, D. R.; Plant, N. J.; Rider, C. G.; Na, L.; Brown, S.; Ateitalla,
I.; Acharya, S. K.; Davies, M. H.; Elias, E.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert,
D. J.; Copeland, N. G.; Elcombe, C. R.: Species-specific induction
of cytochrome P-450 4A RNAs: PCR cloning of partial guinea-pig, human
and mouse CYP4A cDNAs. Biochem. J. 294: 173-180, 1993.

2. Cho, B. H.; Park, B. L.; Kim, L. H.; Chung, H. S.; Shin, H. D.
: Highly polymorphic human CYP4A11 gene. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 259-263,
2005.

3. Gainer, J. V.; Bellamine, A.; Dawson, E. P.; Womble, K. E.; Grant,
S. W.; Wang, Y.; Cupples, L. A.; Guo, C.-Y.; Demissie, S.; O'Donnell,
C. J.; Brown, N. J.; Waterman, M. R.; Capdevila, J. H.: Functional
variant of CYP4A11 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid synthase is associated
with essential hypertension. Circulation 111: 63-69, 2005.

4. Imaoka, S.; Ogawa, H.; Kimura, S.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Complete cDNA
sequence and cDNA-directed expression of CYP4A11, a fatty acid omega-hydroxylase
expressed in human kidney. DNA Cell Biol. 12: 893-899, 1993.

5. Kawashima, H.; Kusunose, E.; Kikuta, Y.; Kinoshita, H.; Tanaka,
S.; Yamamoto, S.; Kishimoto, T.; Kusunose, M.: Purification and cDNA
cloning of human liver CYP4A fatty acid omega-hydroxylase. J. Biochem. 116:
74-80, 1994.

6. Nakagawa, K.; Holla, V. R.; Wei, Y.; Wang, W.-H.; Gatica, A.; Wei,
S.; Mei, S.; Miller, C. M.; Cha, D. R.; Price, E., Jr.; Zent, R.;
Pozzi, A.; Breyer, M. D.; Guan, Y.; Falck, J. R.; Waterman, M. R.;
Capdevila, J. H.: Salt-sensitive hypertension is associated with
dysfunctional Cyp4a10 gene and kidney epithelial sodium channel. J.
Clin. Invest. 116: 1696-1702, 2006.

7. Nelson, D. R.; Zeldin, D. C.; Hoffman, S. M. G.; Maltais, L. J.;
Wain, H. M.; Nebert, D. W.: Comparison of cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes
from the mouse and human genomes, including nomenclature recommendations
for genes, pseudogenes and alternative-splice variants. Pharmacogenetics 14:
1-18, 2004.

8. Palmer, C. N. A.; Richardson, T. H.; Griffin, K. J.; Hsu, M.-H.;
Muerhoff, A. S.; Clark, J. E.; Johnson, E. F.: Characterization of
a cDNA encoding a human kidney, cytochrome P-450 4A fatty acid omega-hydroxylase
and the cognate enzyme expressed in Escherichia coli. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1172: 161-166, 1993.

9. Pikuleva, I. A.; Waterman, M. R.: Cytochromes P450: roles in diseases. J.
Biol. Chem. 288: 17091-17098, 2013.

10. Powell, P. K.; Wolf, I.; Lasker, J. M.: Identification of CYP4A11
as the major lauric acid omega-hydroxylase in human liver microsomes. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 335: 219-226, 1996.

11. Savas, U.; Hsu, M.-H.; Johnson, E. F.: Differential regulation
of human CYP4A genes by peroxisome proliferators and dexamethasone Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 409: 212-220, 2003.

12. Savas, U.; Machemer, D. E. W.; Hsu, M.-H.; Gaynor, P.; Lasker,
J. M.; Tukey, R. H.; Johnson, E. F.: Opposing roles of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha and growth hormone in the regulation
of CYP4A11 expression in a transgenic mouse model. J. Biol. Chem. 284:
16541-16552, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - update 8/13/2013.: 8/13/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/20/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/2/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/22/2005
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/27/1998

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 6/17/1996

EDITED tpirozzi: 09/23/2013
tpirozzi: 8/14/2013
tpirozzi: 8/13/2013
tpirozzi: 7/26/2013
carol: 5/16/2008
wwang: 2/15/2007
mgross: 8/2/2006
terry: 7/20/2006
carol: 9/22/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
wwang: 7/26/2005
ckniffin: 7/22/2005
joanna: 5/27/1998
psherman: 5/27/1998
mark: 7/8/1997
jenny: 4/8/1997
terry: 7/15/1996
mark: 6/18/1996
mark: 6/17/1996
terry: 6/17/1996
mark: 6/17/1996

602863	TITLE *602863 WINGLESS-TYPE MMTV INTEGRATION SITE FAMILY, MEMBER 9A; WNT9A
;;WINGLESS-TYPE MMTV INTEGRATION SITE FAMILY, MEMBER 14; WNT14
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The WNT gene family consists of structurally related genes that encode
cysteine-rich secreted glycoproteins that act as extracellular signaling
factors. WNT genes are implicated in a wide variety of biologic
processes including cell fate determination and patterning in early
embryos and in cell growth and/or differentiation in certain adult
mammalian tissues. Bergstein et al. (1997) stated that all WNT genes
identified in mammals encode proteins of approximately 350 to 400 amino
acids with an amino-terminal secretory signal peptide followed by a
short domain of low sequence conservation and then by a large conserved
domain that includes 22 cysteine residues, the relative spacing of which
is exactly conserved in the majority of known WNT proteins.

CLONING

By PCR with degenerate primers, Bergstein et al. (1997) isolated 2 novel
members of the WNT family in humans, WNT14 and WNT15 (602864). WNT14
shows 75% amino acid identity to chicken Wnt14 and 54% identity to human
WNT15. Bergstein et al. (1997) reported that, based on both an unusual
cysteine spacing pattern and amino acid sequence comparison, WNT14 and
WNT15 are more closely related to Drosophila Wnt4 (603490) and hagfish
Wnt9 than to other members of the WNT family and may share common
ancestry.

During analysis of human genome draft sequence containing WNT3A
(606359), Saitoh et al. (2001) identified WNT14 gene fragments. Using
RACE and cDNA-PCR, they assembled a WNT14 cDNA sequence. WNT14 encodes a
deduced 365-amino acid protein containing an N-linked glycosylation site
and residues conserved among members of the WNT family. Northern blot
analysis detected a 4.4-kb WNT14 transcript at moderate levels in adult
skeletal muscle and heart and at low levels in placenta, adult lung,
pancreas, spleen, ovary, fetal brain, and fetal lung. Using cDNA-PCR,
Saitoh et al. (2001) detected WNT14 expression in gastric cancer cell
lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Hartmann and Tabin (2001) presented evidence that Wnt14 plays a central
role in initiating synovial joint formation in the chick limb. Wnt14 was
expressed in joint-forming regions prior to the segmentation of the
cartilage elements, and local misexpression of Wnt14 induced morphologic
and molecular changes characteristic of the first steps of joint
formation. Induction of an ectopic joint-like region by Wnt14 suppressed
the formation of the immediately adjacent endogenous joint, potentially
providing insight into the spacing of joints.

Guo et al. (2004) found that several Wnt genes, including Wnt4, Wnt14,
and Wnt16 (606267), were expressed in overlapping and complementary
patterns in developing mouse synovial joints, where beta-catenin
(CTNNB1; 116806) protein level and transcription activity were
upregulated. Removal of Ctnnb1 early in mesenchymal progenitor cells
promoted chondrocyte differentiation and blocked the activity of Wnt14
in joint formation. Ectopic expression of an activated form of Ctnnb1 or
Wnt14 in early differentiating chondrocytes induced ectopic joint
formation both morphologically and molecularly. In contrast, genetic
removal of Ctnnb1 in chondrocytes led to joint fusion. Guo et al. (2004)
concluded that the Wnt/CTNNB1 signaling pathway is necessary and
sufficient to induce early steps of synovial joint formation, and they
suggested that WNT4, WNT14, and WNT16 may play redundant roles in
synovial joint induction by signaling through the CTNNB1-mediated
canonical Wnt pathway.

GENE STRUCTURE

Saitoh et al. (2001) determined that the WNT14 gene contains 4 exons and
spans about 27 kb of genomic DNA. WNT14 and WNT3A are clustered in a
head-to-head manner with an interval of about 58 kb.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of a monochromosomal human-hamster somatic cell hybrid
DNA panel, Bergstein et al. (1997) mapped the WNT14 gene to human
chromosome 1. By FISH, Saitoh et al. (2001) refined the mapping to 1q42.

REFERENCE 1. Bergstein, I.; Eisenberg, L. M.; Bhalerao, J.; Jenkins, N. A.;
Copeland, N. G.; Osborne, M. P.; Bowcock, A. M.; Brown, A. M. C.:
Isolation of two novel WNT genes, WNT14 and WNT15, one of which (WNT15)
is closely linked to WNT3 on human chromosome 17q21. Genomics 46:
450-458, 1997.

2. Guo, X.; Day, T. F.; Jiang, X.; Garrett-Beal, L.; Topol, L.; Yang,
Y.: Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is sufficient and necessary for synovial
joint formation. Genes Dev. 18: 2404-2417, 2004.

3. Hartmann, C.; Tabin, C. J.: Wnt-14 plays a pivotal role in inducing
synovial joint formation in the developing appendicular skeleton. Cell 104:
341-351, 2001.

4. Saitoh, T.; Hirai, M.; Katoh, M.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of WNT3A and WNT14 clustered in human chromosome 1q42 region. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 284: 1168-1175, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/9/2004
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/8/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/7/2001

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 7/21/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/21/2005
mgross: 12/9/2004
alopez: 10/17/2002
carol: 10/8/2001
mgross: 3/7/2001
carol: 7/29/1998

602738	TITLE *602738 KARYOPHERIN BETA-1; KPNB1
;;IMPORTIN BETA-1
DESCRIPTION The import of proteins into the nucleus proceeds through the nuclear
pore complex. Cytoplasmic proteins with a nuclear localization signal
(NLS) bind to an importin-alpha (see 600685)/importin-beta heterodimer.
The trimeric complex docks to the cytoplasmic periphery of the nuclear
pore complex and is subsequently translocated through as a single
entity. The import reaction is terminated by the direct binding of RAN
(601179) to KPNB, which dissociates the importin heterodimer.

CLONING

Gorlich et al. (1995) purified a 90-kD subunit of importin (importin-90)
from Xenopus egg extracts and obtained a 188-amino acid partial protein
sequence from internal peptides. Using the partial amino acid sequence,
they isolated cDNAs encoding human importin-90, or KPNB1, from a HeLa
cell cDNA library. The sequence of the predicted 876-amino acid human
KPNB1 protein is 93% identical to the 188-amino acid partial sequence of
Xenopus importin-90. Gorlich et al. (1995) showed that Xenopus
importin-60 and importin-90 cooperate to form an import receptor that
distinguishes functional NLSs from nonfunctional ones and selectively
binds import substrates to the nuclear envelope. Independently, Chi et
al. (1995) identified cDNAs encoding human KPNB1. Based on the 97-kD
product of in vitro translation, they designated the protein p97. Using
a monoclonal antibody against bovine p97, Chi et al. (1995) localized
p97 to the cytoplasm and nuclear envelope of bovine kidney cells. These
authors found that recombinant human p97 binds zinc and that a bound
metal ion is required for nuclear envelope-binding activity. Kutay et
al. (1997) identified the regions of KPNB1 that interact with RAN,
importin-alpha, and the nuclear pore complex.

GENE FUNCTION

The guanosine triphosphatase Ran (601179) stimulates assembly of
microtubule asters and spindles in mitotic Xenopus egg extracts. A
carboxy-terminal region of the nuclear mitotic apparatus protein (NUMA;
164009), a nuclear protein required for organizing mitotic spindle
poles, mimics Ran's ability to induce asters. This NUMA fragment also
specifically interacted with importin-beta. Wiese et al. (2001) showed
that importin-beta is an inhibitor of microtubule aster assembly in
Xenopus egg extracts and that Ran regulates the interaction between
importin-beta and NUMA. Importin-beta therefore links NUMA to regulation
by Ran. Wiese et al. (2001) concluded that this suggests that similar
mechanisms regulate nuclear import during interphase and spindle
assembly during mitosis.

The survival of motor neuron (SMN1; 600354) protein is mutated in
patients with spinal muscular atrophy. SMN is part of a multiprotein
complex required for biogenesis of the Sm class of small nuclear
ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). Following assembly of the Sm core domain,
snRNPs are transported to the nucleus via importin-beta. Sm snRNPs
contain a nuclear localization signal (NLS) consisting of a
2,2,7-trimethylguanosine (TMG) cap and the Sm core. Snurportin-1
(607902) is the adaptor protein that recognizes both the TMG cap and
importin-beta. Narayanan et al. (2002) reported that a mutant snurportin
construct lacking the importin-beta-binding (IBB) domain, but containing
an intact TMG cap-binding domain, localized primarily to the nucleus,
whereas full-length snurportin localized to the cytoplasm. Snurportin
interacted with SMN, Gemin3 (606168), Sm snRNPs, and importin-beta. In
the presence of ribonucleases, the interactions with SMN and Sm proteins
were abolished, suggesting that snRNAs may mediate this interplay. Cell
fractionation studies showed that snurportin bound preferentially to
cytoplasmic SMN complexes. Additionally, SMN directly interacted with
importin-beta in a GST-pull-down assay, suggesting that the SMN complex
may represent the Sm core NLS receptor predicted by previous studies.
The authors concluded that, following Sm protein assembly, the SMN
complex may persist until the final stages of cytoplasmic snRNP
maturation, and may provide somatic cell RNPs with an alternative NLS.

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was KPNB1. These 37 genes included several
splicing factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects.
In addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

Caudron et al. (2005) reported that the spatial cues necessary for
microtubules to reproducibly self-organize during cell division are
provided by chromosome-mediated interaction gradients between the small
guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Ran and importin-beta. This produces
activity gradients that determine the spatial distribution of
microtubule nucleation and stabilization around chromosomes and that are
essential for the self-organization of microtubules into a bipolar
spindle.

Kalab et al. (2006) examined the Ran-importin-beta system in cells by
conventional and fluorescence lifetime microscopy using a biosensor,
termed Rango, that increases its fluorescence resonance energy transfer
signal when released from importin-beta by RanGTP. Rango is
predominantly free in mitotic cells, but is further liberated around
mitotic chromatin. In vitro experiments and modeling showed that this
localized increase of free cargoes corresponds to changes in RanGTP
concentration sufficient to stabilize microtubules in extracts. In
cells, the Ran-importin-beta-cargo gradient kinetically promotes spindle
formation but is largely dispensable once the spindle has been
established. Kalab et al. (2006) observed that the Ran system also
affects spindle pole formation and chromosome congression in vivo. Kalab
et al. (2006) concluded that conserved Ran-regulated pathways are
involved in multiple, parallel processes required for spindle function,
but that their relative contribution differs in chromatin- versus
centrosome/kinetochore-driven spindle assembly systems.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Bayliss et al. (2000) described the crystal structure of a complex
between KPNB1 residues 1 to 442 and 5 tandem FxFG nucleoporin repeats
from yeast Nsp1.

Lee et al. (2003) showed the crystal structure of importin-beta
complexed with the active form of SREBP2 (600481). Importin-beta uses
characteristic long helices like a pair of chopsticks to interact with
an SREBP2 dimer. Importin-beta changes its conformation to reveal a
pseudo-2-fold symmetry on its surface structure so that it can
accommodate a symmetric dimer molecule.

To provide a basis for understanding the crucial cargo-release step of
nuclear import, Lee et al. (2005) presented the crystal structure of
full-length yeast importin-beta (Kap95) complexed with RanGTP (see
602362). Lee et al. (2005) identified a key interaction site where the
RanGTP switch I loop binds to the carboxy-terminal arch of Kap95. This
interaction produced a change in helicoidal pitch that locks Kap95 in a
conformation that cannot bind importin-alpha (see 600685) or cargo. Lee
et al. (2005) suggested an allosteric mechanism for nuclear import
complex disassembly by RanGTP.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ayala-Madrigal et al. (2000)
mapped the KPNB1 gene to chromosome 17q21. By FISH, Matsuda et al.
(1996) mapped the mouse Kpnb1 gene to the proximal end of chromosome
11D.

REFERENCE 1. Ayala-Madrigal, M. L.; Doerr, S.; Ramirez-Duenas, M. L.; Hansmann,
I.: Assignment of KPNA4 and KPNB1 encoding karyopherin alpha 4 and
beta 1 to human chromosome bands 11q22 and 17q21 respectively, by
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 89: 258-259, 2000.

2. Bayliss, R.; Littlewood, T.; Stewart, M.: Structural basis for
the interaction between FxFG nucleoporin repeats and importin-beta
in nuclear trafficking. Cell 102: 99-108, 2000.

3. Caudron, M.; Bunt, G.; Bastiaens, P.; Karsenti, E.: Spatial coordination
of spindle assembly by chromosome-mediated signaling gradients. Science 309:
1373-1376, 2005.

4. Chi, N. C.; Adam, E. J. H.; Adam, S. A.: Sequence and characterization
of cytoplasmic nuclear protein import factor p97. J. Cell Biol. 130:
265-274, 1995.

5. Gorlich, D.; Kostka, S.; Kraft, R.; Dingwall, C.; Laskey, R. A.;
Hartmann, E.; Prehn, S.: Two different subunits of importin cooperate
to recognize nuclear localization signals and bind them to the nuclear
envelope. Curr. Biol. 5: 383-392, 1995.

6. Kalab, P.; Pralle, A.; Isacoff, E. Y.; Heald, R.; Weis, K.: Analysis
of a RanGTP-regulated gradient in mitotic somatic cells. Nature 440:
697-701, 2006.

7. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

8. Kutay, U.; Izaurralde, E.; Bischoff, F. R.; Mattaj, I. W.; Gorlich,
D.: Dominant-negative mutants of importin-beta block multiple pathways
of import and export through the nuclear pore complex. EMBO J. 16:
1153-1163, 1997.

9. Lee, S. J.; Matsuura, Y.; Liu, S. M.; Stewart, M.: Structural
basis for nuclear import complex dissociation by RanGTP. (Letter) Nature 435:
693-696, 2005.

10. Lee, S. J.; Sekimoto, T.; Yamashita, E.; Nagoshi, E.; Nakagawa,
A.; Imamoto, N.; Yoshimura, M.; Sakai, H.; Chong, K. T.; Tsukihara,
T.; Yoneda, Y.: The structure of importin-beta bound to SREBP-2:
nuclear import of a transcription factor. Science 302: 1571-1575,
2003.

11. Matsuda, Y.; Hamatani, K.; Itoh, M.; Takahashi, E.; Araki, R.;
Abe, M.: Localization of the importin-beta gene to mouse chromosome
11D and rat chromosome 10q32.1. Genomics 36: 213-215, 1996.

12. Narayanan, U.; Ospina, J. K.; Frey, M. R.; Hebert, M. D.; Matera,
A. G.: SMN, the spinal muscular atrophy protein, forms a pre-import
snRNP complex with snurportin1 and importin beta. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
1785-1795, 2002.

13. Wiese, C.; Wilde, A.; Moore, M. S.; Adam, S. A.; Merdes, A.; Zheng,
Y.: Role of importin-beta in coupling Ran to downstream targets in
microtubule assembly. Science 291: 653-656, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/3/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/20/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/5/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 1/16/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/4/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/22/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/06/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
alopez: 10/12/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
alopez: 6/16/2005
terry: 6/15/2005
alopez: 3/8/2005
alopez: 12/8/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
cwells: 6/20/2003
alopez: 4/6/2001
terry: 4/5/2001
mcapotos: 1/17/2001
carol: 1/16/2001
mgross: 8/4/2000
psherman: 6/22/1998

604205	TITLE *604205 COPINE I; CPNE1
;;CPN1
DESCRIPTION Molecular events at the interface of the cell membrane and cytoplasm may
be regulated by proteins that attach to and detach from the membrane
surface in response to signals. Calcium-dependent membrane-binding
proteins may play such a role. To identify proteins that may underlie
membrane trafficking processes in ciliates, Creutz et al. (1998)
isolated calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding proteins from
Paramecium. They named the major protein that they obtained 'copine'
(pronounced 'ko-peen'), the French feminine noun meaning 'friend,'
because it associates like a 'companion' with lipid membranes. The 55-kD
copine protein bound phosphatidylserine in a calcium- but not
magnesium-dependent manner, but it did not bind phosphatidylcholine.
Copine promoted calcium-dependent aggregation of lipid vesicles. The
authors cloned partial cDNAs representing 2 distinct Paramecium copine
genes. By searching sequence databases for genes with sequence
similarity to the Paramecium copine genes, Creutz et al. (1998)
identified human ESTs corresponding to 5 copine genes, named copine I to
V. Two overlapping ESTs contained the complete copine I (CPNE1) coding
sequence. The deduced 537-amino acid CPNE1 protein contains 2 type II C2
domains in its N-terminal half and a domain similar to the A domain,
which is present in a number of extracellular proteins or the
extracellular portions of membrane proteins, in its C-terminal half; it
does not have a predicted signal sequence or transmembrane domains. C2
domains mediate calcium-dependent interactions with phospholipids, and
the A domain of integrins appears to mediate the binding of the integrin
to extracellular ligands. CPNE1 has a broad tissue distribution.
Recombinant CPNE1 expressed in bacteria exhibited calcium-dependent
binding to phosphatidylserine vesicles. Antibody against CPNE1 reacted
with bovine chromobindin-17, which is a 55-kD calcium-dependent
chromaffin vesicle-binding protein, and the authors concluded that
chromobindin-17 is a copine. They suggested that copines function in
membrane trafficking.

REFERENCE 1. Creutz, C. E.; Tomsig, J. L.; Snyder, S. L.; Gautier, M.-C.; Skouri,
F.; Beisson, J.; Cohen, J.: The copines, a novel class of C2 domain-containing,
calcium-dependent, phospholipid-binding proteins conserved from Paramecium
to humans. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1393-1402, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 9/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/01/1999
mgross: 9/30/1999
psherman: 9/30/1999

605952	TITLE *605952 SORTING NEXIN 9; SNX9
;;SH3 DOMAIN- AND PX DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; SH3PX1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the sorting nexin protein family, such as SNX9, contain a
phospholipid-binding module called the phox homology (PX) domain. SNX9
functions in clathrin (see 118955)-mediated endocytosis and
clathrin-independent, actin (see 102610)-dependent fluid-phase
endocytosis (Yarar et al., 2007).

CLONING

By use of a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Howard et al. (1999) identified 2 SH3
domain-containing proteins, endophilin-1 (SH3GL2; 604465) and SNX9, that
interact with the cytoplasmic domains of metalloprotease disintegrins
ADAM9 (602713) and ADAM15 (605548). The 595-amino acid SNX9 protein
contains an N-terminal SH3 domain, followed by a PX domain and a
C-terminal coiled-coil domain. Northern blot analysis detected wide
expression of 4.4- and 3.1-kb transcripts, with high levels in heart and
placenta and relatively low levels in thymus and peripheral blood
leukocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Howard et al. (1999) determined that binding of the SH3 domain of SNX9
to ADAM9 and ADAM15 required the C-terminal proline-rich region of the
ADAM9 and ADAM15 cytoplasmic tails. Both SNX9 and SH3GL2 preferentially
bound the precursors, but not the processed forms, of ADAM9 and ADAM15.

Using green monkey kidney cells, Yarar et al. (2007) showed that SNX9
was required for clathrin-independent, actin-dependent fluid-phase
endocytosis. SNX9 directly regulated F-actin nucleation through N-WASP
(WASL; 605056) and the ARP2 (ACTR2; 604221)/ARP3 (ACTR3; 604222)
complex, and this activity was synergistically enhanced by
phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bisphosphate-containing liposomes. Yarar et al.
(2007) concluded that SNX9 physically couples F-actin nucleation to
plasma membrane remodeling during endocytosis.

Posor et al. (2013) showed that the BAR domain protein SNX9 is a
phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate (PI(3,4)P2) effector at
clathrin-coated pits in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Timed formation
of PI(3,4)P2 by class 2 phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase C2A (PI3KC2A;
603601) is required for selective enrichment of SNX9 at late-stage
endocytic intermediates.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SNX9
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-19319).

REFERENCE 1. Howard, L.; Nelson, K. K.; Maciewicz, R. A.; Blobel, C. P.: Interaction
of the metalloprotease disintegrins MDC9 and MDC15 with two SH3 domain-containing
proteins, endophilin I and SH3PX1. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 31693-31699,
1999.

2. Posor, Y.; Eichhorn-Gruenig, M.; Puchkov, D.; Schoneberg, J.; Ullrich,
A.; Lampe, A.; Muller, R.; Zarbakhsh, S.; Gulluni, F.; Hirsch, E.;
Krauss, M.; Schultz, C.; Schmoranzer, J.; Noe, F.; Haucke, V.: Spatiotemporal
control of endocytosis by phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate. Nature 499:
233-237, 2013.

3. Yarar, D.; Waterman-Storer, C. M.; Schmid, S. L.: SNX9 couples
actin assembly to phosphoinositide signals and is required for membrane
remodeling during endocytosis. Dev. Cell 13: 43-56, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 08/29/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/24/2001

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 5/21/2001

EDITED alopez: 08/29/2013
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mcapotos: 5/24/2001
carol: 5/24/2001
mcapotos: 5/24/2001
carol: 5/23/2001

603614	TITLE *603614 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 10D; TNFRSF10D
;;DECOY RECEPTOR 2; DCR2;;
TNF-RELATED APOPTOSIS-INDUCING LIGAND RECEPTOR 4; TRAILR4;;
TRAIL RECEPTOR WITH A TRUNCATED DEATH DOMAIN; TRUNDD
DESCRIPTION TRAIL (603598) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of
cytokines. The TRAIL ligand induces apoptosis in a wide variety of
transformed cell lines of diverse lineage, but does not appear to kill
normal cells. Since TRAIL mRNA is expressed at significant levels in
most normal tissues, the regulation of TRAIL function appears to take
place at the level of receptor expression. The TRAIL receptors TRAILR1
(603611) and TRAILR2 (603612) are capable of mediating apoptosis. A
third receptor, TRAILR3 (603613), lacks a cytoplasmic domain, and may
act as a decoy receptor to inhibit TRAIL signaling. By screening
peripheral blood lymphocyte and foreskin fibroblast libraries with a
cDNA encoding the extracellular domain of TRAILR3, Degli-Esposti et al.
(1997) isolated cDNAs encoding TRAILR4, a novel member of the TRAIL
receptor family. The predicted 386-amino acid TRAILR4 protein contains a
predicted signal sequence, 1 partial and 2 complete cysteine-rich
pseudorepeats in the extracellular domain, an extracellular linker
sequence, a transmembrane region, and a C-terminal sequence containing
one-third of the consensus death domain. The extracellular domain of
TRAILR4 shares 70%, 57%, and 58% identity with those of TRAILR3,
TRAILR2, and TRAILR1, respectively. Transient expression studies showed
that TRAILR4 binds the TRAIL ligand with affinities comparable to those
of TRAILR1, TRAILR2, and TRAILR3. Like TRAILR1 and TRAILR2, TRAILR4
induces nuclear factor-kappa-B (see 164011) activation. Transient
overexpression of TRAILR4 in cells normally sensitive to TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis conferred complete protection, and Degli-Esposti et al. (1997)
suggested that 1 function of TRAILR4 may be the inhibition of TRAIL
cytotoxicity. Northern blot analysis revealed that TRAILR4 was expressed
as an approximately 4-kb mRNA in all tissues tested.

Independently, Marsters et al. (1997) and Pan et al. (1998) isolated
cDNAs encoding TRAILR4, which they designated 'decoy receptor-2' (DCR2)
and 'TRAIL receptor with a truncated death domain' (TRUNDD),
respectively.

By analysis of radiation hybrid panels, Degli-Esposti et al. (1997) and
Marsters et al. (1997) mapped the TRAILR4 gene to 8p21, in a cluster
with the genes encoding TRAILR1, TRAILR2, and TRAILR3.

REFERENCE 1. Degli-Esposti, M. A.; Dougall, W. C.; Smolak, P. J.; Waugh, J.
Y.; Smith, C. A.; Goodwin, R. G.: The novel receptor TRAIL-R4 induces
NF-kappa-B and protects against TRAIL-mediated apoptosis, yet retains
an incomplete death domain. Immunity 7: 813-820, 1997.

2. Marsters, S. A.; Sheridan, J. P.; Pitti, R. M.; Huang, A.; Skubatch,
M.; Baldwin, D.; Yuan, J.; Gurney, A.; Goddard, A. D.; Godowski, P.;
Ashkenazi, A.: A novel receptor for Apo2L/TRAIL contains a truncated
death domain. Curr. Biol. 7: 1003-1006, 1997.

3. Pan, G.; Ni, J.; Yu, G.; Wei, Y.-F.; Dixit, V. M.: TRUNDD, a new
member of the TRAIL receptor family that antagonizes TRAIL signalling. FEBS
Lett. 424: 41-45, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/8/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/09/1999
mgross: 3/9/1999
mgross: 3/8/1999

614995	TITLE *614995 INTERLEUKIN 17 RECEPTOR E; IL17RE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL17RE, a member of the IL17R family (IL17RA, 605461; IL17RB, 605458:
IL17RC; 610925; and IL17RD, 606807), is involved in host mucosal defense
against infection. IL17RE is a receptor specific for IL17C (604628)
(Song et al., 2011).

CLONING

By RT-PCR analysis of mouse tissues, Song et al. (2011) detected high
levels of IL17re in colon, followed by kidney, cecum, and ileum.

Chang et al. (2011) detected increased binding of IL17C in embryonic
kidney cells transfected with IL17RE, but not other IL17Rs. Mouse Th17
cells express high levels of IL17re, dependent on the presence of Stat3
(102582), Rorc (602943), and Rora (600825). Expression was enhanced
after stimulation with IL6 (147620) and Tgfb (190180). IL17c-induced
expression of IL17a is dependent on the presence of both IL17ra and
IL17re as well as the adaptor protein Act1 (TRAF3IP2; 607043).

ANIMAL MODEL

In Il17re -/- mice, Song et al. (2011) observed weight loss, accompanied
by enlargement of spleen and intestine, high bacterial loads, and death
13 days after infection with Citrobacter rodentium. Infected mice
lacking IL17re have reduced levels of antibacterial peptides (e.g.,
S100A8, 123885; S100A9, 123886; and LCN2, 600181), proinflammatory
cytokines (TNF, 191160; IL1B, 147720), and chemokines (KC, 155730;
CXCL2, 139110; and CCL20, 601960). Wildtype mice express high levels of
IL17c and IL17f (606496) at day 4 after infection, whereas IL17a
(603149) is expressed late in infection at day 12. Exposure of wildtype,
but not IL17re-deficient, colonic epithelial cells (CEC) to IL17c
induced the expression of genes encoding antibacterial peptides.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed interaction of IL17c with the
extracellular domains of IL17ra and IL17re but not with other IL17r
members. IL17ra and IL17re associate with each other; IL17c binds to the
heterodimeric receptor and activates downstream signaling. Exposure of
wildtype, but not IL17re -/-, CEC to IL17c and IL22 (605330), resulted
in synergistic induction of antibacterial peptides.

In mice with transgenic expression of Il17re in T cells, Chang et al.
(2011) observed increased susceptibility to experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE). They concluded that enhanced signaling of
IL17RE in CD4+ T cells leads to greater EAE disease as well as an
enhanced Th17 cell response and increased expression of IKBZ (NFKBIZ;
608004).

REFERENCE 1. Chang, S. H.; Reynolds, J. M.; Pappu, B. P.; Chen, G.; Martinez,
G. J.; Dong, C.: Interleukin-17C promotes Th17 cell responses and
autoimmune disease via interleukin-17 receptor E. Immunity 35: 611-621,
2011.

2. Song, X.; Zhu, S.; Shi, P.; Liu, Y.; Shi, Y.; Levin, S. D.; Qian,
Y.: IL-17RE is the functional receptor for IL-17C and mediates mucosal
immunity to infection with intestinal pathogens. Nature Immun. 12:
1151-1158, 2011.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/19/2012

EDITED alopez: 12/19/2012

126064	TITLE *126064 DIHYDROOROTATE DEHYDROGENASE; DHODH
;;DHOdehase;;
URA1, YEAST, HUMAN COMPLEMENT OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.3.1) catalyzes the fourth enzymatic
step in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis. Minet et al. (1992) isolated a
truncated human cDNA encoding this enzyme from a HeLa cell cDNA library
by functional complementation of a corresponding deletion mutant from
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The gene in yeast is symbolized ura1. DHO
dehydrogenase is a monofunctional protein which, in most eukaryotic
organisms, is located on the outer surface of the inner mitochondrial
membrane. In yeast, however, it has a cytosolic location.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ng et al. (2010) determined that the DHODH gene contains 9 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

White et al. (2011) used zebrafish embryos to identify the initiating
transcriptional events that occur on activation of human BRAF(V600E)
(164757.0001) in the neural crest lineage. Zebrafish embryos that are
transgenic for mitfa:BRAF(V600E) and lack p53 (191170) have a gene
signature that is enriched for markers of multipotent neural crest
cells, and neural crest progenitors from these embryos fail to
terminally differentiate. To determine whether these early
transcriptional events are important for melanoma pathogenesis, White et
al. (2011) performed a chemical genetic screen to identify
small-molecule suppressors of the neural crest lineage, which were then
tested for their effects on melanoma. One class of compound, inhibitors
of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), e.g., leflunomide, led to an
almost complete abrogation of neural crest development in zebrafish and
to a reduction in the self-renewal of mammalian neural crest stem cells.
Leflunomide exerts these effects by inhibiting the transcriptional
elongation of genes that are required for neural crest development and
melanoma growth. When used alone or in combination with a specific
inhibitor of the BRAF(V600E) oncogene, DHODH inhibition led to a marked
decrease in melanoma growth both in vitro and in mouse xenograft
studies. White et al. (2011) concluded that their studies, taken
together, highlight developmental pathways in neural crest cells that
have a direct bearing on melanoma formation.

MAPPING

Barnes et al. (1993) mapped the DHODH gene to 16q22 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutations in the DHODH gene cause Miller syndrome (263750), an autosomal
recessive disorder also known as postaxial acrofacial dysostosis. Ng et
al. (2010) found 10 different missense mutations and 1 frameshift
mutation in the DHODH gene underlying Miller syndrome. All patients were
found to be compound heterozygotes, and each parent a carrier. These
findings were supported by whole-genome sequencing by Roach et al.
(2010).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, ARG346TRP

In 2 members of 2 unrelated kindreds segregating autosomal recessive
Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010) found a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 1036 in exon 8 of the DHODH gene resulting in an arg-to-trp
substitution at codon 346 (R346W). Both patients, descended from
different ethnic backgrounds, were compound heterozygotes for R346W and
a different missense mutation.

.0002
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, ARG135CYS

In a patient with Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010) reported
compound heterozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 403 in
exon 3 of the DHODH gene, resulting in an arg-to-cys substitution at
codon 135 (R135C), and an R346W mutation (126064.0001).

.0003
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, GLY19GLU

In a patient with Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010) detected a
G-to-A transition at nucleotide 56 in exon 2 of the DHODH gene resulting
in a gly-to-glu substitution at codon 19 (G19E). This patient carried an
R346W mutation (126064.0001) on the other allele.

.0004
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, GLY152ARG

In 2 sibs from 1 kindred segregating Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al.
(2010) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 454 in exon 4 of the
DHODH gene, resulting in a gly-to-arg substitution at codon 152 (G152R).
The sibs were compound heterozygous for another missense mutation
(126064.0005).

.0005
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, GLY202ALA

In sibs from a kindred segregating Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al.
(2010) identified heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide
605 in exon 5 of the DHODH gene, resulting in a gly-to-ala substitution
at codon 202 (G202A).

.0006
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, GLY202ASP

In a kindred segregating Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010)
identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 605 in
exon 5 of the DHODH gene, resulting in a gly-to-asp substitution at
codon 202 (G202D). Another substitution at this codon was found in a
different family (126064.0005).

.0007
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, ARG244TRP

In a patient with Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010) identified
heterozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 730 in exon 6 of
the DHODH gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 244
(R244W). This patient was compound heterozygous for this mutation and
the G202D mutation (126064.0006) in exon 5.

.0008
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, 1-BP DEL, 611T

In a patient with Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010) identified
a single nucleotide deletion in exon 5 of the DHODH gene, a T at
position 611, resulting in a frameshift (L204PfsX8). This patient was
compound heterozygous for a missense mutation (126064.0009).

.0009
MILLER SYNDROME
DHODH, ARG199CYS

In a patient with Miller syndrome (263750), Ng et al. (2010) identified
a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 595 in exon 5 of the DHODH gene,
resulting in an arg-to-cys substitution at codon 199 (R199C). This
patient was compound heterozygous for a frameshift mutation
(126064.0008).

REFERENCE 1. Barnes, T.; Parry, P.; Hart, I.; Jones, C.; Minet, M,; Patterson,
D.: Regional mapping of the gene encoding dihydroorotate dehydrogenase,
an enzyme involved in UMP synthesis, electron transport, and superoxide
generation, to human chromosome region 16q22. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 19: 405-411, 1993.

2. Minet, M.; Dufour, M.-E.; Lacroute, F.: Cloning and sequencing
of a human cDNA coding for dihydroorotate dehydrogenase by complementation
of the corresponding yeast mutant. Gene 121: 393-396, 1992.

3. Ng, S. B.; Buckingham, K. J.; Lee, C.; Bigham, A. W.; Tabor, H.
K.; Dent, K. M.; Huff, C. D.; Shannon, P. T.; Jabs, E. W.; Nickerson,
D. A.; Shendure, J.; Bamshad, M. J.: Exome sequencing identifies
the cause of a mendelian disorder. Nature Genet. 42: 30-35, 2010.

4. Roach, J. C.; Glusman, G.; Smit, A. F. A.; Huff, C. D.; Hubley,
R.; Shannon, P. T.; Rowen, L.; Pant, K. P.; Goodman, N.; Bamshad,
M.; Shendure, J.; Drmanac, R.; Jorde, L. B.; Hood, L.; Galas, D. J.
: Analysis of genetic inheritance in a family quartet by whole-genome
sequencing. Science 328: 636-639, 2010.

5. White, R. M.; Cech, J.; Ratanasirintrawoot, S.; Lin, C. Y.; Rahl,
P. B.; Burke, C. J.; Langdon, E.; Tomlinson, M. L.; Mosher, J.; Kaufman,
C.; Chen, F.; Long, H. K.; Kramer, M.; Datta, S.; Neuberg, D.; Granter,
S.; Young, R. A.; Morrison, S.; Wheeler, G. N.; Zon, L. I.: DHODH
modulates transcriptional elongation in the neural crest and melanoma. Nature 471:
518-522, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/9/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/3/2009
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 7/1/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED terry: 05/25/2011
alopez: 5/10/2011
terry: 5/9/2011
carol: 3/10/2011
carol: 2/2/2011
alopez: 1/28/2010
alopez: 12/4/2009
alopez: 12/3/2009
terry: 12/3/2009
carol: 7/1/1998
joanna: 7/1/1998
mimadm: 7/1/1994
jason: 6/17/1994

607222	TITLE *607222 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 18; FBXO18
;;F-BOX DNA HELICASE 1; FBH1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNA helicases are enzymes involved in DNA replication, repair, and
recombination. They generate single-stranded DNA by catalyzing the
melting of stable helical DNA structures utilizing energy derived from
the hydrolysis of nucleoside triphosphates. FBH1 is a member of a unique
class of DNA helicases that are also involved in cell cycle regulation
by catalyzing ubiquitin ligation of proteins for ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis (Kim et al., 2002).

CLONING

Kim et al. (2002) cloned FBH1 by searching for homologs of S. pombe DNA
helicase I, screening a HeLa cell cDNA library, and 5-prime RACE. The
deduced 969-amino acid protein contains an F-box motif and 7 conserved
helicase motifs. It shares 95% identity with the mouse protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Kim et al. (2002) found that recombinant FBH1, purified from
baculovirus-infected sf9 cells, showed elevated levels of
single-stranded DNA-dependent ATPase activity. They determined that FBH1
translocates in the 3-prime-to-5-prime direction and is not dependent on
fork structures for its unwinding activity. The presence of an F-box in
the FBH1 sequence suggested its inclusion in SCF (SKP1 (601434)/cullin
(see CUL1; 603134)/F-box) complexes, which are involved in
ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments with
extracts of cotransfected human 293T cells confirmed that FBH1 interacts
with SKP1 and, through SKP1, with CUL1 and ROC1 (RBX1; 603814) in vitro.
All interactions were dependent on a functional F-box motif. The SCF
complex including FBH1 displayed ubiquitin ligase activity.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO18 gene maps to chromosome 10p15.1
and the mouse Fbxo18 gene maps to chromosome 2A1.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

2. Kim, J.; Kim, J.-H.; Lee, S.-H.; Kim, D.-H.; Kang, H.-Y.; Bae,
S.-H.; Pan, Z.-Q.; Seo, Y.-S.: The novel human DNA helicase hFBH1
is an F-box protein. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 24530-24537, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/17/2002

EDITED mgross: 12/16/2004
mgross: 9/17/2002

603354	TITLE *603354 GASTRULATION BRAIN HOMEOBOX 1; GBX1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The homeobox is a 180-bp DNA sequence that encodes a DNA-binding domain
known as a homeodomain. See 142950. To identify additional homeobox
genes, Matsui et al. (1993) performed PCR using genomic DNA and
degenerate primers based on conserved regions of the homeodomain. They
isolated fragments of 2 novel homeobox genes, GBX1 and GBX2 (601135).
The amino acid sequence of the predicted GBX1 and GBX2 homeodomains were
identical. Sequence comparisons indicated that the GBX1/GBX2 homeodomain
was most similar to that of chicken CHox-7. Northern blot analysis
revealed that GBX1 was expressed as a 2.2-kb mRNA in 2 hematopoietic
cell lines. Matsui et al. (1993) reported that the GBX1 gene is the
human homolog of the mouse MMoxB, or Gbx1, gene identified by Murtha et
al. (1991).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Matsui et al. (1993) mapped the
GBX1 gene to 7q36.1. They noted that a second homeobox gene, EN2
(131310), has been mapped to the same region. The Gbx1 gene resides on
mouse chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Matsui, T.; Hirai, M.; Wakita, M.; Hirano, M.; Kurosawa, Y.: Expression
of a novel human homeobox-containing gene that maps to chromosome
7q36.1 in hematopoietic cells. FEBS Lett. 322: 181-185, 1993.

2. Murtha, M. T.; Leckman, J. F.; Ruddle, F. H.: Detection of homeobox
genes in development and evolution. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10711-10715,
1991.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 12/10/1998

EDITED carol: 06/22/2012
terry: 3/18/2004
alopez: 12/11/1998
alopez: 12/10/1998

612944	TITLE *612944 RIBONUCLEASE T2; RNASET2
;;RNASE6PL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RNASET2 belongs to the RNase T2 family (EC 3.1.27.1) of proteins that
are present in all phyla and primarily function in the extracellular
milieu. In some microorganisms and plants, T2 RNases mediate phosphate
uptake by digesting extracellular RNAs. In other species, they provide
host protection against pathogens or trigger cellular senescence. Human
RNASET2 appears to suppress tumorigenicity (Monti et al., 2008).

CLONING

By searching for coding sequences in a region of chromosome 6 that is
frequently rearranged in malignancies, followed by screening a pooled
tissue cDNA library, Trubia et al. (1997) cloned RNASET2. The deduced
191-amino acid protein contains 2 highly conserved pentameric catalytic
motifs. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.2-kb transcript in all
tissues examined.

Using Northern blot analysis, Acquati et al. (2001) detected ubiquitous
expression of a 1.4-kb RNASET2 transcript. Highest expression was in
liver and heart, and lowest expression was in lung and placenta.

Campomenosi et al. (2006) stated that full-length human RNASET2 has 256
amino acids and shares 67.4% identity with mouse Rnaset2. Western blot
analysis detected RNASET2 in most ovarian cancer cell lines at an
apparent molecular mass of 31 kD. Proteins of 36 and 27 kD were also
detected in some cell lines, and the 36-kD protein was secreted into the
culture medium. Subcellular fractionation of transfected ovarian cancer
cells revealed full-length RNASET2 in the endoplasmic reticulum fraction
and the 2 smaller RNASET2 isoforms in the lysosome fraction.

Acquati et al. (2005) identified an N-terminal signal sequence and 3
putative N-glycosylation sites in full-length RNASET2.
Fluorescence-tagged RNASET2 localized to the Golgi apparatus of
transfected human embryonic kidney cells, and the 36-kD protein was
secreted into the culture medium. Western blot analysis detected 4
RNASET2 species between 31 and 36 kD. Endoglycosylase treatment of in
vitro-translated RNASET2 resulted in disappearance of the higher
molecular mass forms and accumulation of the 31-kD protein. Acquati et
al. (2005) concluded that RNASET2 is a secreted glycoprotein.

By RT-PCR analysis, Henneke et al. (2009) found strong RNASET2
expression in temporal lobe and fetal brain, followed by capsula
interna, cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and corpus callosum, and low
expression in amygdala.

GENE FUNCTION

Abnormalities of chromosome 6q are associated with several solid
neoplasms, including carcinomas of the ovary (167000). Using PCR,
Acquati et al. (2001) found that expression of RNASET2 was reduced in
30% of 55 primary ovarian tumors with alterations at 6q26-qter.
Downregulation of RNASET2 was also detected in 75% of ovarian tumor cell
lines. Transfection of RNASET2 into HEY4 and SG10G ovarian tumor cell
lines suppressed their tumorigenicity following injection into nude
mice. RNASET2 induced cell senescence in HEY4 cells when expressed over
a certain threshold, while suppression of tumorigenicity in mice
required only minimal RNASET2 expression.

Using zymogram gel electrophoresis, Campomenosi et al. (2006) showed
that recombinant RNASET2 had optimum catalytic activity at pH 5. PolyU
and polyA were efficiently cleaved, whereas polyG and polyC were
resistant to cleavage. Activity of RNASET2 did not depend on
glycosylation.

Acquati et al. (2005) introduced 2 mutations into RNASET2 (his65 to phe
and his118 to phe) that reduced its ribonuclease activity to less than
1% of wildtype. Using HEY4 cells and a highly metastatic HEY4 subclone,
they found that the mutations did not alter the ability of RNASET2 to
suppress metastasis following injection into nude mice.

Malignant melanoma (see 155600) is associated with chromosomal
rearrangements in the 6q27 region. Using real-time PCR, Monti et al.
(2008) found that RNASET2 expression was downregulated in 4 of 8
melanoma cell lines, including the SK-MEL28 cell line. Transfection of
SK-MEL28 cells with RNASET2 reduced their tumorigenicity upon injection
into nude mice, but it had no effect on their growth or clonogenicity in
culture.

GENE STRUCTURE

Acquati et al. (2001) determined that the RNASET2 gene contains 9 exons
and spans about 27 kb. The proximal promoter region shows greatest CpG
density close to the transcription start site.

MAPPING

By YAC analysis, Trubia et al. (1997) mapped the RNASET2 gene to
chromosome 6q27. Southern blot analysis showed that RNASET2 is a
single-copy gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing in 2
consanguineous Turkish families with cystic leukoencephalopathy without
megalencephaly (612951), Henneke et al. (2009) identified 2 different
homozygous mutations in the RNASET2 gene (612944.0001 and 612944.0002,
respectively) that segregated with the disorder. Analysis of 3
additional unrelated individuals with the disorder identified homozygous
or compound heterozygous RNASET2 mutations (612944.0003-612944.0006).
All of the mutations were predicted to result in loss of protein
function. The phenotype was characterized by normo- or microcephaly,
early onset of severe psychomotor retardation, cystic changes in the
anterior temporal lobes, and multifocal white matter lesions; the
phenotype was indistinguishable from neonatal asymptomatic
cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, CYSTIC, WITHOUT MEGALENCEPHALY
RNASET2, CYS184ARG

In 2 sibs, born of Turkish consanguineous parents, with cystic
leukoencephalopathy without megalencephaly (612951), Henneke et al.
(2009) identified a homozygous 550T-C transition in exon 8 of the
RNASET2 gene, resulting in a cys184-to-arg (C184R) substitution in a
highly conserved disulfide bond, predicted to interfere with the native
protein conformation. Both unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
C184R-mutant protein showed defective trafficking to the extracellular
medium, consistent with impaired protein folding or stability. The
patients had onset of neurologic impairment by age 3 months.

.0002
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, CYSTIC, WITHOUT MEGALENCEPHALY
RNASET2, 2.5-KB DEL

In 2 sibs, born of Turkish consanguineous parents, with cystic
leukoencephalopathy (612951), Henneke et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 2.5-kb deletion including exon 3 and part of introns 1 and 2
of the RNASET2 gene. Both unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation. The patients had onset of neurologic impairment by age 1
month.

.0003
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, CYSTIC, WITHOUT MEGALENCEPHALY
RNASET2, IVS5AS, A-G, -2

In a Turkish girl, born of consanguineous parents, with cystic
leukoencephalopathy (612951), Henneke et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous A-to-G transition in intron 5 of the RNASET2 gene, resulting
in a splice site mutation and altered transcripts with either deletion
of exons or frameshifts. Both unaffected parents were heterozygous for
the mutation. The patient had onset of neurologic impairment by age 12
months. At age 4 years, she could sit and walk without aid, showed
spasticity, and had developed comprehensible speech.

.0004
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, CYSTIC, WITHOUT MEGALENCEPHALY
RNASET2, 1-BP DEL, 332+1G

In a Spanish boy with cystic leukoencephalopathy (612951), Henneke et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (332+1delG) in the
donor splice site of exon 5 of the RNASET2 gene, resulting in altered
transcripts with deleted exons. The patient had onset of neurologic
impairment by age 3 months. At age 2 years, he had no head control, no
use of his hands, seizures, and poor social contact.

.0005
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, CYSTIC, WITHOUT MEGALENCEPHALY
RNASET2, 15-BP DEL

In a girl of German and Turkish ancestry with cystic leukoencephalopathy
(612951), Henneke et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the RNASET2 gene: a 15-bp deletion in exon 1, resulting in
an in-frame loss of 5 residues within the putative signal peptide, and a
567G-A transition at the last nucleotide of exon 8 (612944.0006) that
does not change residue gln189, but disrupts the splicing process,
leading to the skipping of exon 8. She had onset of neurologic
impairment by age 7 months. Age age 10, she had microcephaly, seizures,
and could sit alone, but needed aid to walk. She had no speech
development.

.0006
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, CYSTIC, WITHOUT MEGALENCEPHALY
RNASET2, 567G-A

See 612944.0005 and Henneke et al. (2009).

REFERENCE 1. Acquati, F.; Morelli, C.; Cinquetti, R.; Bianchi, M. G.; Porrini,
D.; Varesco, L.; Gismondi, V.; Rocchetti, R.; Talevi, S.; Possati,
L.; Magnanini, C.; Tibiletti, M. G.; Bernasconi, B.; Daidone, M. G.;
Shridhar, V.; Smith, D. I.; Negrini, M.; Barbanti-Brodano, G.; Taramelli,
R.: Cloning and characterization of a senescence inducing and class
II tumor suppressor gene in ovarian carcinoma at chromosome region
6q27. Oncogene 20: 980-988, 2001.

2. Acquati, F.; Possati, L.; Ferrante, L.; Campomenosi, P.; Talevi,
S.; Bardelli, S.; Margiotta, C.; Russo, A.; Bortoletto, E.; Rocchetti,
R.; Calza, R.; Cinquetti, R.; Monti, L.; Salis, S.; Barbanti-Brodano,
G.; Taramelli, R.: Tumor and metastasis suppression by the human
RNASET2 gene. Int. J. Oncol. 26: 1159-1168, 2005.

3. Campomenosi, P.; Salis, S.; Lindqvist, C.; Mariani, D.; Nordstrom,
T.; Acquati, F.; Taramelli, R.: Characterization of RNASET2, the
first human member of the Rh/T2/S family of glycoproteins. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 449: 17-26, 2006.

4. Henneke, M.; Diekmann, S.; Ohlenbusch, A.; Kaiser, J.; Engelbrecht,
V.; Kohlschutter, A.; Kratzner, R.; Madruga-Garrido, M.; Mayer, M.;
Opitz, L.; Rodriguez, D.; Ruschendorf, F.; Schumacher, J.; Thiele,
H.; Thoms, S.; Steinfeld, R.; Nurnberg, P.; Gartner, J.: RNASET2-deficient
cystic leukoencephalopathy resembles congenital cytomegalovirus brain
infection. Nature Genet. 41: 773-775, 2009.

5. Monti, L.; Rodolfo, M.; Lo Russo, G.; Noonan, D.; Acquati, F.;
Taramelli, R.: RNASET2 as a tumor antagonizing gene in a melanoma
cancer model. Oncol. Res. 17: 69-74, 2008. Note: Erratum: Oncol.
Res. 17: 191 only, 2008.

6. Trubia, M.; Sessa, L.; Taramelli, R.: Mammalian Rh/T2/S-glycoprotein
ribonuclease family genes: cloning of a human member located in a
region of chromosome 6 (6q27) frequently deleted in human malignancies. Genomics 42:
342-344, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/5/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/30/2009

EDITED carol: 08/08/2012
carol: 2/2/2010
wwang: 8/18/2009
ckniffin: 8/5/2009
mgross: 7/30/2009

148040	TITLE *148040 KERATIN 5; KRT5
;;K5
DESCRIPTION For background information on keratins, see KRT15 (148030).

CLONING

Lersch and Fuchs (1988) reported the cDNA and amino acid sequences of a
human 58-kD type II keratin, K5, which is coexpressed with a 50-kD type
I keratin, K14 (148040), in stratified squamous epithelia.

Eckert and Rorke (1988) cloned full-length KRT5 from a cultured
keratinocyte cDNA library. The deduced 590-amino acid protein contains a
central alpha-helical core region of about 310 amino acids with a
7-amino acid repeat found in coiled-coil structures. The N and C termini
are serine rich and contain gly-gly-gly-x motifs.

Mischke et al. (1990) showed that 2 electrophoretic variants for each of
the human keratins K4 and K5 that are expressed in squamous
nonkeratinizing epithelia lining the upper digestive tract could be
distinguished by SDS-PAGE. K5 appears to have 2 codominant alleles, a
and b. On the basis of a population sample, they concluded that the
alleles are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Trask et al. (1990) showed that normal mammary epithelial cells in
culture produce keratins K5, K6 (see 148041), K7 (148059), K14, and K17
(148069), whereas tumor cells produced mainly keratins K8 (148060), K18
(148070), and K19 (148020).

GENE STRUCTURE

Eckert and Rorke (1988) determined that the 5-prime region of the KRT5
gene contains a TATA box and a potential CAAT box. The 3-prime region
contains a single polyadenylation signal.

GENE FUNCTION

Knox et al. (2010) hypothesized that parasympathetic innervation is
required for epithelial progenitor cell function during organogenesis.
Removal of the parasympathetic ganglion in mouse explant organ culture
decreased the number and morphogenesis of keratin 5-positive epithelial
progenitor cells. These effects were rescued with an acetylcholine
analog. Knox et al. (2010) demonstrated that acetylcholine signaling,
via the muscarinic M1 receptor (118510) and epidermal growth factor
receptor (131550), increased epithelial morphogenesis and proliferation
of the keratin 5-positive progenitor cells. Parasympathetic innervation
maintained the epithelial progenitor cell population in an
undifferentiated state, which was required for organogenesis.

MAPPING

Rosenberg et al. (1991) assigned the type II epidermal keratin gene KRT5
to chromosome 12 by use of Southern blot analysis of somatic cell
hybrids. Bonifas et al. (1991) reported that a K5-specific human cosmid
was localized to a position on chromosome 12 (12q11-q13) nearly
indistinguishable from the location of D12S14 and D12S17 by 2-color
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Inasmuch as epidermolysis bullosa
simplex was found to be linked to D12S14 in 1 family, the very close
localization of the KRT5 gene to D12S14 by multicolor fluorescence in
situ hybridization supported KRT5 as a candidate gene (Bonifas et al.,
1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex

In affected members of a large family with Dowling-Meara epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (EBS) (131760), Lane et al. (1992) identified a
heterozygous mutation in the KRT5 gene (E475G; 148040.0001).

In the large Finnish family with the generalized (Koebner) type of EBS
(131900), Dong et al. (1993) identified a heterozygous mutation in the
KRT5 gene (L462P; 148040.0002).

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with localized epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (131800), Chan et al. (1993) identified a heterozygous
mutation in the KRT5 gene (I161S; 148040.0003). Ehrlich et al. (1995)
identified the I161S mutation in 6 of 13 cases of the localized type of
EB simplex. The high frequency of this mutation suggested either a
hotspot or founder effect.

Humphries et al. (1996) concluded that the M327T (148040.0004) and N193K
(148040.0007) mutations in KRT5 account for most cases of dominant
localized epidermolysis bullosa simplex in Ireland.

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with epidermolysis bullosa
simplex with mottled pigmentation (EBS-MP; 131960), Uttam et al. (1996)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the KRT5 gene (P24L; 148040.0009).
Irvine et al. (1997) identified the P24L mutation in the sporadic case
of a 6-year-old boy who showed acral blistering, mottled pigmentation of
the limbs, and punctate hyperkeratoses primarily affecting the soles.
The authors speculated that recurrence of this mutation may be related
to the fact that it occurred in a CpG site. Although the mutation might
explain the epidermolysis, the cause of the mottled pigmentation
remained obscure.

In a Japanese girl with epidermolysis bullosa simplex with migratory
circinate erythema (609352) and affected members of an unrelated Korean
family, Gu et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion
(148040.0017) in the KRT5 gene. The patients had a phenotype that was
less severe than that of EBS Dowling-Meara, with an unusual migratory
circinate erythema and multiple vesicles on the erythematous area.

Yasukawa et al. (2002) reported an unusual Japanese family with both
autosomal recessive and dominant inheritance of EBS resulting in
phenotypic variability. The proband was a man with classic generalized
autosomal recessive EBS (EBSB1; 601001) who was compound heterozygous
for the E170K (148040.0020) and E418K (148040.0021) mutations in the
KRT5 gene. His paternal uncle, who had blisters restricted to the palms
and soles consistent with localized EBS (131800), was heterozygous for
the E170K mutation. The proband's deceased father and paternal
grandmother, who were putatively heterozygous for the E170K mutation,
also reportedly had localized blistering of the hands and feet. In
contrast, 2 unaffected family members were heterozygous for the E418K
substitution, implying that it is not pathogenic in isolation. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that cells transfected with either
mutation developed small ball-like filament aggregates, indicating a
disruption of the keratin network, although the effect was more
pronounced for the E170K mutation. Expression of both mutant proteins
exacerbated the clumping and resulted in significantly more disruption
than either alone. These findings were consistent with the marked
phenotypic and genotypic variability observed in this family.

- Dowling-Degos Disease 1

Dowling-Degos disease-1 (DDD1; 179850) is an autosomal dominant
genodermatosis characterized by progressive and disfiguring reticulate
hyperpigmentation of the flexures. Betz et al. (2006) performed a
genomewide linkage analysis of 2 German families and mapped DDD1 to
chromosome 12q, with a total lod score of 4.42 (theta = 0.0) for marker
D12S368. This region included the keratin gene cluster, which they
screened for mutations. They identified loss-of-function mutations in
the KRT5 gene (see, e.g., 148040.0018; 148040.0019) in all affected
family members and in 6 unrelated patients with DDD1. This represented
the first identified mutations that led to haploinsufficiency in a
keratin gene. The identification of loss-of-function mutations, along
with the results from additional functional studies, suggested a crucial
role for keratin in the organization of cell adhesion, melanosome
uptake, organelle transport, and nuclear anchorage.

- Susceptibility to Basal Cell Carcinoma

For a discussion of a possible association between the KRT5 gene and
susceptibility to basal cell carcinoma, see BCC4 (613061).

ANIMAL MODEL

Peters et al. (2001) found that Krt5-null mice died shortly after birth,
lacked keratin filaments in the basal epidermis, and were more severely
affected than Krt14 (148066)-null mice. In contrast to the Krt14-null
mice, Krt5-null mice showed a strong induction of the wound-healing
Krt6a (148041) in the suprabasal epidermis of cytolyzed areas. Krt5-null
and Krt14-null mice also differed with respect to tongue lesions. In the
absence of Krt5, residual Krt14 and Krt15 (148030) aggregated along
hemidesmosomes, demonstrating that individual keratins without a partner
can be stable in vivo. The data also indicated that Krt5 may be the
natural partner of Krt15 and Krt17 (148069). The findings suggested that
KRT5 null mutations may be lethal in human epidermolysis bullosa simplex
patients.

Roth et al. (2009) found that skin from Krt5-null mice showed increased
levels of the inflammatory cytokines MCP1 (CCL2; 158105), CCL19
(602227), and CCL20 (601960), all of which are regulated by NFKB
(164011) and involved in the recruitment, maturation, and migration of
Langerhans cells in the epidermis. These changes were not observed in
Krt14-null mice. The number of Langerhans cells were increased 2-fold in
epidermis of neonatal Krt5-null mice. In contrast, TNFA (191160) was not
changed, demonstrating the specificity of that process. The basal
epidermis from Krt5-null mice also showed decreased p120-catenin
(CTNND1; 601045). Enhanced Langerhans cell recruitment within the
epidermis was found in 5 human patients with various forms of EBS due to
KRT5 mutations, but not in EBS patients with KRT14 gene mutations. These
data provided an first explanation for distinct, keratin-type-specific
genotype-phenotype correlations in EBS, and suggested that the
pathophysiology of EBS involves more than mutant keratins.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, GLU475GLY

In affected members of a large family with Dowling-Meara EBS (131760),
Lane et al. (1992) identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition in the
KRT5 gene, resulting in a glu475-to-gly (E475G) substitution in a highly
conserved position 3 residues before the end of the rod domain, in a
sequence known as the helix termination peptide.

.0002
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, LEU462PRO

In the large Finnish family with the generalized (Koebner) type of EBS
(131900) in which Ryynanen et al. (1991) found linkage to the type II
keratin cluster on 12q, Dong et al. (1993) found a heterozygous mutation
in KRT5. The disorder was associated with a T-to-C transition (CTG to
CCG) within exon 7, resulting in substitution of leucine by proline at
codon 462 (L462P). The substituted leucine is one that is invariant
among 8 different human keratins in a highly conserved segment at the
carboxy-terminal region of the keratin 5 polypeptide.

.0003
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, ILE161SER

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with localized EBS (131800),
Chan et al. (1993) found a heterozygous T-to-G transversion in the
second base position of codon 161 of 1 of the 2 K5 alleles, leading to a
substitution of serine for isoleucine (I161S). Linkage analysis mapped
the defect to 12q11-q13. Ehrlich et al. (1995) identified the same
mutation in 6 of 13 cases of the Weber-Cockayne type of EB simplex. The
high frequency of this mutation suggested either a hotspot or founder
effect.

Pfendner et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous I161S mutation in a
patient with blistering of the hands and feet. The patient's affected
mother carried the same mutation.

.0004
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, MET327THR

localized EBS (131800), Chan et al. (1994) identified a heterozygous
met327-to-thr (M327T) mutation in KRT5. The mutation cosegregated with
the disease, was located in the nonhelical linker segment L1-2, and
perturbed the ability of keratin 5 to assemble with its partner into
10-nm filaments.

Humphries et al. (1996) identified a heterozygous M327T mutation in
affected members of a large Irish family with localized EBS.

.0005
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, ASN329LYS

Chan et al. (1994) found a heterozygous N329K mutation in the KRT5 gene
as the cause of localized EBS (131800) in a family with affected members
in 2 generations. Like the M327T mutation (148040.0004), it was located
in the nonhelical linker segment L1-2 of keratin 5 and perturbed the
ability of keratin 5 to assemble with its partner into 10-nm filaments.

.0006
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, LYS173ASN

In a family with autosomal dominant generalized EBS (131900), Stephens
et al. (1995) demonstrated a mutation predicted to result in the
substitution of an evolutionarily conserved lysine by an asparagine
residue (K173N). Unlike previous heterozygous mutations located within
the initial segment of domain 1A of keratins, K173N heterozygosity did
not result in severe disease or clumping of keratin filaments. One
family member was homozygous for the K173N allele, having inherited it
from each of her affected first-cousin parents. Despite a lack of normal
keratin-5 molecules and an effective doubling of abnormal molecules
available for heterodimerization with keratin-14 during formation of
intermediate filaments (IFs), there were no significant differences in
either the clinical severity or the ultrastructural organization of the
homozygous individual's keratin IF cytoskeleton. These data demonstrated
that the K173N mutation behaves as a fully dominant allele. The findings
indicated also that a limited number of abnormal keratin molecules are
sufficient to impair cytoskeletal function and elicit epidermal
fragility and blistering.

.0007
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, ASN193LYS

In affected members of a large Irish family with localized EBS (131800),
Humphries et al. (1996) identified a heterozygous mutation in the KRT5
gene, resulting in an asn193-to-lys (N193K) substitution.

.0008
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, LEU174PHE

In a Japanese patient with epidermolysis bullosa simplex Dowling-Meara
type (131760), Nomura et al. (1996) identified a heterozygous C-to-T
transition in the KRT5 gene, resulting in a leu174-to-phe (L174F)
substitution in the highly conserved 1A region within the helix
initiation peptide.

.0009
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX WITH MOTTLED PIGMENTATION
KRT5, PRO25LEU

In 2 unrelated families with epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled
pigmentation (EBS-MP; 131960), Uttam et al. (1996) found a heterozygous
C-to-T transition at base position 71 of the KRT5 gene, causing a P24L
substitution. The mutation occurred in the V1 domain of keratin 5;
previous mutations of K5 or K14 (148066) reported in EBS had been
located in the central helical rod domains, with a tendency to aggregate
at the highly conserved helix boundary peptides or at the nonhelical L12
linker domain. Irvine et al. (1997) identified the same mutation in the
sporadic case of a 6-year-old boy who showed acral blistering, mottled
pigmentation of the limbs, and punctate hyperkeratoses primarily
affecting the soles. The authors speculated that recurrence of this
mutation may be related to the fact that it occurred in a CpG site.
Although the mutation might explain the epidermolysis, the cause of the
mottled pigmentation remained obscure.

Until 1999, the P24L mutation of the KRT5 gene was the only mutation
identified in patients with EBS-MP. Moog et al. (1999) described a
sporadic patient and a family with an affected 6-year-old girl, her
mother, and maternal aunt; all of them had the P24L mutation. The
6-year-old girl showed erythema with telangiectasia on the cheeks and
above the upper lip at birth. From 6 months of age, blisters arose daily
after minor trauma, predominantly on the distal extremities. The lesions
healed without scarring. Over time, the tendency to blistering decreased
considerably. However, her skin remained fragile on sites where adhesive
tape was used. Hyperpigmented spots that were not preceded by blistering
developed from infancy. The mother had mild blistering (always confined
to the feet) and mottled pigmentation from infancy.

Irvine et al. (2001) reported a KRT5 pro25-to-leu mutation in 2
additional families, increasing the total number of EBS-MP kindreds with
this mutation to 7. This mutation was previously reported as PRO24LEU
based on the numbering suggested by Lersch et al. (1989), which ignores
the initial methionine. All other KRT5 mutations are numbered according
to GenBank GENBANK M21389, which includes methionine. Irvine et al.
(2001) suggested that the P25L designation be used in future reports.

Glasz-Bona et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous P25L mutation in
affected members of a 4-generation Hungarian pedigree with EBS-MP. There
were 10 affected members, 5 of whom were deceased. All had localized
blistering and skin fragility in childhood, followed by the development
of brownish, lentigo-like mottled pigmentation and hypopigmentation on
the trunk and/or extremities in adolescence and adulthood. Two patients
also had nail dystrophy. In this family, the P25L mutation segregated
with a gly138-to-glu (G138E) polymorphism.

.0010
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, VAL7ALA

In a family with the autosomal dominant generalized variant of
epidermolysis bullosa simplex (131900), Galligan et al. (1998) found a
heterozygous T-to-C transition in codon 323 of KRT5 in affected
individuals, resulting in a valine to alanine substitution of the
seventh residue within the L12 linker domain. The valine at this
position is absolutely conserved in all type II keratins, and in other
intermediate filament subunits as well, which suggests that this residue
makes an important contribution to filament integrity. Secondary
structure analysis revealed that alanine at this position markedly
reduces both the hydrophobicity and the beta-sheet nature of the L12
domain.

.0011
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, IVS1DS, G-A, +1

In affected members of a large French family with Dowling-Meara EBS
(131760), Rugg et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition
at the +1 position of the consensus GT donor splice site of intron 1 of
KRT5. This mutation leads to the use of an exonic GT cryptic donor
splice site located 66 nucleotides upstream from the normal donor splice
site. The corresponding peptide deletion includes the last 5 amino acids
of the H1 head domain and the first 17 amino acids of the conserved
N-terminal end of the 1A rod domain, including the first 2 heptad
repeats and the helix initiation peptide. Owing to the functional
importance of the removed region, the data strongly suggested that
shortened keratin polypeptide can impair keratin filament assembly in a
dominant manner and cause the Dowling-Meara type of EBS.

.0012
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, SER181PRO

In an infant with no family history of skin disease who presented within
hours of birth with extensive blistering of the skin and oral mucosa and
subsequently developed hoarse cries, Shemanko et al. (2000) detected a
T-to-C transition at the second nucleotide position of codon 181,
resulting in a ser-to-pro amino acid change (ser181 to pro; S181P). The
serine at position 181 in the helix initiation motif of keratin 5 is a
highly conserved amino acid across keratins and other intermediate
filament proteins. Although hoarseness is not a well documented feature
of Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex (131760), this patient
and another (see 148066.0003) demonstrated that hoarseness does not
necessarily indicate a poor prognosis.

.0013
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, 1-BP DEL, 1635G

Sprecher et al. (2003) reported a 25-year-old male of Ashkenazi Jewish
origin whose initial clinical presentation, structural abnormalities of
lesional skin, and course of disease were consistent with a very mild
localized form of EBS (131800). DNA sequence analysis of the complete
coding sequence of the K5 gene disclosed in exon 9 a heterozygous
guanine deletion at position 1635 downstream of the ATG start codon of
K5 (1635delG). This mutation introduced a frameshift and delayed stop
codon 80 amino acids downstream of the mutation site. The deletion was
predicted to lead to the translation of an aberrant K5 protein carrying
an elongated tail domain.

.0014
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, VAL186LEU

In a family with severe generalized EBS (131900), Liovic et al. (2001)
found a novel K5 mutation, val186 to leu (V186L), that produced a
conservative amino acid change at position 18 of the 1A helix. The
phenotype was unexpectedly severe for the location of the mutation,
which lies outside the consensus helix initiation motif mutation
hotspot, and other mutations at this position have been associated with
Weber-Cockayne (mild) epidermolysis bullosa simplex (131800) only. De
novo K5/K14 (148066) (mutant and wildtype) filament assembly in cultured
cells was studied to determine the effect of this mutation on filament
polymerization and stability. To visualize the structural impact of this
mutation and to compare it with an analogous mutation causing mild
disease, Liovic et al. (2001) generated a computer model of the 1A
region of the K5/K14 coiled-coil. The results showed a high level of
concordance between genetic, cell culture, and molecular modeling data,
suggesting that even a conservative substitution can cause severe
dysfunction in a structural protein, depending on the size and structure
of the amino acid involved.

.0015
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE, WITH SEVERE PALMOPLANTAR
KERATODERMA
KRT5, GLU477TER

In a German patient with epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Dowling-Meara
type (131760) with severe palmoplantar keratoderma, Muller et al. (1999)
found a 1429G-T transversion in the KRT5 gene that predicted a
glu477-to-ter (E477X) substitution at the last glutamate residue of the
KLLEGE motif. As a child, the patient developed severe palmoplantar
hyperkeratoses before she began to walk.

.0016
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED, WITH SEVERE PALMOPLANTAR
KERATOSIS
KRT5, LYS472TER

Livingston et al. (2001) reported an epidermolysis bullosa simplex
patient with severe palmoplantar keratosis, underlying erythema in a
'glove and moccasin' distribution, and limited range of motion in the
fingers. Clinical, histologic, and ultrastructural features were
consistent with a diagnosis of generalized EBS (Koebner subtype;
131900). The patient had a novel single-base substitution, 1414A-T, in
the KRT5 gene that changed the lysine residue at amino acid 472 to a
nonsense codon (K472X). This change predicted the synthesis of a
truncated keratin-5, missing 119 amino acids, including the entire tail
domain and the highly conserved KLLEGE motif at the carboxy terminus of
the 2B domain of the central rod. Expression of an altered keratin-5, of
predicted mass and pI for the product of the K472X allele, was
documented by 1- and 2-dimensional Western blots of protein extracts
from patient skin. Ultrastructural analysis of the patient's
nonhyperkeratotic skin was remarkable for basal keratinocytes with dense
and irregular keratin filaments proximal to the basement membrane.
Keratinocytes, transfected with a cDNA carrying the K472X nonsense
mutation, overexpressed a truncated keratin-5, and showed a disorganized
and collapsed keratin filament cytoskeleton. This was the second
epidermolysis bullosa simplex patient reported with a premature
termination mutation in the KLLEGE motif (see 148040.0015). The
occurrence of severe palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in both patients
suggested that the keratin-5 tail domain may have important functions in
palmoplantar tissues.

.0017
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX WITH MIGRATORY CIRCINATE ERYTHEMA
KRT5, 1-BP DEL, 1649G

In a Japanese girl with epidermolysis bullosa simplex with migratory
circinate erythema (609352) and affected members of an unrelated Korean
family, Gu et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a deletion
mutation (1649delG) in exon 9 of the KRT5 gene, involving the V2 domain
and predicted to cause a frameshift that would delay the termination
codon and result in a protein 35 amino acids longer than the wildtype.
The patients had a phenotype that was less severe than that of EBS
Dowling-Meara, with an unusual migratory circinate erythema and multiple
vesicles on the erythematous area. The mutation was assumed to have
arisen de novo in the Japanese girl, as there were no other affected
family members, and the mutation was not found in the DNA of blood
samples from her parents.

When a younger sister with EBS was born into the Japanese family
previously reported by Gu et al. (2003) and was found to have the same
1649delG mutation as her older sib, Nagao-Watanabe et al. (2004)
reinvestigated the familial segregation of the mutation and identified
heterozygosity for the deletion in the mother's DNA from hair bulb and
buccal cell samples. Closer scrutiny of the mother's history revealed
that she had migratory circinate pigmentation of the skin in childhood,
and Nagao-Watanabe et al. (2004) concluded that this represented
maternal somatic and germline mosaicism.

.0018
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 1
KRT5, 1-BP DUP, 418A

In 2 German pedigrees with Dowling-Degos disease (179850) described by
Biltz and Kiessling (1988) and Milde et al. (1994), Betz et al. (2006)
demonstrated a single adenine base insertion in the KRT5 gene (418dupA).
The mutation was predicted to lead to frameshift and premature
termination of translation at codon 178 (Ile140AsnfsTer39). Haplotype
and SNP analyses revealed that the mutation arose on the same genetic
background in the 2 families, suggesting a common ancestor. Betz et al.
(2006) also performed mutation analysis on the KRT5 gene in 8 patients
not belonging to the original pedigrees. In 5 of the 8 screened
patients, the frameshift mutation was also identified. Genotyping of
additional markers around the mutation showed a result compatible with
the existence of a common ancestor for all affected individuals. Milde
et al. (1994) described the disorder in the family they reported as
Dowling-Degos-Kitamura disease.

.0019
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 1
KRT5, SER5TER

In a patient with Dowling-Degos disease (179850) reported by Braun-Falco
and Ring (2003), Betz et al. (2006) found a heterozygous nonsense
mutation resulting in a premature stop codon (14C-A; S5X).

.0020
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED, INCLUDED
KRT5, GLU170LYS

In an unusual Japanese patient with autosomal recessive inheritance of
generalized EBS (EBSB1; 601001), Yasukawa et al. (2002) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the KRT5 gene: a G-to-A
transition in exon 1, resulting in a glu170-to-lys (E170K) substitution
in the highly conserved helix initiation peptide sequence of the 1A rod
domain, and a G-to-A transition in exon 7, resulting in a glu418-to-lys
(E418K; 148040.0021) substitution in the 2B domain, which is the
so-called 'stutter' region, an interruption in the heptad repeat
substructure. He had the classic phenotype, with blistering of the trunk
and extremities, improvement with age, and cytolysis within basal
keratinocytes on biopsy. His paternal uncle, who had blisters restricted
to the palms and soles consistent with localized EBS (131800), was
heterozygous for the E170K mutation. The proband's deceased father and
paternal grandmother, who were putatively heterozygous for the E170K
mutation, also reportedly had localized blistering of the hands and
feet. In contrast, 2 unaffected family members were heterozygous for the
E418K substitution, implying that it is not pathogenic in isolation.
Neither mutation was identified in 100 control alleles. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that cells transfected with either
mutation developed small ball-like filament aggregates, indicating a
disruption of the keratin network, although the effect was more
pronounced for the E170K mutation. Expression of both mutant proteins
exacerbated the clumping and resulted in significantly more disruption
than either alone. These findings were consistent with the marked
phenotypic and genotypic variability observed in this family.

.0021
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
KRT5, GLU418LYS

See 148040.0020 and Yasukawa et al. (2002).

REFERENCE 1. Betz, R. C.; Planko, L.; Eigelshoven, S.; Hanneken, S.; Pasternack,
S. M.; Bussow, H.; Van Den Bogaert, K.; Wenzel, J.; Braun-Falco, M.;
Rutten, A.; Rogers, M. A.; Ruzicka, T.; Nothen, M. M.; Magin, T. M.;
Kruse, R.: Loss-of-function mutations in the keratin 5 gene lead
to Dowling-Degos disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 510-519, 2006.

2. Biltz, H.; Kiessling, M.: Dowling-Degos disease--an autosomally
dominant genodermatosis. Zeitsch. Hautk. 63: 642-644, 1988.

3. Bonifas, J. M.; Bare, J. W.; Lynch, E. D.; Lebo, R. V.; Epstein,
E. H., Jr.: Regional assignment of the human keratin 5 (KRT5) gene
to chromosome 12q near D12S14 by PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrids
and multicolor in situ hybridization. Genomics 13: 452-454, 1992.

4. Bonifas, J. M.; Rothman, A. L.; Epstein, E. H., Jr.: Epidermolysis
bullosa simplex: evidence in two families for keratin gene abnormalities. Science 254:
1202-1205, 1991.

5. Braun-Falco, M.; Ring, J.: Enhanced cytoplasmic expression of
desmocollin 3 in epidermal rete ridges of Dowling-Degos syndrome. Brit.
J. Derm. 149: 1293-1296, 2003.

6. Chan, Y.; Yu, Q.-C.; LeBlanc-Straceski, J.; Christiano, A.; Pulkkinen,
L.; Kucherlapati, R. S.; Uitto, J.; Fuchs, E.: Mutations in the non-helical
linker segment L1-2 of keratin 5 in patients with Weber-Cockayne epidermolysis
bullosa simplex. J. Cell Sci. 107: 765-774, 1994.

7. Chan, Y.-M.; Yu, Q.-C.; Fine, J.-D.; Fuchs, E.: The genetic basis
of Weber-Cockayne epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 90: 7414-7418, 1993.

8. Dong, W.; Ryynanen, M.; Uitto, J.: Identification of a leucine-to-proline
mutation in the keratin 5 gene in a family with the generalized Koebner
type of epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Hum. Mutat. 2: 94-102, 1993.

9. Eckert, R. L.; Rorke, E. A.: The sequence of the human epidermal
58-kD (#5) type II keratin reveals an absence of 5-prime upstream
sequence conservation between coexpressed epidermal keratins. DNA 7:
337-345, 1988.

10. Ehrlich, P.; Sybert, V. P.; Spencer, A.; Stephens, K.: A common
keratin 5 gene mutation in epidermolysis bullosa simplex: Weber-Cockayne. J.
Invest. Derm. 104: 877-879, 1995.

11. Galligan, P.; Listwan, P.; Siller, G. M.; Rothnagel, J. A.: A
novel mutation in the L12 domain of keratin 5 in the Koebner variant
of epidermolysis bullosa simplex. J. Invest. Derm. 111: 524-527,
1998.

12. Glasz-Bona, A.; Medvecz, M.; Viragh, Z.; Hatvani, Z.; Blazsek,
A.; Karpati, S.: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation--mutation
analysis proved the diagnosis in a four-generation pedigree. Europ.
J. Derm. 20: 698-700, 2010.

13. Gu, L.-H.; Kim, S.-C.; Ichiki, Y.; Park, J.; Nagai, M.; Kitajima,
Y.: A usual frameshift and delayed termination codon mutation in
keratin 5 causes a novel type of epidermolysis bullosa simplex with
migratory circinate erythema. J. Invest. Derm. 121: 482-485, 2003.

14. Humphries, M. M.; Mansergh, F. C.; Kiang, A.-S.; Jordan, S. A.;
Sheils, D. M.; Martin, M. J.; Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P. F.; Young,
M. M.; Humphries, P.: Three keratin gene mutations account for the
majority of dominant simplex epidermolysis bullosa cases within the
population of Ireland. Hum. Mutat. 8: 57-63, 1996.

15. Irvine, A. D.; McKenna, K. E.; Jenkinson, H.; Hughes, A. E.:
A mutation in the V1 domain of keratin 5 causes epidermolysis bullosa
simplex with mottled pigmentation. J. Invest. Derm. 108: 809-810,
1997.

16. Irvine, A. D.; Rugg, E. L.; Lane, E. B.; Hoare, S.; Peret, C.;
Hughes, A. E.; Heagerty, A. H.: Molecular confirmation of the unique
phenotype of epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation. Brit.
J. Derm. 144: 40-45, 2001.

17. Knox, S. M.; Lombaert, I. M. A.; Reed, X.; Vitale-Cross, L.; Gutkind,
J. S.; Hoffman, M. P.: Parasympathetic innervation maintains epithelial
progenitor cells during salivary organogenesis. Science 329: 1645-1647,
2010.

18. Lane, E. B.; Rugg, E. L.; Navsaria, H.; Leigh, I. M.; Heagerty,
A. H. M.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Eady, R. A. J.: A mutation in the
conserved helix termination peptide of keratin 5 in hereditary skin
blistering. Nature 356: 244-246, 1992.

19. Lersch, R.; Fuchs, E.: Sequence and expression of a type II keratin,
K5, in human epidermal cells. Molec. Cell. Biol. 8: 486-493, 1988.

20. Lersch, R.; Stellmach, V.; Stocks, C.; Giudice, G.; Fuchs, E.
: Isolation, sequence, and expression of a human keratin K5 gene:
transcriptional regulation of keratins and insights into pairwise
control. Molec. Cell. Biol. 9: 3685-3697, 1989.

21. Liovic, M.; Stojan, J.; Bowden, P. E.; Gibbs, D.; Vahlquist, A.;
Lane, E. B.; Komel, R.: A novel keratin 5 mutation (K5V186L) in a
family with EBS-K: a conservative substitution can lead to development
of different disease phenotypes. J. Inves. Derm. 116: 964-969, 2001.

22. Livingston, R. J.; Sybert, V. P.; Smith, L. T.; Dale, B. A.; Presland,
R. B.; Stephens, K.: Expression of a truncated keratin 5 may contribute
to severe palmar-plantar hyperkeratosis in epidermolysis bullosa simplex
patients. J. Invest. Derm. 116: 970-974, 2001.

23. Milde, P.; Suss, R.; Megahed, M.; Goerz, G.: Morbus Dowling-Degos-Kitamura. Z.
Hautkr. 69: 282-283, 1994.

24. Mischke, D.; Wille, G.; Wild, A. G.: Allele frequencies and segregation
of human polymorphic keratins K4 and K5. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
548-552, 1990.

25. Moog, U.; de Die-Smulders, C. E. M.; Scheffer, H.; van der Vlies,
P.; Henquet, C. J. M.; Jonkman, M. F.: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
with mottled pigmentation: clinical aspects and confirmation of the
P24L mutation in the KRT5 gene in further patients. Am. J. Med. Genet. 86:
376-379, 1999.

26. Muller, F. B.; Anton-Lamprecht, I.; Kuster, W.; Korge, B. P.:
A premature stop codon mutation in the 2B helix termination peptide
of keratin 5 in a German epidermolysis bullosa simplex Dowling-Meara
case. J. Invest. Derm. 112: 988-990, 1999.

27. Nagao-Watanabe, M.; Fukao, T.; Matsui, E.; Kaneko, H.; Inoue,
R.; Kawamoto, N.; Kasahara, K.; Nagai, M.; Ichiki, Y.; Kitajima, Y.;
Kondo, N.: Identification of somatic and germline mosaicism for a
keratin 5 mutation in epidermolysis bullosa simplex in a family of
which the proband was previously regarded as a sporadic case. Clin.
Genet. 66: 236-238, 2004.

28. Nomura, K.; Shimizu, H.; Meng, X.; Umeki, K.; Tamai, K.; Sawamura,
D.; Nagao, K.; Kawakami, T.; Nishikawa, T.; Hashimoto, I.: A novel
keratin K5 mutation in Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex. J.
Invest. Derm. 107: 253-254, 1996.

29. Peters, B.; Kirfel, J.; Bussow, H.; Vidal, M.; Magin, T. M.:
Complete cytolysis and neonatal lethality in keratin 5 knockout mice
reveal its fundamental role in skin integrity and in epidermolysis
bullosa simplex. Molec. Biol. Cell 12: 1775-1789, 2001.

30. Pfendner, E. G.; Sadowski, S. G.; Uitto, J.: Epidermolysis bullosa
simplex: recurrent and de novo mutations in the KRT5 and KRT14 genes,
phenotype/genotype correlations, and implications for genetic counseling
and prenatal diagnosis. J. Invest. Derm. 125: 239-243, 2005.

31. Rosenberg, M.; Fuchs, E.; Le Beau, M. M.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows,
T. B.: Three epidermal and one simple epithelial type II keratin
genes map to human chromosome 12. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 57: 33-38,
1991.

32. Roth, W.; Reuter, U.; Wohlenberg, C.; Bruckner-Tuderman, L.; Magin,
T. M.: Cytokines as genetic modifiers in K5-/- mice and in human
epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Hum. Mutat. 30: 832-841, 2009.

33. Rugg, E. L.; Rachet-Prehu, M.-O.; Rochat, A.; Barrandon, Y.; Goossens,
M.; Lane, E. B.; Hovnanian, A.: Donor splice site mutation in keratin
5 causes in-frame removal of 22 amino acids of H1 and 1A rod domains
in Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7:
293-300, 1999.

34. Ryynanen, M.; Knowlton, R. G.; Uitto, J.: Mapping of epidermolysis
bullosa simplex mutation to chromosome 12. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49:
978-984, 1991.

35. Shemanko, C. S.; Horn, H. M.; Keohane, S. G.; Hepburn, N.; Kerr,
A. I. G.; Atherton, D. J.; Tidman, M. J.; Lane, E. B.: Laryngeal
involvement in the Dowling-Meara variant of epidermolysis bullosa
simplex with keratin mutations of severely disruptive potential. Brit.
J. Derm. 142: 315-320, 2000.

36. Sprecher, E.; Yosipovitch, G.; Bergman, R.; Ciubutaro, D.; Indelman,
M.; Pfendner, E.; Goh, L. C.; Miller, C. J.; Uitto, J.; Richard, G.
: Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis and epidermolysis bullosa simplex caused
by frameshift mutations altering the V2 tail domains of keratin 1
and keratin 5. J. Invest. Derm. 120: 623-626, 2003.

37. Stephens, K.; Zlotogorski, A.; Smith, L.; Ehrlich, P.; Wijsman,
E.; Livingston, R. J.; Sybert, V. P.: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex:
a keratin 5 mutation is a fully dominant allele in epidermal cytoskeleton
function. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 577-585, 1995.

38. Trask, D. K.; Band, V.; Zajchowski, D. A.; Yaswen, P.; Suh, T.;
Sager, R.: Keratins as markers that distinguish normal and tumor-derived
mammary epithelial cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2319-2323, 1990.

39. Uttam, J.; Hutton, E.; Coulombe, P. A.; Anton-Lamprecht, I.; Yu,
Q.-C.; Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Fine, J.-D.; Fuchs, E.: The genetic basis
of epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 9079-9084, 1996.

40. Yasukawa, K.; Sawamura, D.; McMillan, J. R.; Nakamura, H.; Shimizu,
H.: Dominant and recessive compound heterozygous mutations in epidermolysis
bullosa simplex demonstrate the role of the stutter region in keratin
intermediate filament assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 23670-23674,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/23/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/26/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/10/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/3/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/25/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/29/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/12/2004
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/28/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/25/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/10/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/9/2001
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 6/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/28/1999
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 9/9/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/21/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 11/22/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 8/29/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 11/04/2013
carol: 9/30/2013
ckniffin: 9/24/2013
carol: 7/23/2013
alopez: 3/29/2012
terry: 3/28/2012
ckniffin: 3/26/2012
ckniffin: 11/19/2010
alopez: 11/15/2010
terry: 11/10/2010
wwang: 11/19/2009
ckniffin: 11/3/2009
alopez: 10/2/2009
carol: 9/14/2009
ckniffin: 8/25/2009
wwang: 9/21/2006
alopez: 3/1/2006
alopez: 2/28/2006
terry: 2/27/2006
wwang: 5/5/2005
wwang: 5/2/2005
terry: 4/29/2005
mgross: 11/12/2004
alopez: 4/28/2003
alopez: 4/25/2003
alopez: 4/10/2003
mgross: 2/22/2002
alopez: 4/9/2001
alopez: 6/13/2000
carol: 11/3/1999
terry: 10/28/1999
carol: 9/9/1999
carol: 2/7/1999
terry: 2/3/1999
alopez: 5/14/1998
terry: 6/24/1997
alopez: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/21/1997
alopez: 6/2/1997
mark: 11/22/1996
mark: 8/29/1996
terry: 8/28/1996
terry: 8/22/1996
mark: 8/18/1995
jason: 7/1/1994
carol: 10/4/1993
carol: 6/30/1993
carol: 4/6/1993
carol: 7/6/1992

601040	TITLE *601040 SCAVENGER RECEPTOR CLASS B, MEMBER 1; SCARB1
;;CD36 ANTIGEN-LIKE 1; CD36L1;;
CD36 AND LIMPII ANALOGOUS 1; CLA1;;
SCAVENGER RECEPTOR, CLASS B, TYPE I; SRBI; SRB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Scavenger receptor class B type I (SRBI) mediates the bidirectional
transfer of cholesterol between cells and high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL) (summary by Vergeer et al., 2011).

CLONING

Using degenerate PCR, Calvo and Vega (1993) isolated a novel sequence
closely related to both the CD36 thrombospondin/collagen receptor
(173510) and to lysosomal integral membrane protein II (LIMPII; 602257).
This novel gene was termed CLA1 for 'CD36 and LIMPII analogous-1.' Calvo
and Vega (1993) isolated 2 alternatively spliced CLA1 cDNAs predicting
proteins of 409 and 509 amino acids from a human placenta cDNA library.
Calvo and Vega (1993) stated that the full-length CLA1 sequence predicts
a glycoprotein having 2 transmembrane domains, 2 short cytoplasmic
tails, and a large extracellular loop. They used immunofluorescence to
show that the protein is found on the plasma membrane. Northern blot
analysis revealed a 2.9-kb mRNA in several cell lines.

MAPPING

Calvo et al. (1995) used PCR analysis of human-hamster hybrids to map
the CD36L1 gene to human chromosome 12. They stated that CD36, CD36L1,
and CD36L2 represent a gene family, but that this family is not
clustered in the genome; these genes map to chromosomes 7, 12, and 4,
respectively. Cao et al. (1997) mapped the SCARB1 gene to 12q24.2-qter
by FISH. From the mapping of a QTL for internal carotid artery intimal
medial thickness with chromosome 12 to a site 161 cM from 12pter, it was
found by Fox et al. (2004) that SCARB1 is in close proximity.

GENE FUNCTION

High density lipoprotein (HDL) and low density lipoprotein (LDL) are
cholesterol transport particles whose plasma concentrations are directly
(in the case of LDL) and inversely (in the case of HDL) correlated with
risk for atherosclerosis. LDL metabolism involves cellular uptake and
degradation of the entire particle by a well-characterized receptor
(606945). HDL, in contrast, selectively delivers its cholesterol, but
not protein, to cells. Acton et al. (1996) showed that the mouse HDL
receptor involved in this selective delivery of cholesterol is the class
B scavenger receptor they referred to as SR-BI. This receptor binds HDL
with high affinity, is expressed primarily in liver and nonplacental
steroidogenic tissues, and mediates selective cholesterol uptake by a
mechanism distinct from the classic LDL receptor pathway. The authors
distinguished this receptor activity from that of other HDL-binding
proteins (e.g., 142695). By analogy with the LDL system, a key missing
element in the study of HDL metabolism had been a well-defined HDL
receptor, which could give a molecular and cellular handle on the
system. The class B type I scavenger receptor was the first molecularly
well-characterized HDL receptor.

The murine scavenger receptor type B class I (SRBI) has affinity for
high density lipoproteins (HDLs) and mediates the selective uptake of
cholesterol esters. Murao et al. (1997) noted that SRBI shares 81%
sequence identity with the longer (509 amino acid) form of human CLA1.
By Northern blot analysis, Murao et al. (1997) demonstrated that the
2.9-kb CLA1 message is expressed most strongly in human adrenal gland
and also in liver and testis. Murao et al. (1997) suggested that CLA1,
like SRBI, could play a role in the metabolism of HDL. However, CLA1 was
also expressed in monocytes and, like SRBI, recognized modified forms of
low density lipoproteins as well as native LDL and anionic
phospholipids. Murao et al. (1997) found that CLA1 bound selectively to
apoptotic thymocytes. Murao et al. (1997) suggested that CLA1 may have 2
distinct roles, functioning both as a mediator of HDL uptake in the
liver and steroidogenic tissues, and having an alternative role in
leukocytes.

Murao et al. (1997) and Cao et al. (1997) demonstrated that SRBI is
expressed in humans at high levels in precisely those tissues that
previously had been shown to exhibit the bulk of selective uptake of HDL
cholesterol in vivo. The temporal and spatial expression of SRBI during
murine embryogenesis was consistent with a role of SRBI in delivering
cholesterol to the developing fetus. Additional correlative evidence of
a role of SRBI in HDL cholesterol metabolism came from studies of the
effects on SRBI expression of hormones, which induce or suppress steroid
hormone synthesis. To address the role of SRBI in HDL cholesterol
homeostasis, mice were generated bearing an SRBI promoter mutation that
resulted in decreased expression of the receptor in homozygous mutant
mice (Varban et al., 1998). Hepatic expression of the receptor was
reduced by 53% with a corresponding increase in total plasma cholesterol
levels of 50 to 70%, attributable almost exclusively to elevated plasma
HDL. In addition to the increased HDL cholesteryl esters, HDL
phospholipids and apoA1 (107680) levels were elevated and there was an
increase in HDL particle size in mutant mice. Metabolic studies using
HDL-bearing nondegradable radiolabels in both the protein and lipid
components demonstrated that reduced hepatic SRBI expression by half was
associated with a decrease of 47% in selective uptake of cholesteryl
esters by the liver, and a corresponding reduction of 53% in selective
removal of HDL cholesteryl esters from plasma. Taken together, these
findings strongly supported a pivotal role for hepatic SRBI expression
in regulating plasma HDL levels and indicated that SRBI is the major
molecular mediating selective cholesteryl ester uptake by the liver. The
inverse correlation between plasma HDL levels and atherosclerosis
further suggests that SRBI may influence the development of coronary
artery disease. See Krieger (1998) for a comparison of the HDL and LDL
receptor systems.

Ikemoto et al. (2000) identified an SRBI-associated protein from rat
liver membrane extracts by using an affinity chromatography technique.
The protein contains 4 PDZ domains (see 603199 for a discussion of PDZ)
and associates with the C terminus of rat SRBI by using its N-terminal
first PDZ domain; see 603831.

Scarselli et al. (2002) determined that SCARB1 is a receptor for
hepatitis C virus glycoprotein E2. Binding between SCARB1 and E2 was
found to be independent of the genotype of the viral isolate.

Using a genomewide RNA interference screen in Drosophila macrophage-like
cells using Mycobacterium fortuitum, Philips et al. (2005) identified
factors required for general phagocytosis, as well as those needed
specifically for mycobacterial infection. One specific factor, Peste
(Pes), is a CD36 family member required for uptake of mycobacteria, but
not E. coli or S. aureus. Moreover, mammalian class B scavenger
receptors (SRs) conferred uptake of bacteria into nonphagocytic cells,
with SR-BI and SR-BII (602257) uniquely mediating uptake of M.
fortuitum, which suggests a conserved role for class B SRs in pattern
recognition and innate immunity.

Vishnyakova et al. (2006) found that transfection of embryonic kidney
and HeLa cell lines with CLA1 and its splice variant, CLA2, enhanced
uptake of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria.
Lipopolysaccharide and lipoteichoic acid competed with E. coli K12 for
CLA1 and CLA2 binding. Transmission electron microscopy and confocal
microscopy analyses revealed cytosolic accumulation of bacteria in cells
overexpressing CLA1/CLA2. In the presence of antibiotics, E. coli K12
survived and replicated intracellularly, but synthetic amphipathic
helical peptides prevented E. coli K12 invasion. Peritoneal macrophages
from mice lacking Cla1/Cla2 showed reduced bacterial uptake, as well as
decreased bacterial cytosolic invasion, ubiquitination, and proteasome
mobilization, whereas bacterial lysosomal accumulation was unaffected.
Vishnyakova et al. (2006) proposed that these CLA1/CLA2-mediated
intracellular events may facilitate infection with certain intracellular
pathogens, such as hepatitis C virus, and/or represent a mechanism of
pathogen recognition, ubiquitination, and degradation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 77 subjects who were heterozygous for familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890), Tai et al. (2003) examined the association of plasma lipid
concentrations with 3 common polymorphisms of the SRBI gene, which is a
candidate gene involved in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. Two
polymorphisms, one in exon 1 and one in exon 8, were associated with
variation in plasma concentrations of fasting triglyceride. In addition,
the exon 8 polymorphism was associated with change in lipoprotein
levels. In agreement with animal studies, the data suggested a role for
SRBI in the metabolism of apolipoprotein B (APOB; 107730)-containing
lipoproteins in humans. Tai et al. (2003) suggested that this pathway
may constitute a backup mechanism to LDL receptor-mediated pathways for
the catabolism of these lipoproteins, and could be particularly relevant
in subjects with high levels of apoB-containing lipoproteins, such as
those occurring in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia.

Decreased HDL cholesterol and raised triglyceride levels are well known
risk factors for atherosclerosis. McCarthy et al. (2003) examined
polymorphisms in the HDL receptor gene SCARB1 in 371 white patients with
coronary artery disease to determine their association with plasma
lipids. They found an association between a combination of genotypes in
women but not in men. McCarthy et al. (2003) concluded that genetic
variants in SCARB1 may be an important determinant of abnormal
lipoproteins in women and confer particular susceptibility to coronary
artery disease. They referred to the findings of Herrington et al.
(2002) that a differential response of HDL cholesterol to hormone
replacement therapy is dependent on the presence of genetic variants of
the estrogen receptor gene (133430.0004), and suggested that SCARB1
variants may also modulate the effect of hormone replacement therapy on
plasma lipid levels in women.

Acton et al. (1999) reported 3 common polymorphisms associated with
plasma lipids and body mass index. Osgood et al. (2003) hypothesized
that diabetic status may interact with these polymorphisms in
determining plasma lipid concentrations and particle size. They
evaluated this hypothesis in 2,463 nondiabetic (49% men) and 187
diabetic (64% men) participants in the Framingham Study. After
multivariate adjustment, they found a consistent association between the
exon 8 polymorphism and high density lipoprotein cholesterol
concentration and particle size. Interaction effects were not
significant for exon 8 and intron 5 polymorphisms. However, Osgood et
al. (2003) found statistically significant interactions between SCARB1
exon 1 genotypes and type 2 diabetes (125853), indicating that diabetic
subjects with the less common allele have lower lipid concentrations.
The authors concluded that SCARB1 gene variation modulates the lipid
profile, particularly in type 2 diabetes, contributing to the metabolic
abnormalities in these subjects.

Perez-Martinez et al. (2005) studied if a G-to-A polymorphism in exon 1
of the SCARB1 gene modifies the insulin sensitivity to dietary fat. They
studied 59 healthy volunteers. Steady-state plasma glucose after a
monounsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) diet was lower in G/A compared with
G/G subjects. Plasma nonesterified free fatty acid values were lower in
subjects carrying the less common A allele for all the diet periods. The
authors concluded that carriers of the G/A genotype have significant
increases in insulin sensitivity after a MUFA-rich diet compared with
G/G individuals. There were no homozygotes for the A allele.

Teslovich et al. (2010) performed a genomewide association study for
plasma lipids in more than 100,000 individuals of European ancestry and
reported 95 significantly associated loci (P = less than 5 x 10(-8)),
with 59 showing genomewide significant association with lipid traits for
the first time. The newly reported associations included SNPs near known
lipid regulators (e.g., CYP7A1, 118455; NPC1L1, 608010; and SCARB1) as
well as in scores of loci not previously implicated in lipoprotein
metabolism. The 95 loci contributed not only to normal variation in
lipid traits but also to extreme lipid phenotypes and had an impact on
lipid traits in 3 non-European populations (East Asians, South Asians,
and African Americans).

Vergeer et al. (2011) identified a missense mutation, P297S
(601040.0001), in the SCARB1 gene that was associated with elevated HDL
cholesterol levels (see HDLCQ6, 610762) but no other differences in
lipid profile parameters, atherosclerosis, or carotoid intima-media
thickness. However, carriers of the P297S variant showed decreased
platelet aggregation and a reduction in cholesterol efflux from
monocyte-macrophages. Carriers also had decreased adrenal
steroidogenesis. Khovidhunkit (2011) commented that the study by Vergeer
et al. (2011) did not distinguish whether the diminished adrenal
function in the carriers of the P297S mutation was primary or secondary,
and suggested measuring corticotropin levels to differentiate. Vergeer
et al. (2011) replied that there was no difference in median
corticotropin levels between the 15 P297S carriers and the 15
noncarriers, indicating that there was no pituitary defect. Vergeer et
al. (2011) suggested that the P297S mutation in the SCARB1 cholesterol
transporter directly impairs the adrenal uptake of cholesterol as a
substrate for steriodogenesis, leading to a primary defect in adrenal
function in human carriers.

Brunham et al. (2011) sequenced the SCARB1 gene in 120 Caucasian
probands with plasma HDL cholesterol levels at or above the 90th
percentile adjusted for age and gender, and in 80 Caucasian individuals
with HDLC below the 10th percentile, with no other lipid abnormalities.
In 2 probands with high HDLC, they identified 2 missense mutations
(601040.0002 and 601040.0003) that segregated with HDL cholesterol
levels in each family and were not found in the 80 individuals with low
HDLC levels or in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes databases.

ANIMAL MODEL

Miettinen et al. (2001) generated Scarb1 knockout mice and observed that
null females had abnormal HDLs, ovulated dysfunctional oocytes, and were
infertile. Fertility was restored when the structure and/or quantity of
abnormal HDL was altered by inactivating the Apoa1 gene or administering
the cholesterol-lowering drug probucol. Miettinen et al. (2001)
suggested that abnormal lipoprotein metabolism can cause infertility in
mice and may contribute to some forms of human female infertility.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS
6
SCARB1, PRO297SER

Among a cohort of 162 unrelated white participants with an HDL
cholesterol level above the 95th percentile (see HDLCQ6, 610762),
Vergeer et al. (2011) identified an individual who carried a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 889 of the SCARB1 gene, resulting in a
proline-to-serine substitution at codon 297 (P297S). This mutation was
not found in 150 normolipidemic controls. The proline at this position
is highly conserved across species. Vergeer et al. (2011) investigated
18 further carrier members of the proband's family and compared them to
36 family noncarrier controls matched according to BMI, sex, and age on
an aggregate basis. Carriers had significantly increased HDL cholesterol
levels (70.4 mg per deciliter vs 53.4 mg per deciliter in noncarriers; p
less than 0.001) but no significant differences in levels of other
plasma lipids. Vergeer et al. (2011) found no difference in the
prevalence of cardiovascular disease between carriers and noncarriers,
and no difference in carotid intima-media thickness. Among carriers,
Vergeer et al. (2011) identified decreased platelet aggregation in
response to different agonists compared with noncarriers, as well as
decreased adrenal steroidogenesis. Cholesterol uptake from HDL by
primary murine hepatocytes that expressed mutant SRB1 protein was
reduced by 56% of that of hepatocytes expressing wildtype SRB1 (p less
than 0.001).

.0002
HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS
6
SCARB1, THR175ALA

In a 50-year-old Caucasian man with HDL cholesterol (HDLC) levels above
the 95th percentile when adjusted for age and gender (HDLCQ6; 610762),
Brunham et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a 776A-G
transversion in the SCARB1 gene, resulting in a thr175-to-ala (T175A)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the large extracellular
loop. The mutation was present in the proband's 2 sons, who also had
HDLC levels above the 95th percentile, and in the proband's brother,
whose HDLC level was at the 71st percentile but who also had
hypertension and was taking medication that might influence the
phenotype. The mutation was not found in other family members with HDLC
levels less than the 95th percentile, in 80 unrelated Caucasian
individuals with HDLC levels below the 10th percentile, or in the dbSNP
or 1000 Genomes databases.

.0003
HIGH DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN CHOLESTEROL LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS
6
SCARB1, SER112PHE

In a 51-year-old Caucasian man with HDL cholesterol levels above the
95th percentile when adjusted for age and gender (HDLCQ6; 610762),
Brunham et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a 588C-T transition
in the SCARB1 gene, resulting in a ser112-to-phe (S112F) substitution at
a highly conserved residue in the large extracellular loop. The mutation
was not found in 80 unrelated Caucasian individuals with HDLC levels
below the 10th percentile, or in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes databases.
However, the proband's 76-year-old mother, who was also heterozygous for
S112F, had an HDLC level in the 15th percentile, with early-onset
cerebrovascular disease at 55 years of age as well as later coronary
artery disease. Analysis of 3 genes known to be associated with low HDLC
levels revealed that his mother also carried a heterozygous missense
mutation in the ABCA1 gene (V2091I), suggesting that ABCA1 mutations may
be dominant to SCARB1 mutations with respect to HDLC.

REFERENCE 1. Acton, S.; Osgood, D.; Donoghue, M.; Corella, D.; Pocovi, M.; Cenarro,
A.; Mozas, P.; Keilty, J.; Squazzo, S.; Woolf, E. A.; Ordovas, J.
M.: Association of polymorphisms at the SR-BI gene locus with plasma
lipid levels and body mass index in a white population. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 19: 1734-1743, 1999.

2. Acton, S.; Rigotti, A.; Landschultz, K. T.; Xu, S.; Hobbs, H. H.;
Krieger, M.: Identification of scavenger receptor SR-BI as a high
density lipoprotein receptor. Science 271: 518-650, 1996.

3. Brunham, L. R.; Tietjen, I.; Bochem, A. E.; Singaraja, R. R.; Franchini,
P. L.; Radomski, C.; Mattice, M.; Legendre, A.; Hovingh, G. K.; Kastelein,
J. J. P.; Hayden, M. R.: Novel mutations in scavenger receptor BI
associated with high HDL cholesterol in humans. Clin. Genet. 79:
575-581, 2011. Note: Erratum: Clin. Genet. 80: 406 only, 2011.

4. Calvo, D.; Dopazo, J.; Vega, M. A.: The CD36, CLA-1 (CD36L1),
and LIMPII (CD36L2) gene family: cellular distribution, chromosomal
location, and genetic evolution. Genomics 25: 100-106, 1995.

5. Calvo, D.; Vega, M. A.: Identification, primary structure, and
distribution of CLA-1, a novel member of the CD36/LIMPII gene family. J.
Biol. Chem. 268: 18929-18935, 1993.

6. Cao, G.; Garcia, C. K.; Wyne, K. L.; Schultz, R. A.; Parker, K.
L.; Hobbs, H. H.: Structure and localization of the human gene encoding
SR-BI/CLA-1: evidence for transcriptional control by steroidogenic
factor 1. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 33068-33076, 1997.

7. Fox, C. S.; Cupples, L. A.; Chazaro, I.; Polak, J. F.; Wolf, P.
A.; D'Agostino, R. B.; Ordovas, J. M.; O'Donnell, C. J.: Genomewide
linkage analysis for internal carotid artery intimal medial thickness:
evidence for linkage to chromosome 12. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 253-261,
2004. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 1080 only, 2004.

8. Herrington, D. M.; Howard, T. D.; Hawkins, G. A.; Reboussin, D.
M.; Xu, J.; Zheng, S. L.; Brosnihan, K. B.; Meyers, D. A.; Bleecker,
E. R.: Estrogen-receptor polymorphisms and effects of estrogen replacement
on high-density lipoprotein cholesterol in women with coronary disease. New
Eng. J. Med. 346: 967-974, 2002.

9. Ikemoto, M.; Arai, H.; Feng, D.; Tanaka, K.; Aoki, J.; Dohmae,
N.; Takio, K.; Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.; Inoue, K.: Identification
of a PDZ-domain-containing protein that interacts with the scavenger
receptor class B type I. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6538-6543, 2000.

10. Khovidhunkit, W.: A genetic variant of the scavenger receptor
BI in humans. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 364: 1375-1376, 2011.

11. Krieger, M.: The 'best' of cholesterols, the 'worst' of cholesterols:
a tale of two receptors. (Commentary) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
4077-4080, 1998.

12. McCarthy, J. J.; Lehner, T.; Reeves, C.; Moliterno, D. J.; Newby,
L. K.; Rogers, W. J.; Topol, E. J.: Association of genetic variants
in the HDL receptor, SR-B1, with abnormal lipids in women with coronary
artery disease. J. Med. Genet. 40: 453-458, 2003.

13. Miettinen, H. E.; Rayburn, H.; Krieger, M.: Abnormal lipoprotein
metabolism and reversible female infertility in HDL receptor (SR-BI)-deficient
mice. J. Clin. Invest. 108: 1717-1722, 2001.

14. Murao, K.; Terpstra, V.; Green, S. R.; Kondratenko, N.; Steinberg,
D.; Quehenberger, O.: Characterization of CLA-1, a human homologue
of rodent scavenger receptor BI, as a receptor for high density lipoprotein
and apoptotic thymocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 17551-17557, 1997.

15. Osgood, D.; Corella, D.; Demissie, S.; Cupples, L. A.; Wilson,
P. W. F.; Meigs, J. B.; Schaefer, E. J.; Coltell, O.; Ordovas, J.
M.: Genetic variation at the scavenger receptor class B type I gene
locus determines plasma lipoprotein concentrations and particle size
and interacts with type 2 diabetes: the Framingham Study. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 88: 2869-2879, 2003.

16. Perez-Martinez, P.; Perez-Jimenez, F.; Bellido, C.; Ordovas, J.
M.; Moreno, J. A.; Marin, C.; Gomez, P.; Delgado-Lista, J.; Fuentes,
F.; Lopez-Miranda, J.: A polymorphism exon 1 variant at the locus
of the scavenger receptor class B type I (SCARB1) gene is associated
with differences in insulin sensitivity in healthy people during the
consumption of an olive oil-rich diet. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90:
2297-2300, 2005.

17. Philips, J. A.; Rubin, E. J.; Perrimon, N.: Drosophila RNAi screen
reveals CD36 family member required for mycobacterial infection. Science 309:
1251-1253, 2005.

18. Scarselli, E.; Ansuini, H.; Cerino, R.; Roccasecca, R. M.; Acali,
S.; Filocamo, G.; Traboni, C.; Nicosia, A.; Cortese, R.; Vitelli,
A.: The human scavenger receptor class B type I is a novel candidate
receptor for the hepatitis C virus. EMBO J. 21: 5017-5025, 2002.

19. Tai, E. S.; Adiconis, X.; Ordovas, J. M.; Carmena-Ramon, R.; Real,
J.; Corella, D.; Ascaso, J.; Carmena, R.: Polymorphisms at the SRBI
locus are associated with lipoprotein levels in subjects with heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin. Genet. 63: 53-58, 2003.

20. Teslovich, T. M.; Musunuru, K.; Smith, A. V.; Edmondson, A. C.;
Stylianou, I. M.; Koseki, M.; Pirruccello, J. P.; Ripatti, S.; Chasman,
D. I.; Willer, C. J.; Johansen, C. T.; Fouchier, S. W.; and 197 others
: Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood
lipids. Nature 466: 707-713, 2010.

21. Varban, M. L.; Rinninger, F.; Wang, N.; Fairchild-Huntress, V.;
Dunmore, J. H.; Fang, Q.; Gosselin, M. L.; Dixon, K. L.; Deeds, J.
D.; Acton, S. L.; Tall, A. R.; Huszar, D.: Targeted mutation reveals
a central role for SR-BI in hepatic selective uptake of high density
lipoprotein cholesterol. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 4619-4624, 1998.

22. Vergeer, M.; Korporaal, S. J. A.; Franssen, R.; Meurs, I.; Out,
R.; Hovingh, G. K.; Hoekstra, M.; Sierts, J. A.; Dallinga-Thie, G.
M.; Motazacker, M. M.; Holleboom, A. G.; Van Berkel, T. J. C.; Kastelein,
J. J. P.; Van Eck, M.; Kuivenhoven, J. A.: Genetic variant of the
scavenger receptor BI in humans. New Eng. J. Med. 364: 136-145,
2011.

23. Vergeer, M.; Van Eck, M.; Kuivenhoven, J. A.: Reply to Khovidhunkit.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 364: 1376 only, 2011.

24. Vishnyakova, T. G.; Kurlander, R.; Bocharov, A. V.; Baranova,
I. N.; Chen, Z.; Abu-Asab, M. S.; Tsokos, M.; Malide, D.; Basso, F.;
Remaley, A.; Csako, G.; Eggerman, T. L.; Patterson, A. P.: CLA-1
and its splicing variant CLA-2 mediate bacterial adhesion and cytosolic
bacterial invasion in mammalian cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 16888-16893,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/25/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/19/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/31/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/28/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/28/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/21/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/6/1996

EDITED carol: 10/01/2013
carol: 4/11/2013
carol: 11/1/2012
terry: 10/25/2012
alopez: 4/11/2011
terry: 4/8/2011
joanna: 4/7/2011
carol: 2/2/2011
alopez: 1/31/2011
terry: 1/19/2011
alopez: 9/27/2010
mgross: 1/16/2007
alopez: 7/31/2006
alopez: 9/16/2005
terry: 9/15/2005
alopez: 6/28/2005
tkritzer: 1/31/2005
terry: 1/28/2005
alopez: 2/5/2004
terry: 2/5/2004
tkritzer: 2/3/2004
tkritzer: 2/2/2004
carol: 2/24/2003
tkritzer: 2/20/2003
terry: 2/10/2003
mgross: 12/18/2002
terry: 12/16/2002
carol: 9/9/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
mcapotos: 8/28/2000
terry: 8/7/2000
carol: 4/14/1999
alopez: 6/25/1998
terry: 5/21/1998
mark: 2/6/1996

602055	TITLE *602055 INSULIN-INDUCED GENE 1; INSIG1
;;CL6, RAT, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By subtractive hybridization and differential screening following
induction by insulin, Diamond et al. (1993) identified a 'delayed-early
gene,' designated CL-6, from the rat H35 cell line. The deduced
256-amino acid rat protein is highly hydrophobic. CL-6 is the most
highly insulin-induced gene in H35 cells. Northern blot analysis showed
that CL-6 is expressed in normal liver and kidney as well as in
regenerating liver. Peng et al. (1997) isolated a human gene that they
designated insulin-induced gene-1 (INSIG1). They found it to share 80%
identity with the rat CL-6 gene within the translated region.

By PCR of a HepG2 cell cDNA library, Yang et al. (2002) obtained a cDNA
encoding INSIG1. The deduced 277-amino acid protein has at least 6
membrane spanning regions and differs from the sequence reported by Peng
et al. (1997) at residues 27 (ala vs thr), 31 (ala vs pro), 32 (ala vs
pro), 99 (ala vs thr), 170 (val vs gly), and 172 (val vs gly). The human
INSIG1 protein is 84.6% and 84.2% identical to rat and mouse Insig1,
respectively. Northern blot analysis detected expression of INSIG1 in
all tissues tested, with high expression in liver. Immunofluorescence of
epitope-tagged INSIG1 in stably transfected CHO cells showed an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) localization when the cells were cultured in
either the absence or presence of sterols.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation and tandem mass spectrometry, Yang et al.
(2002) identified INSIG1 as an ER protein that binds the sterol-sensing
domain of SREBP (see 184756) cleavage-activating protein (SCAP; 601510)
and facilitates retention of the SCAP/SREBP complex in the ER. In
sterol-depleted cells, SCAP escorts SREBPs from ER to Golgi for
proteolytic processing, thereby allowing SREBPs to stimulate cholesterol
synthesis. Using blue native-PAGE, Yang et al. (2002) showed that
sterols induce binding of SCAP to INSIG1, and this binding was
correlated with the inhibition of SCAP exit from the ER. Overexpression
of INSIG1 increased the sensitivity of cells to sterol-mediated
inhibition of SREBP processing. Mutant SCAP (tyr298 to cys) failed to
bind INSIG1 and was resistant to sterol-mediated inhibition of ER exit.
The authors concluded that by facilitating sterol-dependent ER retention
of SCAP, INSIG1 plays a central role in cholesterol homeostasis.

Sever et al. (2003) showed that degradation of HMG-CoA reductase
(142910) is accelerated by the sterol-induced binding of its
sterol-sensing domain to the ER protein INSIG1. Accelerated degradation
was inhibited by overexpression of the sterol-sensing domain of SCAP,
suggesting that both proteins bind to the same site on INSIG1. Whereas
INSIG1 binding to SCAP led to ER retention, INSIG1 binding to HMG-CoA
reductase led to accelerated degradation that could be blocked by
proteasome inhibitors. The authors concluded that INSIG1 plays an
essential role in the sterol-mediated trafficking of HMG-CoA reductase
and SCAP.

Song et al. (2005) found that rodent Gp78 (AMFR; 603243), a
membrane-bound E3 ubiquitin ligase, associated with Insig1. Insig1 bound
the membrane domain of Gp78 in the absence or presence of sterols, and
upon addition of sterols, HMG-CoA reductase was recruited to the
complex. Knockdown of Gp78 by RNA interference prevented
sterol-dependent ubiquitination and degradation of endogenous reductase.
Vcp (601023), an ATPase that participates in postubiquitination steps of
ER-associated degradation and is required for reductase degradation,
indirectly associated with Insig1 by binding Gp78. The results
identified GP78 as a ubiquitin ligase that initiates sterol-dependent
degradation of HMG-CoA reductase, and INSIG1 as the bridge between
GP78/VCP and the reductase substrate.

Li et al. (2003) presented experimental results suggesting that INSIG1
expression restricts lipogenesis in mature adipocytes and blocks
differentiation in preadipocytes. They examined gene expression in the
fat tissue of normal mice at the onset of diet-induced obesity. INSIG1
mRNA rose progressively with a high-fat diet and declined on a
restricted diet. Transfection of mouse or human INSIG1 into 3T3-L1
preadipocytes completely prevented oil red O staining and blocked
upregulation of adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein-2 (FABP2; 134640),
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-2 (PPARG2; see 601487),
and carbohydrate response element-binding protein, while reducing
downregulation of preadipocyte factor-1 (PREF1; 176290).

Asp205 in INSIG1 and asp149 in INSIG2 are conserved residues that abut
the fourth transmembrane helix at the cytosolic side of the ER membrane.
Gong et al. (2006) found that mutation of these residues to alanine
resulted in INSIG proteins that were unable to bind SCAP and suppress
cleavage of SREBPs. The mutant INSIGs were also ineffective in
accelerating sterol-stimulated degradation of HMG CoA reductase.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Peng et al. (1997) mapped the
INSIG1 gene to chromosome 7q36.

ANIMAL MODEL

Takaishi et al. (2004) infected Zucker diabetic fatty rats (see 601007)
with recombinant adenovirus containing Insig1 or Insig2 (608660) cDNA.
Triacylglycerols in the liver and plasma of control diabetic rats rose
steeply, whereas the Insig-infected rats exhibited substantial
attenuation of hepatic steatosis and hyperlipidemia. Insig
overexpression was also associated with a reduction in the elevated
level of nuclear Srebp1c and reduced expression of Srebp1c lipogenic
target enzymes. In normal animals, overexpression of the Insigs reduced
the increase in Srebp1c mRNA and its target enzymes caused by refeeding.
Takaishi et al. (2004) concluded that both Insigs have antilipogenic
action.

Engelking et al. (2005) found that, whereas cholesterol feeding reduced
nuclear Srebps and lipogenic mRNAs in wildtype mice, this feedback
response was severely blunted in Insig1/Insig2 double-knockout mice, and
synthesis of cholesterol and fatty acids was not repressed.

In cortical neuron culture, Taghibiglou et al. (2009) found that
activation of NMDA receptors resulted in increased activation and
nuclear accumulation of SREBP1. The activation was primarily mediated by
the NR2B (138252) subunit-containing receptor. Inhibition of
NMDAR-dependent SREBP1 activation by cholesterol decreased NMDA-induced
excitotoxic cell death. Similarly, shRNA against SREBP1 also resulted in
decreased cell death in culture. These findings implicated SREBP1 as a
mediator of NMDA-induced excitotoxicity. NMDAR-mediated activation of
SREBP1 was shown to result from increased Insig1 degradation, which
could be inhibited with an interference peptide. In a rat model of focal
ischemic stroke, systemic administration of the INSIG1 interference
peptide prevented SREBP1 activation, substantially reduced neuronal
damage, and improved behavioral outcome.

REFERENCE 1. Diamond, R. H.; Du, K.; Lee, V. M.; Mohn, K. L.; Haber, B. A.;
Tewari, D. S.; Taub, R.: Novel delayed-early and highly insulin-induced
growth response genes: identification of HRS, a potential regulator
of alternative pre-mRNA splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 15185-15192,
1993.

2. Engelking, L. J.; Liang, G.; Hammer, R. E.; Takaishi, K.; Kuriyama,
H.; Evers, B. M.; Li, W.-P.; Horton, J. D.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown,
M. S.: Schoenheimer effect explained--feedback regulation of cholesterol
synthesis in mice mediated by Insig proteins. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
2489-2498, 2005.

3. Gong, Y.; Lee, J. N.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; Ye, J.:
Juxtamembranous aspartic acid in Insig-1 and Insig-2 is required for
cholesterol homeostasis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 6154-6159, 2006.

4. Li, J.; Takaishi, K.; Cook, W.; McCorkle, S. K.; Unger, R. H.:
Insig-1 brakes lipogenesis in adipocytes and inhibits differentiation
of preadipocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 9476-9481, 2003.

5. Peng, Y.; Schwarz, E. J.; Lazar, M. A.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N.
B.; Taub, R.: Cloning, human chromosomal assignment, and adipose
and hepatic expression of the CL-6/INSIG1 gene. Genomics 43: 278-284,
1997.

6. Sever, N.; Yang, T.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; DeBose-Boyd,
R. A.: Accelerated degradation of HMG CoA reductase mediated by binding
of insig-1 to its sterol-sensing domain. Molec. Cell 11: 25-33,
2003.

7. Song, B.-L.; Sever, N.; DeBose-Boyd, R. A.: Gp78, a membrane-anchored
ubiquitin ligase, associates with Insig-1 and couples sterol-regulated
ubiquitination to degradation of HMG CoA reductase. Molec. Cell 19:
829-840, 2005.

8. Taghibiglou, C.; Martin, H. G. S.; Lai, T. W.; Cho, T.; Prasad,
S.; Kojic, L.; Lu, J.; Liu, Y.; Lo, E.; Zhang, S.; Wu, J. Z. Z.; Li,
Y. P.; Wen, Y. H.; Imm, J.-H.; Cynader, M. S.; Wang, Y. T.: Role
of NMDA receptor-dependent activation of SREBP1 in excitotoxic and
ischemic neuronal injuries. Nature Med. 15: 1399-1406, 2009.

9. Takaishi, K.; Duplomb, L.; Wang, M.-Y.; Li, J.; Unger, R. H.:
Hepatic insig-1 or -2 overexpression reduces lipogenesis in obese
Zucker diabetic fatty rats and in fasted/refed normal rats. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 7106-7111, 2004.

10. Yang, T.; Espenshade, P. J.; Wright, M. E.; Yabe, D.; Gong, Y.;
Aebersold, R.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.: Crucial step in cholesterol
homeostasis: sterols promote binding of SCAP to INSIG-1, a membrane
protein that facilitates retention of SREBPs in ER. Cell 110: 489-500,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/17/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/26/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/17/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/22/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/10/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/15/1997

EDITED wwang: 01/06/2010
ckniffin: 12/17/2009
mgross: 9/26/2007
carol: 6/15/2007
mgross: 6/14/2006
terry: 6/14/2006
mgross: 10/26/2005
carol: 3/9/2005
mgross: 6/28/2004
terry: 6/17/2004
cwells: 9/15/2003
mgross: 4/22/2003
mgross: 9/10/2002
mark: 10/15/1997

613114	TITLE *613114 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 134, MEMBER B; FAM134B
;;JK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a region of chromosome 5p amplified in esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC; see 133239) in a Chinese population, Tang et al.
(2007) identified FAM134B, which they called JK1. The deduced 39.3-kD
protein has an EGF (131530)-like domain, 3 N-glycosylation sites, 3
N-myristoylation sites, and numerous possible phosphorylation sites.

Kurth et al. (2009) stated that the human FAM134B protein contains 497
amino acids. Structure analysis showed that the N-terminal half of
FAM134B has 2 unusually long hydrophobic segments of about 35 amino
acids each that are separated by a hydrophilic loop of about 60 amino
acids. This structure is similar to that of reticulon proteins (see
600865) that shape the curvature of endoplasmic reticulum membranes. The
C terminus of FAM134B contains a coiled-coil domain. Northern blot
analysis of adult mouse tissues detected at least 4 Fam134b transcripts.
High expression of an approximately 1.5-kb transcript was detected in
testis only. Transcripts of about 3.5 kb were more weakly expressed in
dorsal root ganglia, esophagus, skeletal muscle, and kidney, and many
other tissues showed much weaker Fam134b expression. In situ
hybridization of day-14.5 mouse embryos showed prominent staining of
sensory and autonomic ganglia. In cultured mouse dorsal root ganglia,
Fam134b colocalized with a cis-Golgi marker and partly colocalized with
a trans-Golgi marker.

GENE FUNCTION

Using multiplex RT-PCR, Tang et al. (2007) found that JK1 was
overexpressed in a significant number of ESCC cell lines and tumors
compared with normal esophageal cells and tissues. Overexpression of JK1
in NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts and HEK293 cells caused an increase in
growth rate, colony formation in soft agar, and foci formation in
confluent cultures. High-grade sarcomas were formed in athymic nude mice
following subcutaneous injection of JK1-overexpressing NIH-3T3 cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Tang et al. (2007) mapped the FAM134B gene
to chromosome 5p15.1, downstream of the delta-catenin gene (CTNND2;
604275).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with hereditary sensory and
autonomic neuropathy type IIB (HSAN2B; 613115), Kurth et al. (2009)
identified 4 different homozygous truncating loss-of-function mutations
in the FAM134B gene (613114.0001-613114.0004).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY AND AUTONOMIC, TYPE IIB
FAM134B, SER309TER

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous Saudi Arabian family with
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type 2B (613115), Kurth et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous 926C-G transversion in the FAM134B
gene, resulting in a ser309-to-ter (S309X) substitution.

.0002
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY AND AUTONOMIC, TYPE IIB
FAM134B, 2-BP DEL, 17CT

In a patient with HSAN2B (613115), Kurth et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 2-bp deletion in exon 1 of the FAM134B gene resulting in
frameshift and premature termination at residue 133 (Pro7GlyfsTer133).

.0003
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY AND AUTONOMIC, TYPE IIB
FAM134B, GLN145TER

In 2 sibs with HSAN2B (613115), Kurth et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous mutation in the FAM134B gene resulting in a gln145-to-ter
(Q145X) substitution.

.0004
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY AND AUTONOMIC, TYPE IIB
FAM134B, IVS7DS, T-C, +2

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with HSAN2B (613115), Kurth
et al. (2009) identified a homozygous T-to-C transition in intron 7 of
the FAM134B gene (873+2T-C). The mutation results in a stop codon after
4 additional amino acids.

REFERENCE 1. Kurth, I.; Pamminger, T.; Hennings, J. C.; Soehendra, D.; Huebner,
A. K.; Rotthier, A.; Baets, J.; Senderek, J.; Topaloglu, H.; Farrell,
S. A.; Nurnberg, G.; Nurnberg, P.; De Jonghe, P.; Gal, A.; Kaether,
C.; Timmerman, V.; Hubner, C. A.: Mutations in FAM134B, encoding
a newly identified Golgi protein, cause severe sensory and autonomic
neuropathy. Nature Genet. 41: 1179-1181, 2009.

2. Tang, W. K.; Chui, C. H.; Fatima, S.; Kok, S. H. L.; Pak, K. C.;
Ou, T. M.; Hui, K. S.; Wong, M. M.; Wong, J.; Law, S.; Tsao, S. W.;
Lam, K. Y.; Beh, P. S. L.; Srivastava, G.; Chan, A. S. C.; Ho, K.
P.; Tang, J. C. O.: Oncogenic properties of a novel gene JK-1 located
in chromosome 5p and its overexpression in human esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma. Int. J. Molec. Med. 19: 915-923, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/6/2009

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
mgross: 11/23/2009
alopez: 11/10/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
mgross: 11/6/2009

612320	TITLE *612320 CUB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; CDCP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Maraganore et al. (2005) identified the CDCP2 gene, which they called
LOC200008, within the PARK10 (606852) locus for late-onset Parkinson
disease (PD; 168600) susceptibility on chromosome 1.

GENE FUNCTION

Maraganore et al. (2005) stated that the CDCP2 protein is predicted to
have oxidoreductase activity and is potentially involved in cholesterol
biosynthesis and electron transport.

MAPPING

Maraganore et al. (2005) mapped the CDCP2 gene to chromosome 1p32.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of the possible association of PARK10 and the CDCP2
gene, see 606852.

REFERENCE 1. Maraganore, D. M.; de Andrade, M.; Lesnick, T. G.; Strain, K. J.;
Farrer, M. J.; Rocca, W. A.; Krishna Pant, P. V.; Frazer, K. A.; Cox,
D. R.; Ballinger, D. G.: High-resolution whole-genome association
study of Parkinson disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77: 685-693, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/29/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/26/2008

EDITED carol: 09/30/2008
ckniffin: 9/29/2008
mgross: 9/26/2008

602325	TITLE *602325 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 4-GAMMA, 2; EIF4G2
;;EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 4G-LIKE 1;;
p97;;
DEATH-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 5; DAP5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

All eukaryotic cellular mRNAs are posttranscriptionally modified by the
addition of a cap structure, m(7)GpppN (where N is any nucleotide), at
the 5-prime terminus. Translation initiation is mediated by specific
recognition of the cap structure by eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4F (eIF4F), a cap-binding complex. Eukaryotic initiation factor
4G (EIF4G; 600495) serves as the scaffold for formation of the eIF4F
complex. Imataka et al. (1997) identified a human embryonic brain cDNA
encoding a protein of 907 amino acids, termed p97, with 28% identity to
the C-terminal two-thirds of EIF4G, a region that contains EIF4A (see
601102)- and EIF3 (see 602039)-binding sites. In vitro mutagenesis
followed by transfection into Hela cells demonstrated that the start
codon is a GTG.

Shaughnessy et al. (1997) independently cloned a mouse homolog of EIF4G,
which they designated Eif4g2, by exon trapping from a mouse YAC spanning
a site of viral integration found in myeloid leukemias of BXH2 mice.
Northern blots using the mouse gene as a probe revealed that the gene is
expressed ubiquitously in human tissues as a 4.6-kb transcript. Yamanaka
et al. (1997) reported that the mouse and human EIF4G2 (which they
termed NAT1) genes are 96% identical.

In a screen for genes involved in interferon gamma (IFNG;
147570)-induced apoptosis, Levy-Strumpf et al. (1997) identified EIF4G2
and named it DAP5 for 'death-associated protein 5.'

GENE FUNCTION

Imataka et al. (1997) used immunoprecipitation studies with HA- or
FLAG-tagged proteins to show that p97 specifically binds to EIF4A and
EIF3, but not to EIF4E (133440) in vitro. Transient transfection
experiments showed that p97 suppressed both cap-dependent and
independent translation, and that overexpression of p97 reduced overall
protein synthesis. Imataka et al. (1997) suggested that p97 is a general
repressor of translation that acts by forming translationally inactive
complexes.

Pyronnet et al. (1999) demonstrated that MNK1 (MKNK1; 606724) interacts
with the C-terminal region of p97. They hypothesized that p97 may block
phosphorylation of eIF4E by sequestering Mnk1.

Levy-Strumpf et al. (1997) showed that while a fragment of DAP5 cDNA
from the C-terminal region (encoding a 28-kD 'miniprotein') protected
cells from IFNG-induced programmed cell death at low levels of
expression, higher levels of expression were toxic. They proposed that
the miniprotein may be a dominant-negative inhibitor of the essential
DAP5 protein, and that DAP5 may play a specific role in apoptosis.

Yamanaka et al. (1997) found that NAT1 mRNA is edited at high levels by
APOBEC1 (600130), creating multiple stop codons. They suggested that
aberrant APOBEC1 editing of NAT1 mRNA may contribute to the potent
oncogenesis induced by APOBEC1 overexpression in mice.

In stressed cells, a caspase (see CASP1; 147678)-cleaved DAP5/p86
isoform regulates cap-independent translation of various mRNAs via an
internal ribosome entry site (IRES). Marash et al. (2008) showed that
DAP5 also regulated cap-independent translation in unstressed cells.
Knockdown of endogenous DAP5 in HeLa cells by short hairpin RNA induced
substantial apoptosis during M phase that was associated with reduced
translation of the antiapoptotic proteins BCL2 (151430) and CDK1 (CDC2;
116940). Cap-dependent translation was not inhibited in DAP5-knockdown
cells. Marash et al. (2008) concluded that DAP5 maintains cell survival
during mitosis by promoting cap-independent translation of prosurvival
proteins.

MAPPING

Shaughnessy et al. (1997) suggested that, based on synteny with mouse
chromosomes, the human EIF4G2 gene maps to 11p15. Yamanaka et al. (1997)
independently mapped the EIF4G2 gene to 11p15 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Imataka, H.; Olsen, H. S.; Sonenberg. N.: A new translational
regulator with homology to eukaryotic translation initiation factor
4G. EMBO J. 16: 817-825, 1997.

2. Levy-Strumpf, N.; Deiss, L. P.; Berissi, H.; Kimchi, A.: DAP-5,
a novel homolog of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4G isolated
as a putative modulator of gamma interferon-induced programmed cell
death. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17: 1615-1625, 1997.

3. Marash, L.; Liberman, N.; Henis-Korenblit, S.; Sivan, G.; Reem,
E.; Elroy-Stein, O.; Kimchi, A.: DAP5 promotes cap-independent translation
of Bcl-2 and CDK1 to facilitate cell survival during mitosis. Molec.
Cell 30: 447-459, 2008.

4. Pyronnet, S.; Imataka, H.; Gingras, A.-C.; Fukunaga, R.; Hunter,
T.; Sonenberg, N.: Human eukaryotic translation initiation factor
4G (eIF4G) recruits Mnk1 to phosphorylate eIF4E. EMBO J. 18: 270-279,
1999.

5. Shaughnessy, J. D., Jr.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: cDNA
cloning, expression analysis, and chromosomal localization of a gene
with high homology to wheat eIF-(iso)4F and mammalian eIF-4G. Genomics 39:
192-197, 1997.

6. Yamanaka, S.; Poksay, K. S.; Arnold, K. S.; Innerarity, T. L.:
A novel translational repressor mRNA is edited extensively in livers
containing tumors caused by the transgene expression of the apoB mRNA-editing
enzyme. Genes Dev. 11: 321-333, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/14/2008
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 2/27/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 08/14/2008
terry: 8/14/2008
mgross: 2/27/2002
alopez: 5/11/1999
alopez: 2/13/1998
alopez: 2/9/1998

610771	TITLE *610771 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 5; CHD5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Changes in gene expression are associated with changes in chromatin
structure, which can result from modification of histones by acetylation
and methylation. In addition, SWI/SNF proteins can effect chromatin
structure and gene expression by causing ATP-dependent disruption of the
nucleosome and by enhancing binding of transcription factors. CHD5
belongs to a group of SWI/SNF proteins called CHD proteins, which
contain a SWI/SNF-like helicase/ATPase domain, as well as a DNA-binding
domain and a chromodomain that directly modifies chromatin structure
(Thompson et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequence analysis of a region on chromosome 1 frequently deleted in
neuroblastomas, followed by PCR and 5-prime RACE of a fetal brain cDNA
library, Thompson et al. (2003) cloned CHD5. The predicted 1,954-amino
acid CHD5 protein contains 2 N-terminal PHD zinc fingers, followed by 2
chromodomains, a central helicase/ATPase domain, and a C-terminal
DNA-binding domain. It has several potential nuclear localization
signals. Among CHD proteins, CHD5 is most homologous to CHD3 and CHD4,
sharing 70% and 76% amino acid identity, respectively. It shares 93%
amino acid identity with its mouse homolog. RT-PCR detected CHD5
expression in adult and fetal total brain, cerebellum, and adrenal
gland, but not in any other tissue examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Thompson et al. (2003) determined that the CHD5 gene contains 42 exons
and spans more than 78 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Thompson et al. (2003) mapped the CHD5
gene to chromosome 1p36.3. This region is frequently deleted in
neuroblastomas and other neural crest tumors, suggesting that CHD5
deletion might contribute to cancer. Thompson et al. (2003) also noted
that microdeletions in monosomy 1p36 syndrome (607872) would include the
CHD5 gene, suggesting that haploinsufficiency of CHD5 may contribute to
the neurologic and developmental problems seen in those patients.

Bagchi et al. (2007) mapped the mouse Cdh5 gene to chromosome 4 in a
region that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome 1p36.

ANIMAL MODEL

Deletions of chromosome 1p36 are common in human malignancies of
epithelial, neural, and hematopoietic origins. To identify tumor
suppressor genes in this region, Bagchi et al. (2007) used Cre-lox
methodology to generate mice with either a gain or loss of the syntenic
4.5-Mb interval on mouse chromosome 4. Fibroblasts from embryos
heterozygous for an extra copy of the region showed decreased
proliferation and increased senescence compared with wildtype
fibroblasts, whereas fibroblasts from embryos heterozygous for a single
copy of the region showed enhanced proliferation. Fibroblasts from
embryos heterozygous for the duplicated region could be serially
passaged in culture only 8 to 10 times, but fibroblasts from embryos
heterozygous for a single copy of the region grew indefinitely. Mice
heterozygous for a single copy of the region were indistinguishable from
wildtype mice at embryonic day 17.5, although adult mice frequently
developed hyperplasia. In contrast, embryos of mice heterozygous for the
duplicated region died perinatally due to developmental abnormalities
resulting from increased apoptosis. Embryos with the duplicated interval
on one chromosome and the deleted interval on the other chromosome
(i.e., normal copy number) were indistinguishable from wildtype embryos.
Mice heterozygous for the duplicated interval could be rescued on a
background with a single p53 gene (TP53; 191170), indicating that the
increased dosage acted through the p53 pathway. To identify the
causative gene, Bagchi et al. (2007) used short hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated knockdown of several genes in the interval and found
that only shRNA against Chd5 efficiently rescued the proliferative
effect of fibroblasts heterozygous for the duplicated interval.
Additional experiments using fibroblasts from embryos heterozygous for a
single copy of the interval or a duplication of the interval, as well as
fibroblasts in which Chd5 expression was knocked down by RNA
interference, showed that Chd5 modulated p53 through the intermediaries
p19(Arf) and p16(Ink4a), which are encoded by the Cdkn2a gene (600160).
Bagchi et al. (2007) concluded that CHD5 is a tumor suppressor that
controls proliferation, apoptosis, and senescence via the p19(ARF)/p53
pathway. When more copies of CHD5 are present, more p19(ARF) is produced
and more p53 is made, leading to apoptosis, senescence, and reduced
proliferation. The opposite occurs when CHD5 is present in single copy.

REFERENCE 1. Bagchi, A.; Papazoglu, C.; Wu, Y.; Capurso, D.; Brodt, M.; Francis,
D.; Bredel, M.; Vogel, H.; Mills, A. A.: CHD5 is a tumor suppressor
at human 1p36. Cell 128: 459-475, 2007.

2. Thompson, P. M.; Gotoh, T.; Kok, M.; White, P. S.; Brodeur, G.
M.: CHD5, a new member of the chromodomain gene family, is preferentially
expressed in the nervous system. Oncogene 22: 1002-1011, 2003.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/16/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/16/2007

104701	TITLE *104701 AMYLASE, SALIVARY, B; AMY1B
DESCRIPTION To investigate the genomic organization of the human alpha-amylase
genes, Groot et al. (1989) isolated the pertinent genes from a cosmid
library constructed of DNA from an individual expressing 3 different
salivary amylase allozymes. From the restriction maps of the overlapping
cosmids and a comparison of these maps with the restriction enzyme
patterns of DNA from the donor and family members, they were able to
identify 2 haplotypes consisting of very different numbers of salivary
amylase genes. The short haplotype contained 2 pancreatic genes, AMY2A
and AMY2B, and 1 salivary amylase gene, AMY1C, arranged in the order
2B--2A--1C, encompassing a total length of approximately 100 kb. The
long haplotype spanned about 300 kb and contained 6 additional genes
arranged in 2 repeats, each one consisting of 2 salivary genes, AMY1A
and AMY1B, and a pseudogene lacking the first 3 exons, AMYP1. The order
of the amylase genes within the repeat was 1A--1B--P1. All of the genes
were in a head-to-tail orientation except AMY1B, which had the reverse
orientation with respect to the other genes.

REFERENCE 1. Groot, P. C.; Bleeker, M. J.; Pronk, J. C.; Arwert, F.; Mager,
W. H.; Planta, R. J.; Eriksson, A. W.; Frants, R. R.: The human alpha-amylase
multigene family consists of haplotypes with variable numbers of genes.
Genomics 5: 29-42, 1989.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/21/1991

EDITED supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/10/1992
carol: 10/21/1991

609295	TITLE *609295 SEMAPHORIN 6D; SEMA6D
;;KIAA1479
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned SEMA6D, which they designated
KIAA1479. RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in adult whole brain,
spinal cord, and most specific adult brain regions examined. Somewhat
lower expression was detected in fetal brain and adult ovary, and most
other tissues showed intermediate expression, with the lowest level in
testis.

By searching databases for sequences similar to SEMA6C (609294),
followed by RT-PCR and 5-prime RACE, Qu et al. (2002) cloned 5 SEMA6D
splice variants. The 4 long variants, designated SEMA6D.1 through
SEMA6D.4, encode deduced proteins of 998 to 1,073 amino acids. All 4
contain an N-terminal signal sequence, followed by a class VI SEMA
domain, a PSI domain with a cysteine-rich motif, a transmembrane
segment, and a long cytoplasmic region. SEMA6D.1 also has 9 potential
N-glycosylation sites. The long variants differ in amino acid sequence
between the extracellular PSI domain and the transmembrane domain. A
short variant, designated SEMA6Ds, encodes a truncated 476-amino acid
protein with only the signal sequence and SEMA domain. By Northern blot
analysis using a sequence common to all SEMA6D variants as probe, Qu et
al. (2002) detected a major 6.5-kb transcript and a second 5.0-kb
transcript. The 6.5-kb transcript was expressed abundantly in kidney,
brain, and placenta, moderately in heart and skeletal muscle, and weakly
in lung, colon, and small intestine. Expression was barely detectable in
other tissues. The 5.0-kb transcript was expressed faintly in kidney,
skeletal muscle, heart, and placenta and was barely detectable in all
other tissues. RT-PCR using variant-specific primers showed that
SEMA6D.1 was the major transcript in all tissues examined except
placenta. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos detected Sema6d
expression beginning at embryonic day 13, with widespread expression in
brain and spinal cord. Labeling of cultured rat spinal cord neurons
showed expression in neural perikaryon, processes, and termini, but no
labeling of nuclei or axons. Transient transfection of SEMA6D.1 in COS-7
cells resulted in expression of a cytoplasmic protein of about 67.1 kD
and a secreted protein of about 80 kD, suggesting modification after
secretion. SEMA6D.1 was also expressed on the cell surface. SEMA6Ds
showed a punctate cytoplasmic distribution, with accumulation at the 2
ends of many cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Qu et al. (2002) exposed chicken embryo dorsal root ganglion explants
and neonatal rat cortical and hippocampal neurons to SEMA6D secreted
from transfected COS-7 cells and found that SEMA6D induced growth cone
collapse. SEMA6D also inhibited axonal extension in a nerve growth
factor (NGF; see 162030)-differentiated rat pheochromocytoma cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Qu et al. (2002) determined that the SEMA6D contains at least 19
alternatively spliced exons and spans about 58 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Qu et al. (2002) mapped the SEMA6D gene to
chromosome 15q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

2. Qu, X.; Wei, H.; Zhai, Y.; Que, H.; Chen, Q.; Tang, F.; Wu, Y.;
Xing, G.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, S.; Fan, M.; He, F.: Identification, characterization,
and functional study of the two novel human members of the semaphorin
gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 35574-35585, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/1/2005

EDITED mgross: 04/01/2005

615187	TITLE *615187 POST-GPI ATTACHMENT TO PROTEINS 2; PGAP2
;;FGF RECEPTOR-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 1; FRAG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) modification of plasma membrane
proteins occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and GPI-anchored
proteins are incorporated into rafts in the Golgi during their transport
to the cell surface. PGAP2 appears to be involved in maturation of the
GPI anchor on GPI-anchored proteins (Tashima et al., 2006).

CLONING

By screening an M426 human embryonic fibroblast cell line with rat
Frag1, Lorenzi et al. (1999) cloned PGAP2, which they called FRAG1. The
deduced 316-amino acid protein has 2 N-terminal FRAG1 homology (FH)
domains and 4 possible isoprenylation signals. Hydropathy analysis
suggested that FRAG1 has 7 transmembrane segments. Human and rat FRAG1
share 92% amino acid identity, but the rat protein has only 1 FH domain.
Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a 2.0-kb FRAG1
transcript in all 16 tissues examined, with highest expression in testis
and pancreas, and lowest expression in brain and thymus. A transcript of
about 3.2 kb was also detected in several tissues, predominantly
pancreas, spleen, and prostate. FRAG1 was also detected in a number of
tumor cell lines at a level comparable to that observed in normal
tissues.

By database analysis and cloning using rat and hamster cDNA libraries,
Tashima et al. (2006) identified human, rat, and hamster cDNAs encoding
a 254-amino acid PGAP2 protein. They also identified a splice variant in
human and hamster that encodes a 250-amino acid isoform lacking a VSQE
sequence. Rat Pgap2 localized to Golgi in transfected NRK cells.

Hansen et al. (2013) stated that the PGAP2 gene encodes 16 different RNA
transcripts, 8 of which encode different isoforms and 8 that are
noncoding RNA. Isoform 8, which is 254 amino acids long and contains 5
alpha-helix domains embedded in the Golgi membrane, is believed to be
the biologically active isoform. The N terminus is in the cytoplasm and
the C terminus is in the Golgi lumen.

GENE FUNCTION

Tashima et al. (2006) found that transfected CHO cells lacking Pgap2
were deficient in cell surface expression of the human GPI-anchored
proteins CD59 (107271) and CD55 (125240). Cotransfection of rat Pgap2 or
the human or hamster variant encoding the short PGAP2 isoform restored
CD59 surface expression. GPI-anchored proteins appeared to traffic
normally through the ER and Golgi, but they were secreted upon arrival
at the plasma membrane via phospholipid D (see 602382)-like activity.
The secreted proteins showed an altered GPI anchor. Tashima et al.
(2006) proposed that remodeling of the GPI anchor occurs in GPI-anchored
proteins, and that in Pgap2-deficient cells, this remodeling is
defective, resulting in GPI-anchored proteins that are sensitive to
cleavage then secretion from the plasma membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lorenzi et al. (1999) determined that the PGAP2 gene contains 6 exons
and spans over 7 kb. The tandem FH domains in the FRAG1 protein are
encoded by exons 1 and 2.

MAPPING

Using FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Lorenzi et al. (1999) mapped
the PGAP2 gene to chromosome 11p15.5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous families with
hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome-3 (HPMRS3; 614207),
Hansen et al. (2013) identified 2 different homozygous missense
mutations in the PGAP2 gene (615187.0001 and 615187.0002, respectively).
In vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant alleles
were hypomorphic and caused decreased enzyme activity. Hansen et al.
(2013) commented that the disorder due to PGAP2 mutations can be viewed
as part of a disease family representing a spectrum of disorders due to
mutations in genes involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor
biosynthesis. Mutations in genes earlier in the pathway appear to cause
a more severe phenotype, including dysmorphic features (e.g., MCAHS1,
614080), than mutations in genes that act later in the pathway.

Among 13 individuals with intellectual disability and increased serum
alkaline phosphatase who were screened for mutations in genes encoding
proteins in the GPI-anchor biosynthesis pathway, Krawitz et al. (2013)
found that 2 unrelated patients carried biallelic missense mutations in
the PGAP2 gene (615187.0003-615187.0005). In vitro studies showed that
the mutations caused decreased enzyme activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, TYR99CYS

In 3 affected members of a consanguineous Syrian family (MR043) with
autosomal recessive hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation-3 (HPMRS3;
614207) originally reported by Abou Jamra et al. (2011), Hansen et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.296A-G transition in the PGAP2 gene,
resulting in a tyr99-to-cys (Y99C) substitution between transmembrane
segments 1 and 2 in the Golgi lumen. The mutation, which was found by
exome sequencing of the linked region on chromosome 11p15, was confirmed
by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in the family. In
vitro functional expression studies in CHO cells showed that the mutant
protein was expressed but had significantly decreased activity compared
to wildtype. Patient lymphoblastoid cells showed essentially normal
expression of the GPI-anchored proteins DAF (125240) and CD59 (107271),
supporting a hypomorphic effect of the Y99C mutation.

.0002
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, ARG177PRO

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family (MR5) with
HPMRS3 (614207) originally reported by Rehman et al. (2011), Hansen et
al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.530G-C transversion in the PGAP2
gene, resulting in an arg177-to-pro (R177P) substitution between
transmembrane segments 3 and 4 in the Golgi lumen. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing of the linked region on chromosome 11p15,
was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in
the family. In vitro functional expression studies in CHO cells showed
that the mutant protein was expressed but had significantly decreased
activity compared to wildtype. Patient lymphoblastoid cells showed
essentially normal expression of the GPI-anchored proteins DAF (125240)
and CD59 (107271), supporting a hypomorphic effect of the R177P
mutation.

.0003
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, LEU127SER

In a Turkish boy, born of consanguineous parents, with HPMRS3 (614207),
Krawitz et al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.380T-C transition in the
PGAP2 gene, resulting in a leu127-to-ser (L127S) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation segregated with the disorder in
the family. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein had decreased activity compared to wildtype.

.0004
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, ARG16TRP

In a 28-year-old Finnish woman with mild HPMRS3 (614207), Krawitz et al.
(2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PGAP2
gene: a c.46C-T transition resulting in an arg16-to-trp (R16W)
substitution, and a c.479C-T transition resulting in a thr160-to-ile
(T160I; 615187.0005) substitution. Both mutations occurred at highly
conserved residues. In vitro functional expression studies showed that
the mutant proteins had decreased activity compared to wildtype. Higher
residual activity of R16W may explain the milder phenotype in this
patient.

.0005
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, THR160ILE

See 615187.0004 and Krawitz et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hansen, L.; Tawamie, H.; Murakami, Y.; Mang, Y.; Rehman, S.; Buchert,
R.; Schaffer, S.; Muhammad, S.; Bak, M.; Nothen, M. M.; Bennett, E.
P.; Maeda, Y.; Aigner, M.; Reis, A.; Kinoshita, T.; Tommerup, N.;
Baig, S. M.; Abou Jamra, R.: Hypomorphic mutations in PGAP2, encoding
a GPI-anchor-remodeling protein, cause autosomal-recessive intellectual
disability. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 575-583, 2013.

3. Krawitz, P. M.; Murakami, Y.; Riess, A.; Hietala, M.; Kruger, U.;
Zhu, N.; Kinoshita, T.; Mundlos, S.; Hecht, J.; Robinson, P. N.; Horn,
D.: PGAP2 mutations, affecting the GPI-anchor-synthesis pathway,
cause hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 92: 584-589, 2013.

4. Lorenzi, M. V.; Castagnino, P.; Aaronson, D. C.; Lieb, D. C.; Lee,
C. C.; Keck, C. L.; Popescu, N. C.; Miki, T.: Human FRAG1 encodes
a novel membrane-spanning protein that localizes to chromosome 11p15.5,
a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in cancer. Genomics 62:
59-66, 1999.

5. Rehman, S.; Baig, S. M.; Eiberg, H.; Rehman, S.; Ahmad, I.; Malik,
N. A.; Tommerup, N.; Hansen, L.: Autozygosity mapping of a large
consanguineous Pakistani family reveals a novel non-syndromic autosomal
recessive mental retardation locus on 11p15-tel. Neurogenetics 12:
247-251, 2011.

6. Tashima, Y.; Taguchi, R.; Murata, C.; Ashida, H.; Kinoshita, T.;
Maeda, Y.: PGAP2 is essential for correct processing and stable expression
of GPI-anchored proteins. Molec. Biol. Cell 17: 1410-1420, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/9/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/18/2013

EDITED alopez: 05/23/2013
ckniffin: 5/9/2013
mgross: 4/18/2013

605393	TITLE *605393 LYSINE-SPECIFIC DEMETHYLASE 5B; KDM5B
;;JUMONJI, AT-RICH INTERACTIVE DOMAIN 1B; JARID1B;;
PUTATIVE DNA/CHROMATIN-BINDING MOTIF 1;;
PUT1;;
PLU1;;
RETINOBLASTOMA-BINDING PROTEIN 2, HOMOLOG 1A; RBBP2H1A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Overexpression of ERBB2 (164870) correlates with a poor prognosis in
breast cancer. Instead of functioning as a heterodimeric receptor,
overexpressed ERBB2 appears to act as a constitutively signaling,
autophosphorylating homodimer. To isolate genes whose expression is
reversibly regulated by ERBB2 signaling as a homodimer, Lu et al. (1999)
treated a mammary epithelial cell line overexpressing ERBB2 with an
antibody (4D5) that downregulates its phosphorylation. Using isolated
partial cDNAs to screen fetal brain and breast cancer cell line cDNA
libraries, they isolated a full-length cDNA, which they designated PLU1.
PLU1 encodes a deduced 1,544-amino acid protein containing 3
cysteine-rich zinc-binding PHD/LAP domains, a DNA-binding domain that is
also found in the Drosophila dead ringer (dri) gene, 5 putative nuclear
localization signals, and other conserved regions of unknown function.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of PLU1 transcripts at low
levels in nonmalignant mammary cell lines and in colon cancer cell lines
but at high levels in breast cancer cell lines. High expression in
transformed breast cell lines decreased after treatment with 4D5. In
situ hybridization analysis detected strong expression in the invasive
but not in the benign components of primary breast carcinomas. Northern
blot analysis detected high mRNA levels in normal testis and low levels
in placenta, ovary, and tonsil. In situ hybridization analysis
demonstrated expression in Sertoli cells. Western blot,
immunohistochemical, and confocal microscopy analyses determined that
PLU1 is expressed as a 170-kD protein in the nucleus. Permanent PLU1
transfectants could not be obtained, suggesting that overexpression of
PLU1 may not be compatible with cell viability.

Kashuba et al. (2000) used a NotI-linking clone as a probe to isolate a
novel putative member of the retinoblastoma-binding protein family,
which they termed retinoblastoma-binding protein-2 homolog-1A
(RBBP2H1A). They found that the maximum open reading frame encodes a
deduced 1,681-amino acid protein containing 3 DNA-binding zinc finger
domains and 2 bipartite nuclear localization signals. Except for an
additional 137 amino acids, the protein is identical to PLU1. The
RBBP2H1A protein shares 56% overall amino acid sequence identity with
RBBP2 (180202), which plays an important role in RB (614041) tumor
suppressor regulation. Northern blot analysis showed expression of
approximately 6- and 7-kb transcripts in all tissues tested, with widely
varying levels of expression among tissues. The highest level of
expression was detected in testis and the lowest in skeletal muscle. No
expression was detected in renal cell carcinoma biopsies or cell lines.

By bioinformatic analysis, Xiang et al. (2007) identified full-length
JARID1B as a histone lysine demethylase. It has an N-terminal JmjN
domain, followed by an ARID domain, a PHD domain, a JmjC domain, a zinc
finger, and 2 C-terminal PHD domains.

GENE FUNCTION

Through bioinformatic and biochemical analysis, Xiang et al. (2007)
identified JARID1B as an H3 (see 602810) lys4 (H3K4) demethylase.
Overexpression of JARID1B in HeLa cells resulted in loss of tri-, di-,
and monomethyl H3K4, but did not alter the methylation status of H3K9 or
H3K36. In vitro biochemical experiments confirmed that JARID1B directly
catalyzed the demethylation. Enzymatic activity required the JmjC domain
of JARID1B and used Fe(II) and alpha-ketoglutarate as cofactors.
Expression of JARID1B was upregulated in prostate cancer tissue compared
with benign prostate hyperplasia. JARID1B associated with androgen
receptor (AR; 313700) and regulated its transcriptional activity in
reporter gene assays.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lu et al. (1999) and Kashuba et
al. (2000) mapped the RBBP2H1A gene to chromosome 1q32 in the same
region as RBBP5 (600697).

REFERENCE 1. Kashuba, V.; Protopopov, A.; Podowski, R.; Gizatullin, R.; Li,
J.; Klein, G.; Wahlestedt, C.; Zabarovsky, E.: Isolation and chromosomal
localization of a new human retinoblastoma binding protein 2 homologue
1a (RBBP2H1A). Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 407-413, 2000.

2. Lu, P. J.; Sundquist, K.; Baeckstrom, D.; Poulsom, R.; Hanby, A.;
Meier-Ewert, S.; Jones, T.; Mitchell, M.; Pitha-Rowe, P.; Freemont,
P.; Taylor-Papadimitriou, J.: A novel gene (PLU-1) containing highly
conserved putative DNA/chromatin binding motifs is specifically up-regulated
in breast cancer. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 15633-15645, 1999.

3. Xiang, Y.; Zhu, Z.; Han, G.; Ye, X.; Xu, B.; Peng, Z.; Ma, Y.;
Yu, Y.; Lin, H.; Chen, A. P.; Chen, C. D.: JARID1B is a histone H3
lysine 4 demethylase up-regulated in prostate cancer. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 104: 19226-19231, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/13/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/8/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
terry: 6/21/2011
mgross: 7/9/2009
mgross: 3/14/2008
mgross: 3/13/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
joanna: 11/8/2007
terry: 3/19/2004
carol: 2/13/2001
joanna: 11/17/2000
carol: 11/8/2000

600326	TITLE *600326 DEAD/H BOX 6; DDX6
;;RNA HELICASE, 54-KD; p54;;
HELICASE, RNA, NUCLEAR 2; HLR2;;
ONCOGENE RCK
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DDX6 belongs to the DEAD box family of putative RNA helicases that
contain a characteristic asp-glu-ala-asp (DEAD) box motif (Seto et al.,
1995). DDX6 localizes to cytoplasmic processing bodies (P bodies)
involved in mRNA storage, processing, regulation, and degradation and is
required for P-body formation (Scheller et al., 2007).

CLONING

Akao et al. (1991) cloned the breakpoint of the t(11;14)(q23;q32) in
B-cell lymphoma (Akao et al., 1990), as represented in the RC-K8 cell
line, and named the locus RCK. Using a probe from the t(11;14)
breakpoint, Akao et al. (1992) isolated a partial cDNA for the RCK gene,
which detected a 7.5-kb mRNA. The predicted RCK protein has 472 amino
acids and shares sequence homology with a translation initiation
factor/helicase family.

Lu and Yunis (1992) cloned a putative human RNA helicase, p54, from a
lymphoid cell line with chromosomal breakpoint 11q23.3. The predicted
amino acid sequence shares 75% identity with the female
germline-specific RNA helicase ME31B gene of Drosophila. Unlike ME31B,
however, the human gene expressed an abundant transcript in a large
number of adult tissues.

Seto et al. (1995) found that the RCK/p54 gene, which encodes a 472- to
483-amino acid peptide belonging to the RNA helicase/translation
initiation factor family, is highly conserved in mouse. The mouse cDNA
shows 93.7% nucleotide identity and 97.7% predicted amino acid identity
with human RCK.

Using Northern blot analysis, Scheller et al. (2007) detected variable
expression of a 7.5-kb RCK transcript in all human tissues examined. In
HeLa cells, RCK colocalized with PATL1 (614660), LSM (607281), and CDP1
(see 607010) in cytoplasmic P bodies.

MAPPING

By analysis of a B-cell lymphoma with t(11;14)(q23;q32), Akao et al.
(1991) mapped the DDX6 gene to chromosome 11q23. Tunnacliffe et al.
(1993) assigned the DDX6 gene more precisely using a panel of sequence
tagged sites (STSs) representing 30 markers previously assigned to
11q23.

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Akao and Matsuda (1996) mapped
the Ddx6 gene to mouse chromosome 9.

CYTOGENETICS

Akao et al. (1992) stated that by pulsed field gel electrophoresis, they
had previously shown that the RCK locus was centromeric to the PBGD gene
(HMBS; 609806) on chromosome 11q23, while the breakpoints of infantile
leukemia cell lines with t(11;19)(q23;p13) were detected by a probe for
CD3D (186790), which is centromeric to RCK. Akao et al. (1992) did
long-range mapping from the CD3 genes to the PBGD gene on 11q23 to
determine the relationship between RCK and MLL (159555). They showed
that RCK and MLL are on different NotI fragments, indicating that 2
different genes are associated with 11q23 translocations in
hematopoietic tumors.

Lu and Yunis (1992) found that the 5-prime noncoding region of p54 was
split in a t(11;14)(q23.3;q32.3) cell line from a diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Using mass spectroscopy, Fenger-Gron et al. (2005) found that RCK, EDC3
(YJDC; 609842), and HEDLS (RCD8; 606030) coimmunopurified with DCP1A
(607010) and DCP2 (609844) from HEK293 cell lysates. Overexpression of
DCP2, RCK, or EDC3 in HeLa cells reduced the association of endogenous
DCP1A and XRN1 (607994) with cytoplasmic P bodies.

Using small interfering RNAs, Scheller et al. (2007) found that
knockdown of PATL1 or RCK reduced the number of P bodies in HeLa cells.

REFERENCE 1. Akao, Y.; Matsuda, Y.: Identification and chromosome mapping of
the mouse homologue of the human gene (DDX6) that encodes a putative
RNA helicase of the DEAD box protein family. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 75:
38-44, 1996.

2. Akao, Y.; Seto, M.; Takahashi, T.; Kubonishi, I.; Miyoshi, I.;
Nakazawa, S.; Tsujimoti, Y.; Croce, C. M.; Ueda, R.: Molecular cloning
of the chromosomal breakpoint of a B-cell lymphoma with the t(11;14)(q23;q32)
chromosome translocation. Cancer Res. 51: 1574-1576, 1991.

3. Akao, Y.; Seto, M.; Yamamoto, K.; Iida, S.; Nakazawa, S.; Inazawa,
J.; Abe, T.; Takahashi, T.; Ueda, R.: The RCK gene associated with
t(11;14) translocation is distinct from the MLL/ALL-1 gene with t(4;11)
and t(11;19) translocations. Cancer Res. 52: 6083-6087, 1992.

4. Akao, Y.; Tsujimoto, Y.; Finan, J.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.
: Molecular characterization of a t(11;14)(q23;q32) chromosome translocation
in a B-cell lymphoma. Cancer Res. 50: 4856-4859, 1990.

5. Fenger-Gron, M.; Fillman, C.; Norrild, B.; Lykke-Andersen, J.:
Multiple processing body factors and the ARE binding protein TTP activate
mRNA decapping. Molec. Cell 20: 905-915, 2005.

6. Lu, D.; Yunis, J. J.: Cloning, expression and localization of
an RNA helicase gene from a human lymphoid cell line with chromosomal
breakpoint 11q23.3. Nucleic Acids Res. 20: 1967-1972, 1992.

7. Scheller, N.; Resa-Infante, P.; de la Luna, S.; Galao, R. P.; Albrecht,
M.; Kaestner, L.; Lipp, P.; Lengauer, T.; Meyerhans, A.; Diez, J.
: Identification of PatL1, a human homolog to yeast P body component
Pat1. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1773: 1786-1792, 2007.

8. Seto, M.; Yamamoto, K.; Takahashi, T.; Ueda, R.: Cloning and expression
of a murine cDNA homologous to the human RCK/P54, a lymphoma-linked
chromosomal translocation junction gene on 11q23. Gene 166: 293-296,
1995.

9. Tunnacliffe, A.; Perry, H.; Radice, P.; Budarf, M. L.; Emanuel,
B. S.: A panel of sequence tagged sites for chromosome band 11q23. Genomics 17:
744-747, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/23/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/23/2006
Alan F. Scott - edited: 12/27/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/23/1995

EDITED carol: 07/10/2012
mgross: 5/23/2012
terry: 5/15/2012
mgross: 1/23/2006
ckniffin: 1/5/2006
alopez: 5/7/1999
alopez: 11/19/1998
terry: 1/15/1997
mark: 12/27/1996
mark: 3/5/1996
carol: 1/23/1995

600958	TITLE *600958 MYOSIN-BINDING PROTEIN C, CARDIAC; MYBPC3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cardiac myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3) is arrayed transversely in
sarcomere A-bands and binds myosin heavy chain (see 160710) in thick
filaments and titin (188840) in elastic filaments. Phosphorylation of
this protein appears to modulate contraction.

GENE STRUCTURE

Carrier et al. (1997) reported that the MYBPC3 gene spans more than 21
kb and contains 35 exons. Two exons are unusually small, 3 bp each.

Klaassen (2013) noted that the MYBPC3 gene contains a noncoding exon 1.
Some authors (e.g., Probst et al., 2011) have used this noncoding exon
in the numbering of the exons in the gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Using single-particle fluorescence imaging techniques, transgenic
protein expression, proteomics, and modeling, Previs et al. (2012) found
that cMyBP-C slows actomyosin motion generation in native cardiac thick
filaments. This mechanical effect was localized to where cMyBP-C resides
within the thick filament (i.e., the C-zones) and was modulated by
phosphorylation and site-specific proteolytic degradation. Previs et al.
(2012) concluded that their results provided molecular insight into why
cMyBP-C should be considered a member of a tripartite complex with actin
and myosin that allows fine tuning of cardiac muscle contraction.

MAPPING

Gautel et al. (1995) mapped the MYBPC3 gene to 11p11.2 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization and proposed it as a candidate for the site of the
mutation in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-4 (CMH4; 115197), which
maps to the same region.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Watkins et al. (1995) found that the MYBPC3 gene was linked to CMH4 and
demonstrated a splice donor mutation (600958.0001) in 1 family with
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and a duplication mutation
(600958.0002) in a second. Both mutations were predicted to disrupt the
high-affinity, C-terminal myosin-binding domain of cardiac MyBP-C.
Again, findings demonstrated that as in the case of the 3 forms that had
been defined in molecular terms previously, familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is a disease of the sarcomere.

In 2 unrelated French families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
of the CMH4 type (as indicated by linkage), Bonne et al. (1995) found a
mutation in a splice acceptor site of the MYBPC3 gene which caused
skipping of the associated exon and was predicted to produce a truncated
gene product. The 2 families shared a common haplotype in a region of 2
cM around the MYBPC gene, suggesting that they may be distantly related.

Carrier et al. (1997) found 6 novel mutations in the CYBPC3 gene that
were associated with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 7 unrelated
French families. Four of these mutations were predicted to produce
truncated cardiac myosin-binding protein C polypeptides (e.g.,
600958.0007). The 2 others produced aberrant proteins, 1 truncated
(600985.0005) and 1 mutated (600958.0006).

Mutations in the gene for cardiac myosin-binding protein C account for
approximately 15% of cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Niimura et al. (1998) studied the spectrum of disease-causing mutations
and the associated clinical features of these gene defects. Among 16
families studied, 12 novel mutations were identified: 4 missense
mutations and 8 defects (insertions, deletions, and splice mutations)
predicted to truncate cardiac myosin-binding protein C. The clinical
expression of either missense or truncation mutations was similar to
that observed for other genetic causes of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
but the age at onset of the disease differed markedly. Only 58% of
adults under the age of 50 years who had a mutation in the MYBPC3 gene
(68 of 117 patients) had cardiac hypertrophy; disease penetrance
remained incomplete through the age of 60 years. Survival was generally
better than that observed among patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy caused by mutations in other genes for sarcomere
proteins. Most deaths due to cardiac causes in these families occurred
suddenly.

In 46 young patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1MM; 615396),
Daehmlow et al. (2002) performed mutation screening of 4 sarcomeric
protein genes. They identified 2 mutations in the MYH7 gene
(160760.0026-160760.0027) and 1 mutation in the MYBPC3 gene
(asn948-to-thr; 600958.0013). Daehmlow et al. (2002) noted that they
could not confirm the disease-causing nature of these variants because
family members for the calculation of 2-point lod scores could not be
obtained for further investigation.

Konno et al. (2003) analyzed the MYBPC3 gene in 250 unrelated probands
with CMH and 90 with CMD and identified a missense mutation (R820Q;
600958.0015) in 16 individuals from families with CMH and in a
71-year-old man with a clinical diagnosis of CMD. The authors suggested
that the patient diagnosed with CMD may actually have been in the
'burnt-out' phase of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Lekanne Deprez et al. (2006) reported 2 unrelated Dutch infants with
severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in whom they identified compound
heterozygosity for truncating mutations in the MYBPC3 gene (see, e.g.,
600958.0023). The infants died at 5 and 6 weeks of age. The
nonconsanguineous asymptomatic parents were heterozygous carriers of 1
of the mutations in each case; 1 of the fathers was found to have mild
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy on cardiac MRI.

Wang et al. (2005) observed that patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy carrying identical mutations can have different left
ventricular thicknesses, suggesting the presence of modifying variants.
They genotyped 226 patients with CMH and 226 age- and sex-matched
controls for 3 MYBPC3 polymorphisms, and found that the GG genotype at
nucleotide 18443 in exon 30 was associated with a significantly thicker
left ventricular wall in patients, compared to the AA and AG genotypes
(p less than 0.001). GG was not associated with left ventricular wall
thickness in normal controls, and there was no difference in genotype
distribution between patients and controls. Wang et al. (2005) concluded
that the MYBPC3 polymorphism is a modifier for expression of cardiac
hypertrophy in patients with CMH.

In a 12-month-old girl with restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM3; 612422),
Peddy et al. (2006) performed direct sequencing of the 8 genes most
commonly implicated in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and identified a de
novo 3-bp deletion in the TNNT2 gene (191045.0011). The girl also
carried a known MYBPC3 (600958) polymorphism, V896M, which was also
found in her unaffected father; the authors suggested that the V896M
variant may have acted as a modifier, exacerbating the phenotypic
expression of the TNNT2 mutation and causing an unusually early onset of
RMC.

In 23 Old Order Amish infants with severe neonatal hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, Xin et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a splice
site mutation in the MYBPC3 gene (3330+2T-G; 600958.0020). Noting the
many reports of cardiac symptoms, including sudden death, among these
probands' parents and relatives, and the close similarity between this
mutation and the 3330+5G-C mutation (600958.0001) previously documented
by Watkins et al. (1995) as the cause of CMH in heterozygous carriers,
Xin et al. (2007) suggested that heterozygotes for the 3330+2T-G
mutation may also be at risk for CMH.

Frank-Hansen et al. (2008) used SSCP analysis and sequence confirmation
in 250 unrelated patients with CMH to determine whether intronic
variation flanking the 3 microexons in the MYBPC3 gene is
disease-causing. Functional studies and segregation analysis indicated
that 4 of the 7 mutations they identified are associated with CMH (see,
e.g., 600958.0016 and 600958.0017): all 4 mutations result in premature
termination codons, suggesting that haploinsufficiency is a pathogenic
mechanism of this type of mutation. In 1 family, a second mutation in
the MYBPC3 gene was also identified (V1125M; 600958.0018).

Ehlermann et al. (2008) screened the MYBPC3 gene in 87 patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and 71 patients with CMD and identified
heterozygous mutations in 16 (18.4%) of the CMH patients and in 2 (2.8%)
of the CMD patients. However, in the first CMD family, 3 additional
carriers of the MYBPC3 missense mutation had no certain pathologic
findings, and the authors noted that in the index patient, hypertensive
heart disease could not be ruled out as the cause of his CMD phenotype.
In the second CMD family, the 2 oldest carriers of the splice site
mutation displayed CMD, whereas 4 younger mutation carriers showed CMH;
the authors stated that it was mostly likely that the 2 older patients
suffered from end-stage CMH with progression to a CMD phenotype.
Screening the cohort for variation in 5 additional
cardiomyopathy-associated genes (MYH7, 160760; TNNT2, 191045; TNNI3,
191044; ACTC1, 102540; and TPM1, 191010) revealed no further mutations.
Of a total of 45 affected individuals, from 12 families and 6 sporadic
patients, 23 (51%) suffered an adverse event such as progression to
severe heart failure, transient ischemic attack, stroke, or sudden
death.

Waldmuller et al. (2003) identified a 25-bp deletion in intron 32 of the
MYBPC3 gene (600958.0019) in 2 south Indian families with CMH, 1 of
which was also known to carry a mutation in the MYH7 gene (160760). The
polymorphism was detected in 16 of 229 unrelated healthy Indian
individuals but not in western European individuals, and the authors
considered that it represents a regional polymorphism restricted to
southern India. Waldmuller et al. (2003) stated that the relationship to
disease was 'not unequivocal' and suggested that the deletion may
represent a modifier polymorphism that may enhance the phenotypes of
mutations responsible for disease. Dhandapany et al. (2009) analyzed the
25-bp deletion in the MYBPC3 gene in Indian patients with hypertrophic,
dilated, and restrictive cardiomyopathies and identified an association
with familial cardiomyopathy and an increased risk of heart failure
(overall odds ratio, 6.99; p = 4 x 10(-11)).

After typing 811 genomewide short-tandem repeat markers in 100 members
of a CMH family originally reported by Niimura et al. (1998), 36 of whom
carried the MYBPC3 791insG mutation (600958.0011), Daw et al. (2007)
performed oligogenic simultaneous segregation and linkage analyses using
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods and detected the strongest signals on
chromosomes 10p13 and 17q24, with log of the posterior placement
probability ratio (LOP) scores of 4.86 and 4.17, respectively. The
effect size of the MYBPC3 mutation on left ventricular mass was
significantly decreased when modifier loci were included in the
analysis, suggesting an interaction between the causal mutation and
modifier genes.

In a 28-year-old Australian man who was diagnosed at age 18 years with
severe CMH, Ingles et al. (2005) detected compound heterozygous missense
mutations in the MYBPC3 gene (600958.0021 and 600958.0022). Chiu et al.
(2007) also identified a heterozygous R73Q substitution in the CALR3
gene (611414) in this patient. Chiu et al. (2007) suggested that
calreticulin may be involved in both disease pathogenesis and
modification.

In a female infant with fatal cardiomyopathy who also showed evidence of
skeletal myopathy, Tajsharghi et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for
a nonsense mutation in the MYBPC3 gene (R943X; 600958.0023). Skeletal
muscle biopsy at 2 months of age showed pronounced myopathic changes
with numerous small fibers; immunohistochemical staining showed the
presence of cardiac MYBPC in the small abnormal fibers, and RT-PCR and
sequencing demonstrated the mutation in transcripts of skeletal muscle.
Tajsharghi et al. (2010) noted that cardiac MYBPC is not normally
expressed in skeletal muscle and stated that the reason for the ectopic
expression of cardiac MYBPC remained unknown.

Hershberger et al. (2010) screened 5 cardiomyopathy-associated genes in
312 patients with CMD, who had previously been studied by Hershberger et
al. (2008), and identified 12 MYBPC3 variants in 13 (4.2%) of the
probands, of which 2 were considered to be 'likely' disease-causing
mutations: A833T (600958.0024) and C1264F (600958.0025). The A833T
change was identified in affected individuals from 3 families; haplotype
analysis suggested a founder mutation. Hershberger et al. (2010) noted
that the A833T mutation had previously been identified in a family with
CMH (Morner et al., 2003).

In a cohort of 63 unrelated white patients of western European descent
with left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC10; see 615396), Probst et al.
(2011) analyzed 8 sarcomere genes and identified 5 probands with 4
different heterozygous mutations in the MYBPC3 gene (see, e.g.,
600958.0026-600958.0028). In a 21-year-old man from a consanguineous
Chinese family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Wang et al. (2013)
screened the coding sequence and flanking regions of 26 CMH-related
genes and identified a homozygous missense mutation in the MYBPC3 gene
(G490V; 600958.0029). His affected younger brother was also homozygous
for the mutation; 6 other relatives, including their unaffected parents,
were heterozygous for the mutation. None of the heterozygous carriers
had any of the typical clinical manifestations of CMH, including the 2
oldest carriers at ages 62 years and 71 years, and none showed
abnormalities on electrocardiography or left ventricular hypertrophy on
echocardiography. CMR of 3 heterozygous individuals showed no structural
abnormalities or cardiac fibrosis. Wang et al. (2013) noted that a
different mutation at the same residue, G490R (600958.0026), had
previously been reported to cause disease in heterozygosity; they
proposed that the difference in inheritance pattern might stem from the
fact that G490R produces a more prominent structural change by
substituting a small side chain for a bulky one and changing the
polarity from neutral to basic, whereas G490V keeps the side chain small
and polarity neutral.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Charron et al. (1998) studied clinical features of 76 individuals
heterozygous for disease-causing mutations in the MYBPC3 gene. Little
phenotypic variation was noted among the 7 MYBPC3 mutations described.
Compared to 52 individuals with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy due
to myosin heavy chain gene mutations, prognosis was significantly better
in patients with CMH due to MYBPC3 mutations. In patients with MYBPC3
mutations, the mean age of onset was higher and penetrance below the age
of 30 was lower, leading to a milder phenotype with less hypertrophy and
fewer T-wave abnormalities. No deaths occurred below the age of 40
regardless of the mutation involved. Cause of death was sudden death in
4 of 9 individuals, refractory heart failure in 3 of 9 individuals, and
stroke in 2 of 9 individuals.

To test the hypothesis that some cardiac hypertrophy of the elderly
might be attributable to sarcomere protein gene mutations, Niimura et
al. (2002) conducted a genetic analysis of 31 individuals with
late-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and no other family history. Five
individuals with pathogenic mutations in MYBPC were identified. The mean
age of symptom development in this group was 56 +/- 13.2 with a mean age
at diagnosis of 60.2 +/- 8.9. The reported mutations in the MYBPC3 gene
included missense mutations, truncating mutations, and splice mutations.
The authors highlighted the importance of these findings for counseling
relatives of individuals with elderly-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Seidman (2000) pointed out that correlations between genotype and
prognosis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is possible. Life expectancy is
markedly diminished in individuals with the R719W (160760.0017) and
R403Q (160760.0001) mutations in the MYH7 gene but near normal in
individuals with the E542Q (600958.0006) and 791insG (600958.0011)
mutations in the MYBPC3 gene.

Verweij and Hamel (2002) discussed the moral dilemma when there are
unexpected findings in identifiable stored blood samples collected for
an unrelated study and not carrying consent for other use. The case in
point was that of a woman in a family with triphalangeal
thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome (174500) in which the disorder was mapped
to 7q36 (Tsukurov et al., 1994). The samples were used to study genes
involved in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and a mutation in the MYBPC3
gene was found. Verweij and Hamel (2002) discussed the benefits and
harmful consequences of disclosure, including the uncertainty of the
functional significance of the particular mutation.

Van Driest et al. (2004) analyzed the MYBPC3 gene in a cohort of 389 CMH
probands who had previously been genotyped for mutation in genes
encoding the sarcomeric proteins comprising the thick filament (MYH7 and
the regulatory and essential light chains, MYL2 and MYL3) and the thin
filament (TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1, and ACTC). Forty-six different MYBPC3
mutations were identified in 71 (18%) of the patients. Patients with
MYBPC3 mutations did not differ significantly from patients with thick
filament-CMH, thin filament-CMH, or genotype-negative CMH with respect
to age at diagnosis, degree of hypertrophy, incidence of myectomy, or
family history of CMH or sudden death. The 10 patients with multiple
mutations (2.6% of the total cohort) had the most severe disease
presentation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang et al. (1998) created transgenic mice in which varying amounts of a
mutated MYBPC gene, lacking the myosin and titin binding domains, were
expressed in the heart. The transgenically encoded, truncated protein
was stable but was not incorporated efficiently into the sarcomere. The
transgenic muscle fibers showed a leftward shift in the calcium-force
curve and their power output was reduced. Additionally, expression of
the mutant protein led to decreased levels of endogenous myosin-binding
protein C, resulting in a striking pattern of sarcomere disorganization
and dysgenesis.

Yang et al. (1999) generated a second series of transgenic mice
containing a mutant MYBPC gene lacking only the myosin binding site. In
contrast to this group's previous mouse model (see Yang et al. (1998)),
expression of mutant protein was reduced in the heterozygote transgenic
mouse myocardium. Immunofluorescence studies demonstrated correct
incorporation of the mutant protein into the sarcomere, but transmission
electron microscopy revealed marked disorganization of sarcomeric
ultrastructure. Gross cardiac morphology in transgenic mice was also
abnormal, with a globular heart and mild thickening of the left
ventricular free wall and papillary muscle. Functional analysis of
skinned papillary fibers demonstrated reductions in unloaded shortening
velocity, maximum shortening velocity, and relative maximal power
output. This mutant polypeptide appeared to behave in a
dominant-negative fashion.

Meurs et al. (2005) identified a reduction in Mybpc3 protein in
myocardium from Maine Coon cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in
comparison to control cats (P less than 0.001). In affected cats, the
authors identified a G-C transversion in exon 3 of the feline Mybpc3
gene, resulting in an ala31-to-pro (A31P) substitution in the linker
region between the C0 and C1 domains. The mutation was predicted to
alter protein conformation and result in sarcomeric disorganization.
Affected cats had some variability of phenotype from mildly affected to
severe hypertrophy. Some cats developed congestive heart failure, and
others died suddenly.

Pohlmann et al. (2007) found that cardiac myocytes from 6-week-old
Mybpc3-null mice exhibited mild hypertrophy that became more pronounced
by 30 weeks of age. Isolated Mybpc3-null myocytes showed markedly lower
diastolic sarcomere length without change in diastolic Ca(2+). This
reduced sarcomere length was partially abolished by inhibition of
actin-myosin ATPase, indicating residual actin-myosin interaction in
diastole. Mybpc3-null myocytes started to contract at lower Ca(2+)
concentration, and both sarcomere shortening and Ca(2+) transients were
prolonged in Mybpc3-null cells. Isolated Mybpc3-null left atria
exhibited a marked increase in sensitivity to external Ca(2+) and, in
contrast to wildtype, continued to develop twitch force at low
micromolar Ca(2+) concentration. Pohlmann et al. (2007) concluded that
MYBPC3 functions as a restraint on myosin-actin interaction at low
Ca(2+) concentrations and short sarcomere length to allow complete
relaxation during diastole.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS, G-C, +5

To determine if mutation of the cardiac MYBPC gene caused CMH in
chromosome 11-linked families (115197), Watkins et al. (1995) amplified
lymphocyte RNA by reverse-transcription and nested PCR. An abnormally
short cDNA in one patient was found to be the result of a G-to-C
transversion at position 5 of the 5-prime splice donor sequence GTGAGC
in the following intron. The G-to-C transversion created a new BstEII
site, allowing independent confirmation of the mutation which was
present in all clinically affected members and not present in unaffected
members (except for 2, who carried a disease-associated haplotype).

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, 18-BP DUP

In a family with chromosome 11-linked familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (115197), Watkins et al. (1995) demonstrated an 18-bp
tandem duplication of nucleotide residues 3774-3791. Sequencing of the
genomic product confirmed the duplication, which occurred in the
penultimate exon of the coding sequence (denoted exon P). The
duplication was demonstrated in all affected members of the family and
also in a presumed nonpenetrant 16-year-old member. It was not present
in the other unaffected family members or in 200 chromosomes from
unrelated, unaffected individuals.

.0003
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS, A-G

In 2 French kindreds with chromosome 11-linked hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (115197), Bonne et al. (1995) found 2 cDNAs of different
lengths, 336 bp and 196 bp, in affected individuals. Direct sequencing
of the 336 nucleotide product gave 2 different sequences; the normal
cDNA and a cDNA with an 11-bp deletion between nucleotides 1960 and
1970. Sequencing of the 196-bp product gave a cDNA with a 140-bp
deletion between positions 1960 and 2099. Both deletions resulted in a
frameshift followed by a premature stop codon. Studies of genomic DNA
revealed an A-to-G transition at a 3-prime splice acceptor site in
affected individuals. This mutation accounted for both aberrant
transcripts since the 140-bp deletion resulted from skipping the exon
that spans positions 1060 to 2099, while the 11-bp deletion resulted
from the use of a cryptic splice site downstream from the normal splice
site that had been inactivated. The A-to-G transition mutation
introduced a new NlaIV restriction site which was used to screen
affected and unaffected individuals.

.0004
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS, G-A, +1

In a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy linked to polymorphic
markers on chromosome 11 (115197), Rottbauer et al. (1997) found a
mutation of a splice donor site of the MYBPC gene. The mutation, a
G-to-A transition at position +1 of the donor splice site of exon N,
caused skipping of the associated exon in mRNA from lymphocytes and
myocardium. The skipping of the exon with a consecutive reading
frameshift led to premature termination of translation and was expected
to produce a truncated cardiac myosin-binding protein-C. Western blot
analysis of endomyocardial biopsies from histologically affected left
ventricular myocardium failed to show the expected truncated protein.
The absence of a mutant protein and of significantly reduced amounts of
wildtype protein in the presence of the mutated mRNA argued against the
'poison protein' and the 'null allele' hypotheses and suggested yet
unknown mechanisms relevant to the genesis of chromosome 11-associated
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

.0005
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS7, G-A, +5

One of the 6 new mutations associated with CMH (115197) discovered by
Carrier et al. (1997) in 7 unrelated French families was a G-to-A
transition at position +5 in intron 7. The G residue is highly conserved
at this position in the splice donor consensus sequence. The mutation
resulted in skipping of the 49-bp exon 7 and a frameshift. The aberrant
cDNA encoded 258 normal residues, followed by 25 new amino acids and a
premature termination of translation. This was predicted to produce a
large truncated protein, missing approximately 80% of the normal protein
and lacking the motif containing the phosphorylation sites and the titin
(188840) and myosin (160710)-binding sites.

.0006
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, GLU542GLN

The second of the 6 new mutations discovered by Carrier et al. (1997) in
7 unrelated French CMH (115197) families was a G-to-C transversion at
position 1656 in exon 17 of the MYBPC3 gene. This was found in 2
families and produced the missense change glu542gln in the C3 domain. In
addition, the mutation affected the last nucleotide of the exon, which
is part of the consensus splicing site. A common feature in human
exon/intron boundaries is that 80% of exons finish with a guanine; this
proportion is 85% in MYBPC3. As a result exon 17 was skipped. The
aberrant cDNA encoded 486 normal residues, leading to a truncated
protein that lacked about 62%, including the titin (188840) and myosin
(160710)-binding sites.

.0007
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS23, G-A, +1

The third of 6 new mutations discovered by Carrier et al. (1997) in
French CMH (115197) families was a G-to-A transition at position +1 in
the splice donor site of intron 23 that inactivated the splicing site
and produced skipping of the 160-bp exon 23. The mutated cDNA encoded
717 normal residues and then 51 novel amino acids, followed by premature
termination of the translation in the C5 domain. The resulting protein
was predicted to be truncated with a loss of 44%, including the titin
(188840) and myosin (160710)-binding domains.

.0008
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, BRANCH POINT, IVS23, A-G, TGAT-TGGT

The fourth of the 6 novel mutations discovered by Carrier et al. (1997)
in French CMH (115197) families involved a change from TGAT to TGGT in
intron 23. This A-to-G transition inactivated a potential branch point
consensus sequence (URAY). Although 3 potential branch points existed
upstream from the mutation they did not seem to be used, since analysis
of the transcripts in lymphocytes indicated the existence of 2 aberrant
cDNAs. One corresponded to skipping of the 105-bp exon 24 without
frameshift and encoded a polypeptide depleted of 35 amino acids in the
C6 domain. The other cDNA retained the 724-bp intron 23. The mutant cDNA
was associated with a frameshift; it encoded 770 normal residues and
then 100 novel amino acids, followed by a stop codon, and the
corresponding truncated protein was predicted to be missing 40% of its
structure and should not react with either titin (188840) or myosin
(160710).

.0009
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, 5-BP DEL, EX25

The fifth the of 6 novel mutations in the MYBPC3 gene discovered by
Carrier et al. (1997) in French CMH (115197) families was a 5-bp
deletion (-GCGTC) in exon 25. The deletion produced a frameshift; the
aberrant cDNA identified in lymphocytes encoded 845 normal residues and
then 35 novel amino acids, followed by premature stop codon in domain C6
that should produce a truncated protein missing 34% and loosing the
C-terminal region containing both the titin (188840)- and myosin
(160710)-binding sites.

.0010
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, 12-BP DUP/4-BP DEL, EX33

One of the 6 novel mutations in the MYBPC3 gene discovered by Carrier et
al. (1997) in French CMH (115197) families was a 12-bp duplication and a
4-bp deletion in exon 33. This modification introduced a frameshift at
position 3691 that led to 1,220 normal MyBPC residues and then 19 novel
amino acids, followed by a premature stop codon in the last third of the
C10 domain. The predicted truncated protein, lacking 4%, should lose
part of its myosin (160710) binding site.

.0011
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, 1-BP INS, 2405G

In 115 members of 3 families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Niimura
et al. (1998) identified a 1-bp insertion in codon 791 (791insG, or
2405insG) in exon 25 of the MYBPC3 gene. Of mutation-positive
individuals who underwent examination, only 1 of 19 less than 20 years
of age had cardiac hypertrophy, whereas 44 of 72 mutation-positive
individuals 20 years old or older had cardiac hypertrophy.

Moolman et al. (2000) reported a large family with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197) with a single base insertion (G) in exon
25 of the MYBPC3 gene. This created a 5-prime splice donor site
(AGGTGGG). Moolman et al. (2000) demonstrated that this mutation
resulted in the loss of 40 basepairs at the 3-prime end of exon 25 in
mRNA extracted from affected myocardium. This in turn led to a premature
translation stop and a truncated protein in which the C-terminal binding
sites for myosin heavy chain and titin were lost. This study also
examined the phenotypic consequences of this mutation in 27 carriers
within the same family. Overall, only 15 (56%) showed features of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Age of onset of symptoms varied from 29 to
68, with most individuals developing their first symptoms from the
fourth decade onwards. The Kaplan-Meier survival curve for this group
was similar to that of carriers of the asp175-to-asn tropomyosin-1
mutation (191010.0002) and significantly better than that of carriers of
cardiac troponin T2 (191045) or cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain (160760)
mutations. Twelve mutation carriers were entirely asymptomatic and had
no changes on echocardiography or ECG at the time of the study. This
mutation was therefore considered to have considerably reduced
penetrance and delayed onset.

.0012
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, THR59ALA

In a study of late-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (115197), Niimura
et al. (2002) reported an individual with an A-to-G transition at
nucleotide 206 of the MYBPC3 gene that was predicted to replace the
normal, conserved hydrophilic polar threonine with a hydrophobic
nonpolar alanine at amino acid residue 59 (T59A). The individual had no
family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

.0013
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1MM
MYBPC3, ASN948THR

In a 40-year-old man diagnosed at the age of 36 years with dilated
cardiomyopathy (CMD1MM; see 615396), Daehmlow et al. (2002) found
heterozygosity for an A-to-C transversion at nucleotide 16575 in exon 27
of the MYBPC3 gene, resulting in an asn948-to-thr (N948T) substitution
at a highly conserved residue. Daehmlow et al. (2002) noted that they
could not confirm the disease-causing nature of this variant because
family members for the calculation of 2-point lod scores could not be
obtained for further investigation.

.0014
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, GLU1096TER

In a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (115197) previously
reported by Hengstenberg et al. (1993, 1994), Richard et al. (1999)
found that of 8 affected members, 2 had a G-to-T mutation at codon 1096
of the MYBPC3 gene, leading to a TAA termination codon (E1096X); 4 had a
G-to-A transition in exon 15 of the MYH7 gene (160760.0033) and 2 were
doubly heterozygous for the 2 mutations. The E1096X mutation was
predicted to produce a truncated protein without the C-terminal domain,
which binds to titin and myosin.

.0015
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, ARG820GLN

In 16 affected members of 7 families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(115197) and in a 71-year-old man with a clinical diagnosis of dilated
cardiomyopathy (see 115200), Konno et al. (2003) identified
heterozygosity for a G-A transition in exon 25 of the MYBPC3 gene,
resulting in an arg820-to-gln (R820Q) substitution at a conserved
residue. The mutation was not found in 6 clinically unaffected family
members or in 100 controls. The authors suggested that the elderly man
with a clinical diagnosis of CMD was in the 'burnt-out' phase of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; cardiac biopsy showed mild fibrosis, no
myocardial hypertrophy, and no myofibrillar disarray. In a follow-up
study of this patient, Shimizu et al. (2005) stated that it was unclear
whether this patient had 'burnt-out' CMH or had had CMD from the outset.

.0016
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS13AS, G-A, -19

In a 32-year-old man of Greek Cypriot descent who had mild cardiac
hypertrophy (CMH4; 115197) and severe left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction treated with left ventricular myectomy, Frank-Hansen et al.
(2008) identified heterozygosity for a splice site transition
(1224-19G-A) near exon 14 of the MYBPC3 gene. RT-PCR analysis of
peripheral blood leukocytes from the patient revealed that the mutation
produced a de novo acceptor splice site and extended the transcript by
17 nucleotides, thus introducing a frameshift and premature termination
codon in exon 15. The mutation was also identified in 2 other unrelated
probands, 1 Indian and 1 British, with mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
and was not found in DNA samples from 192 Caucasian controls.

.0017
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS9, G-C, -1

In a 57-year-old woman with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197)
involving asymmetric septal hypertrophy with systolic anterior motion,
Frank-Hansen et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity for a
splice site mutation (906-1G-C) near exon 10 of the MYBPC3 gene and a
val1125-to-met (V1125M) substitution (600958.0018). RT-PCR analysis of
peripheral blood leukocytes from the patient revealed that the 906-1G-C
transition disrupted the existing 3-prime splice site and activated a
neighboring cryptic 3-prime splice site positioned 2 nucleotides
downstream, resulting in exclusion of the first 2 bases of exon 10,
producing a frameshift and premature termination codon in exon 12. The
proband's 64-year-old older sister also carried both mutations, and had
asymmetrical septal hypertrophy, right bundle branch block, and left
atrium dilatation; her son, the proband's nephew, who had a borderline
diagnosis of cardiac hypertrophy, was found to carry only the V1125M
mutation. The proband's mother and son carried only the 906-1G-C
mutation; her 94-year-old mother had a borderline diagnosis with T wave
inversion in the lateral leads and abnormal Q waves in the high lateral
leads on electrocardiogram, but a normal echocardiogram; the 26-year-old
son was unaffected, with normal electrocardiogram and echocardiogram.
Neither mutation was found in DNA samples from 192 Caucasian controls.

.0018
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, VAL1125MET

See 600958.0017 and Frank-Hansen et al. (2008).

.0019
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MYBPC3, IVS32, 25-BP DEL

In a south Indian family with mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH4;
115197) and another south Indian family with CMH1 (192600) due to
mutation in the MYH7 gene (160760), Waldmuller et al. (2003) identified
a 25-bp deletion (nt21348-21372) in intron 32 of the MYBPC3 gene,
predicted to cause loss of the splicing branch point. Exon 33 sequences
in processed mRNA were significantly reduced in COS-1 cells and neonatal
rat cardiomyocytes transfected with the deletion but not in cells
transfected with wildtype; however, residual normal splicing was
observed. Noting that the 25-bp deletion was observed in 16 of 229
unrelated Indian controls from Kerala and Tamil Nadu but not in 270
Caucasians from Russia and western Europe, Waldmuller et al. (2003)
suggested that the deletion may represent a regional polymorphism of
southern India and may be a modifier enhancing the phenotypes of
mutations responsible for disease.

Dhandapany et al. (2009) analyzed the 25-bp MYBPC3 deletion in 354
Indian patients with cardiomyopathy and 238 healthy controls and found
an association with cardiomyopathy (odds ratio, 5.3; p = 2 x 10(-6)).
The findings were replicated in 446 cases and 466 controls from 6
independent Indian cohorts (combined odds ratio, 6.99; p = 4 x 10(-11)).
Analysis of RNA and protein from endomyocardial biopsies of 2
heterozygous individuals revealed 2 transcript structures, a normal
transcript and a mutated allele with skipping of the associated exon,
but the altered protein was not detected in tissue samples. Expression
of mutant and wildtype protein in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes
demonstrated a highly disorganized and diffuse pattern of sarcomeric
architecture as a result of aberrant incorporation of the mutant
protein. Dhandapany et al. (2009) concluded that the 25-bp MYBPC3
deletion is associated with a lifelong increased risk of heart failure.

Dhandapany et al. (2009) tested 63 world population samples, comprising
2,085 individuals from 26 countries, for the 25-bp deletion, and they
identified samples heterozygous for the deletion from Pakistan, Sri
Lanka, Indonesia, and Malaysia but not in other samples. Haplotype
analysis determined that the common 25-bp deletion likely arose
approximately 33,000 years ago on the Indian subcontinent.

.0020
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, IVS30DS, T-G, +2

In 23 Old Order Amish infants with severe neonatal hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197), 20 of whom were from the Geauga County
settlement in Ohio, Xin et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a
3330+2T-G transition in the splice donor site of intron 30 of the MYBPC3
gene, resulting in skipping of the 140-bp exon 30 and causing a
frameshift and premature termination in exon 31. The mutation was found
in heterozygosity in parents. Heterozygous carrier frequency of this
mutation was calculated at 10% in the Geauga County settlement of Ohio.
DNA analysis of a Mennonite couple with a child who had died from CMH
revealed heterozygosity for the same 3330+2T-G mutation.

.0021
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, ARG745GLY

In a 28-year-old Australian man with familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197), Ingles et al. (2005) identified compound
heterozygosity for an arg745-to-gly (R745G) substitution in exon 24 of
the MYBPC3 gene and a pro873-to-his (P873H; 600958.0022) substitution in
exon 27 of the MYBPC3 gene. The proband was diagnosed at 18 years of age
and had severe asymmetric septal hypertrophy on echocardiography and
received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). The proband's
13-year-old son also had severe hypertrophy requiring myectomy on 2
occasions and received an ICD. The proband's father and a brother also
had CMH, but declined to participate in the study. Chiu et al. (2007)
also identified heterozygosity for an R73Q substitution in the CALR3
gene (611414) in this patient and suggested that calreticulin may be
involved in both disease pathogenesis and modification.

.0022
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, PRO873HIS

See 600958.0021 and Ingles et al. (2005).

.0023
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, ARG943TER

In a female infant with fatal cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197) who also had
evidence of skeletal myopathy, Tajsharghi et al. (2010) identified
homozygosity for a 2827C-T transition, resulting in an arg943-to-ter
(R943X) substitution in the MYBPC3 gene. Skeletal muscle biopsy at 2
months of age showed pronounced myopathic changes with numerous small
fibers, which all expressed slow/beta-cardiac myosin heavy chain protein
(MYH7; 160760). Electron microscopy revealed disorganization of the
sarcomeres and partial depletion of thick filaments in the small fibers;
immunohistochemical staining showed the presence of cardiac MYBPC in the
small abnormal fibers. RT-PCR and sequencing demonstrated the mutation
in transcripts of skeletal muscle. Tajsharghi et al. (2010) noted that
cardiac MYBPC is not normally expressed in skeletal muscle, and stated
that the reason for the ectopic expression of cardiac MYBPC remained
unknown. The R943X mutation had previously been identified in compound
heterozygosity with other truncating MYBPC3 mutations in 2 unrelated
Dutch infants with fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Lekanne Deprez et
al., 2006); skeletal myopathy was not mentioned in that report.

.0024
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1MM
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4, INCLUDED
MYBPC3, ALA833THR

In 2 affected individuals from a family with dilated cardiomyopathy
(CMD1MM; 615396), Hershberger et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity
for a 17207G-A transition in exon 25 of the MYBPC3 gene (GenBank GENBANK
NM_000256.3), resulting in an ala833-to-thr (A833T) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was also identified in 2
unrelated CMD probands, but was not found in 246 controls. Haplotype
sharing near the variant suggested a founder mutation. Hershberger et
al. (2010) noted that the A833T variant had previously been identified
in a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197) by Morner et
al. (2003); the proband's brother and father had mild cardiac
hypertrophy.

.0025
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1MM
MYBPC3, CYS1264PHE

In 2 affected individuals from a family with dilated cardiomyopathy
(CMD1MM; 615396), Hershberger et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity
for a 22608G-T transversion in exon 33 of the MYBPC3 gene (GenBank
GENBANK NM_000256.3), resulting in a cys1264-to-phe (C1264F)
substitution at a conserved residue. The mutation was not found in 246
controls.

.0026
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1MM
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4, INCLUDED;;
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 10, INCLUDED
MYBPC3, GLY490ARG

In a patient with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1MM; 615396), Hershberger
et al. (2010) reported a heterozygous 11969G-A transition in exon 17 of
the MYBPC3 gene (GenBank GENBANK NM_000256.3), resulting in a
gly490-to-arg (G490R) substitution at a highly conserved residue. No
family members were available for segregation analysis. Hershberger et
al. (2010) noted that the MYBPC3 G490R mutation had previously been
associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197) by Van Driest
et al. (2004) and Morita et al. (2008).

In 2 unrelated white probands of western European descent with left
ventricular noncompaction (LVNC10; see 615396), Probst et al. (2011)
identified heterozygosity for a c.1523G-A transition in exon 18 of the
MYBPC3 gene, resulting in the G490R substitution within the third
cardiac-specific Ig-like domain. One proband was a 70-year-old man who
presented with dyspnea; family screening revealed that his asymptomatic
32-year-old son was also affected. The other proband was a 24-year-old
woman who had been evaluated for syncopal episodes. All 3
mutation-positive individuals had noncompacted segments of the left
midventricular inferior and lateral wall on echocardiography.

.0027
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 10
MYBPC3, PRO873LEU

In a 37-year-old white man of western European descent with left
ventricular noncompaction (LVNC10; see 615396) who presented with
decompensated congestive heart failure, Probst et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a c.2673C-T transition in exon 27 of the MYBPC3 gene,
resulting in a pro873-to-leu (P873L) substitution within the seventh
cardiac-specific Ig-like domain.

.0028
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 10
MYBPC3, 2-BP DEL, 2919CT

In a white woman of western European descent with left ventricular
noncompaction (LVNC10; see 615396), who had nonsustained ventricular
flutter and received an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, Probst
et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a 2-bp deletion
(c.2919_2920delCT) in exon 28 of the MYBPC3 gene, causing a frameshift
predicted to result in a premature termination codon in exon 30
(Pro955ArgfsTer95). The mutation was also detected in her 14-year-old
unaffected daughter.

.0029
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 4
MYBPC3, GLY490VAL

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Chinese family with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH4; 115197), Wang et al. (2013) identified
homozygosity for a c.1469G-T transversion in exon 17 of the MYBPC3 gene,
resulting in a gly490-to-val (G490V) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The mutation was present in heterozygosity in their unaffected
parents and 4 other unaffected relatives, none of whom had typical
clinical manifestations of CMH or any abnormalities on
electrocardiography or left ventricular hypertrophy on echocardiography.
The mutation was not found in 376 Chinese controls or in the dbSNP or
1000 Genomes public polymorphism databases. Wang et al. (2013) noted
that a different mutation at the same residue, G490R (600958.0026), had
previously been reported to cause disease in heterozygosity; they
proposed that the difference in inheritance pattern might stem from the
fact that G490R produces a more prominent structural change by
substituting a small side chain for a bulky one and changing the
polarity from neutral to basic, whereas G490V keeps the side chain small
and polarity neutral.

REFERENCE 1. Bonne, G.; Carrier, L.; Bercovici, J.; Cruaud, C.; Richard, P.;
Hainque, B.; Gautel, M.; Labeit, S.; James, M.; Beckmann, J.; Weissenbach,
J.; Vosberg, H.-P.; Fiszman, M.; Komajda, M.; Schwartz, K.: Cardiac
myosin binding protein-C gene splice acceptor site mutation is associated
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Nature Genet. 11: 438-440,
1995.

2. Carrier, L.; Bonne, G.; Bahrend, E.; Yu, B.; Richard, P.; Niel,
F.; Hainque, B.; Cruaud, C.; Gary, F.; Labeit, S.; Bouhour, J.-B.;
Dubourg, O.; Desnos, M.; Hagege, A. A.; Trent, R. J.; Komajda, M.;
Fiszman, M.; Schwartz, K.: Organization and sequence of human cardiac
myosin binding protein C gene (MYBPC3) and identification of mutations
predicted to produce truncated proteins in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ.
Res. 80: 427-434, 1997.

3. Charron, P.; Dubourg, O.; Desnos, M.; Bennaceur, M.; Carrier, L.;
Camproux, A.-C.; Isnard, R.; Hagege, A.; Langlard, J. M.; Bonne, G.;
Richard, P.; Hainque, B.; Bouhour, J.-B.; Schwartz, K.; Komajda, M.
: Clinical features and prognostic implications of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy related to the cardiac myosin-binding protein C gene. Circulation 97:
2230-2236, 1998.

4. Chiu, C.; Tebo, M.; Ingles, J.; Yeates, L.; Arthur, J. W.; Lind,
J. M.; Semsarian, C.: Genetic screening of calcium regulation genes
in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Molec. Cell. Cardiol. 43:
337-343, 2007.

5. Daehmlow, S.; Erdmann, J.; Knueppel, T.; Gille, C.; Froemmel, C.;
Hummel, M.; Hetzer, R.; Regitz-Zagrosek, V.: Novel mutations in sarcomeric
protein genes in dilated cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 298:
116-120, 2002.

6. Daw, E. W.; Chen, S. N.; Czernuszewicz, G.; Lombardi, R.; Lu, Y.;
Ma, J.; Roberts, R.; Shete, S.; Marian, A. J.: Genome-wide mapping
of modifier chromosomal loci for human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 16: 2463-2471, 2007.

7. Dhandapany, P. S.; Sadayappan, S.; Xue, Y.; Powell, G. T.; Rani,
D. S.; Nallari, P.; Rai, T. S.; Khullar, M.; Soares, P.; Bahl, A.;
Tharkan, J. M.; Vaideeswar, P.; and 13 others: A common MYBPC3
(cardiac myosin binding protein C) variant associated with cardiomyopathies
in South Asia. Nature Genet. 41: 187-191, 2009.

8. Ehlermann, P.; Weichenhan, D.; Zehelein, J.; Steen, H.; Pribe,
R.; Zeller, R.; Lehrke, S.; Zugck, C.; Ivandic, B. T.; Katus, H. A.
: Adverse events in families with hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy
and mutations in the MYBPC3 gene. BMC Med. Genet. 9: 95, 2008. Note:
Electronic Article.

9. Frank-Hansen, R.; Page, S. P.; Syrris, P.; McKenna, W. J.; Christiansen,
M.; Andersen, P. S.: Micro-exons of the cardiac myosin binding protein
C gene: flanking introns contain a disproportionately large number
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutations. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 16:
1062-1069, 2008.

10. Gautel, M.; Zuffardi, O.; Freiburg, A.; Labeit, S.: Phosphorylation
switches specific for the cardiac isoform of myosin binding protein-C:
a modulator of cardiac contraction? EMBO J. 14: 1952-1960, 1995.

11. Hengstenberg, C.; Charron, P.; Beckmann, J. S.; Weissenbach, J.;
Isnard, R.; Komajda, M.; Schwartz, K.: Evidence for the existence
of a fifth gene causing familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53 (suppl.): A1013 only, 1993.

12. Hengstenberg, C.; Charron, P.; Isnard, R.; Beckmann, J. S.; Fetler,
L.; Desnos, M.; Hagege, A.; Bouhour, J. B.; Souriant, G.; Dubourg,
O.; Schwartz, K.; Komajda, M.: Mise en evidence d'un cinquieme locus
implique dans les cardiomyopathies hypertrophiques familiales. Arch.
Mal. Coeur. 87: 1655-1662, 1994.

13. Hershberger, R. E.; Norton, N.; Morales, A.; Li, D.; Siegfried,
J. D.; Gonzalez-Quintana, J.: Coding sequence rare variants identified
in MYBPC3, MYH6, TNNC1, and TNNI3 from 312 patients with familial
or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet. 3:
155-161, 2010.

14. Hershberger, R. E.; Parks, S. B.; Kushner, J. D.; Li, D.; Ludwigsen,
S.; Jakobs, P.; Nauman, D.; Burgess, D.; Partain, J.; Litt, M.: Coding
sequence mutations identified in MYH7, TNNT2, SCN5A, CSRP3, LBD3,
and TCAP from 313 patients with familial or idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Clin.
Transl. Sci. 1: 21-26, 2008.

15. Ingles, J.; Doolan, A.; Chiu, C.; Seidman, J.; Seidman, C.; Semsarian,
C.: Compound and double mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:
implications for genetic testing and counselling. J. Med. Genet. 42:
e59, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

16. Klaassen, S.: Personal Communication. Berlin, Germany  9/10/2013.

17. Konno, T.; Shimizu, M.; Ino, H.; Matsuyama, T.; Yamaguchi, M.;
Terai, H.; Hayashi, K.; Mabuchi, T.; Kiyama, M.; Sakata, K.; Hayashi,
T.; Inoue, M.; Kaneda, T.; Mabuchi, H.: A novel missense mutation
in the myosin binding protein-C gene is responsible for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular dysfunction and dilation in elderly
patients. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 41: 781-786, 2003.

18. Lekanne Deprez, R. H.; Muurling-Vlietman, J. J.; Hruda, J.; Baars,
M. J. H.; Wijnaendts, L. C. D.; Stolte-Dijkstra, I.; Alders, M.; van
Hagen, J. M.: Two cases of severe neonatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
caused by compound heterozygous mutations in the MYBPC3 gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: 829-832, 2006.

19. Meurs, K. M.; Sanchez, X.; David, R. M.; Bowles, N. E.; Towbin,
J. A.; Reiser, P. J.; Kittleson, J. A.; Munro, M. J.; Dryburgh, K.;
MacDonald, K. A.; Kittleson, M. D.: A cardiac myosin binding protein
C mutation in the Maine Coon cat with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 3587-3593, 2005.

20. Moolman, J. A.; Reith, S.; Uhl, K.; Bailey, S.; Gautel, M.; Jeschke,
B.; Fischer, C.; Ochs, J.; McKenna, W. J.; Klues, H.; Vosberg, H.-P.
: A newly created splice donor site in exon 25 of the MyBP-C gene
is responsible for inherited hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with incomplete
disease penetrance. Circulation 101: 1396-1402, 2000.

21. Morita, H.; Rehm, H. L.; Menesses, A.; McDonough, B.; Roberts,
A. E.; Kucherlapati, R.; Towbin, J. A.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C.
E.: Shared genetic causes of cardiac hypertrophy in children and
adults. New Eng. J. Med. 358: 1899-1908, 2008.

22. Morner, S.; Richard, P.; Kazzam, E.; Hellman, U.; Hainque, B.;
Schwartz, K.; Waldenstrom, A.: Identification of the genotypes causing
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in northern Sweden. J. Molec. Cell. Cardiol. 35:
841-849, 2003.

23. Niimura, H.; Bachinski, L. L.; Sangwatanaroj, S.; Watkins, H.;
Chudley, A. E.; McKenna, W.; Kristinsson, A.; Roberts, R.; Sole, M.;
Maron, B. J.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Mutations in the gene
for cardiac myosin-binding protein C and late-onset familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 1248-1257, 1998.

24. Niimura, H.; Patton, K. K.; McKenna, W. J.; Soults, J.; Maron,
B. J.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Sarcomere protein gene mutations
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of the elderly. Circulation 105:
446-451, 2002.

25. Peddy, S. B.; Vricella, L. A.; Crosson, J. E.; Oswald, G. L.;
Cohn, R. D.; Cameron, D. E.; Valle, D.; Loeys, B. L.: Infantile restrictive
cardiomyopathy resulting from a mutation in the cardiac troponin T
gene. Pediatrics 117: 1830-1833, 2006.

26. Pohlmann, L.; Kroger, I.; Vignier, N.; Schlossarek, S.; Kramer,
E.; Coirault, C.; Sultan, K. R.; El-Armouche, A.; Winegrad, S.; Eschenhagen,
T.; Carrier, L.: Cardiac myosin-binding protein C is required for
complete relaxation in intact myocytes. Circ. Res. 101: 928-938,
2007.

27. Previs, M. J.; Previs, S. B.; Gulick, J.; Robbins, J.; Warshaw,
D. M.: Molecular mechanics of cardiac myosin-binding protein C in
native thick filaments. Science 337: 1215-1218, 2012.

28. Probst, S.; Oechslin, E.; Schuler, P.; Greutmann, M.; Boye, P.;
Knirsch, W.; Berger, F.; Thierfelder, L.; Jenni, R.; Klaassen, S.
: Sarcomere gene mutations in isolated left ventricular noncompaction
cardiomyopathy do not predict clinical phenotype. Circ. Cardiovasc.
Genet. 4: 367-374, 2011.

29. Richard, P.; Isnard, R.; Carrier, L.; Dubourg, O.; Donatien, Y.;
Mathieu, B.; Bonne, G.; Gary, F.; Charron, P.; Hagege, A.; Komajda,
M.; Schwartz, K.; Hainque, B.: Double heterozygosity for mutations
in the beta-myosin heavy chain and in the cardiac myosin binding protein
C genes in a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Med. Genet. 36:
542-545, 1999.

30. Rottbauer, W.; Gautel, M.; Zehelein, J.; Labeit, S.; Franz, W.
M.; Fischer, C.; Vollrath, B.; Mall, G.; Dietz, R.; Kubler, W.; Katus,
H. A.: Novel splice donor site mutation in the cardiac myosin-binding
protein-C gene in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: characterization
of cardiac transcript and protein. J. Clin. Invest. 100: 475-482,
1997.

31. Seidman, C.: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from man to mouse. J.
Clin. Invest. 106: S9-S13, 2000.

32. Shimizu, M.; Ino, H.; Yasuda, T.; Fujino, N.; Uchiyama, K.; Mabuchi,
T.; Konno, T.; Kaneda, T.; Fujita, T.; Masuta, E.; Katoh, M.; Funada,
A.; Mabuchi, H.: Gene mutations in adult Japanese patients with dilated
cardiomyopathy. Circ. J. 69: 150-153, 2005.

33. Tajsharghi, H.; Leren, T. P.; Abdul-Hussein, S.; Tulinius, M.;
Brunvand, L.; Dahl, H. M.; Oldfors, A.: Unexpected myopathy associated
with a mutation in MYBPC3 and misplacement of the cardiac myosin binding
protein C. J. Med. Genet. 47: 575-577, 2010.

34. Tsukurov, O.; Boehmer, A.; Flynn, J.; Nicolai, J.-P.; Hamel, B.
C. J.; Traill, S.; Zaleske, D.; Mankin, H. J.; Yeon, H.; Ho, C.; Tabin,
C.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C.: A complex bilateral polysyndactyly
disease locus maps to chromosome 7q36. Nature Genet. 6: 282-286,
1994.

35. Van Driest, S. L.; Vasile, V. C.; Ommen, S. R.; Will, M. L.; Tajik,
A. J.; Gersh, B. J.; Ackerman, M. J.: Myosin binding protein C mutations
and compound heterozygosity in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Am.
Coll. Cardiol. 44: 1903-1910, 2004.

36. Verweij, M. F.; Hamel, B. C. J.: Unexpected findings in identifiable
stored blood samples after analysis without consent: moral arguments
for and against disclosure. Genet. Counsel. 13: 115-121, 2002.

37. Waldmuller, S.; Sakthivel, S.; Saadi, A. V.; Selignow, C.; Rakesh,
P. G.; Golubenko, M.; Joseph, P. K.; Padmakumar, R.; Richard, P.;
Schwartz, K.; Tharakan, J. M.; Rajamanickam, C.; Vosberg, H.-P.:
Novel deletions in MYH7 and MYBPC3 identified in Indian families with
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Molec. Cell. Cardiol. 35:
623-636, 2003.

38. Wang, P.; Zou, Y.; Fu, C. Y.; Zhou, X.; Hui, R.: MYBPC3 polymorphism
is a modifier for expression of cardiac hypertrophy in patients with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 329:
796-799, 2005.

39. Wang, Y.; Wang, Z.; Yang, Q.; Zou, Y.; Zhang, H.; Yan, C.; Feng,
X.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhou, X.; Ahmad, F.; Hui, R.; Song,
L.: Autosomal recessive transmission of MYBPC3 mutation results in
malignant phenotype of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. PLoS One 6:
e67087, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

40. Watkins, H.; Conner, D.; Thierfelder, L.; Jarcho, J. A.; MacRae,
C.; McKenna, W. J.; Maron, B. J.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.:
Mutations in the cardiac myosin binding protein-C gene on chromosome
11 cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Nature Genet. 11:
434-437, 1995.

41. Xin, B.; Puffenberger, E.; Tumbush, J.; Bockoven, J. R.; Wang,
H.: Homozygosity for a novel splice site mutation in the cardiac
myosin-binding protein C gene causes severe neonatal hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 2662-2667, 2007.

42. Yang, Q.; Sanbe, A.; Osinska, H.; Hewett, T. E.; Klevitsky, R.;
Robbins, J.: In vivo modeling of myosin binding protein C familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation Res. 85: 841-847, 1999.

43. Yang, Q.; Sanbe, A.; Osinska, H.; Hewett, T. E.; Klevitsky, R.;
Robbins, J.: A mouse model of myosin binding protein C human familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 1292-1300, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/3/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/16/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/5/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/7/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/1/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/5/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/23/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/20/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/2/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/20/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/19/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/23/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/7/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/12/2007
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/5/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2002
Paul Brennan - updated: 3/11/2002
Paul Brennan - updated: 4/11/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/19/1998
Paul Brennan - updated: 8/24/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/13/1995

EDITED carol: 09/11/2013
carol: 9/4/2013
carol: 9/3/2013
tpirozzi: 6/28/2013
carol: 5/16/2013
alopez: 11/5/2012
terry: 10/31/2012
carol: 9/6/2012
terry: 9/5/2012
wwang: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/7/2011
carol: 3/25/2010
wwang: 12/17/2009
terry: 12/1/2009
wwang: 9/1/2009
terry: 8/5/2009
wwang: 5/13/2009
terry: 4/23/2009
wwang: 2/24/2009
wwang: 2/23/2009
terry: 2/20/2009
wwang: 2/10/2009
terry: 2/2/2009
carol: 11/25/2008
terry: 11/20/2008
carol: 11/19/2008
mgross: 9/23/2008
terry: 9/23/2008
carol: 3/7/2008
carol: 1/17/2007
carol: 1/12/2007
terry: 1/12/2007
carol: 2/23/2006
carol: 8/12/2005
carol: 5/9/2003
carol: 11/12/2002
tkritzer: 11/11/2002
terry: 11/5/2002
carol: 8/28/2002
tkritzer: 8/26/2002
terry: 8/23/2002
alopez: 3/11/2002
alopez: 3/8/2002
alopez: 4/11/2000
carol: 10/28/1999
alopez: 2/4/1999
carol: 10/28/1998
terry: 10/19/1998
alopez: 10/15/1998
terry: 10/14/1998
alopez: 8/24/1998
carol: 5/11/1998
terry: 5/8/1998
mark: 2/14/1998
terry: 2/6/1998
terry: 9/8/1997
terry: 9/3/1997
mark: 7/22/1996
mark: 2/19/1996
terry: 2/15/1996
mark: 12/13/1995

608352	TITLE *608352 ACROSIN-BINDING PROTEIN; ACRBP
;;PROACROSIN-BINDING PROTEIN SP32 PRECURSOR; SP32;;
OY-TES-1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to mouse Pem (see
300446), followed by PCR and 5-prime RACE of a human testis cDNA
library, Ono et al. (2001) cloned ACRBP, which they designated OY-TES-1.
The deduced 543-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal glutamic acid-
and glutamine-rich domain and a central acidic amino acid region. It has
20 cysteine residues that are completely conserved between several
mammalian species. The mature protein is cleaved between arg273 and
glu274. ACRBP shares 77.2%, 81.9%, and 75.2% amino acid identity with
its guinea pig, pig, and mouse homologs, respectively. RT-PCR of several
human tissues detected ACRBP expression only in testis. ACRBP was also
expressed in a subset of tumors of varied tissue origin. A serologic
survey found antibodies against ACRBP in 25 of 362 cancer patients. No
ACRBP reactivity was found in 20 normal individuals.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ono et al. (2001) determined that the ACRBP gene contains 10 exons and
spans more than 9.3 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Ono et al. (2001) mapped the
ACRBP gene to chromosome 12p13-p12. Southern blot analysis indicated
that there are 2 ACRBP-related genes in the human genome.

REFERENCE 1. Ono, T.; Kurashige, T.; Harada, N.; Noguchi, Y.; Saika, T.; Niikawa,
N.; Aoe, M.; Nakamura, S.; Higashi, T.; Hiraki, A.; Wada, H.; Kumon,
H.; Old, L. J.; Nakayama, E.: Identification of proacrosin binding
protein sp32 precursor as a human cancer/testis antigen. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 3282-3287, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/18/2003

EDITED mgross: 03/24/2005
mgross: 12/18/2003

606778	TITLE *606778 SLINGSHOT, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 1; SSH1
;;KIAA1298
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ADF (actin-depolymerizing factor)/cofilin family (see 601442) is
composed of stimulus-responsive mediators of actin dynamics. ADF/cofilin
proteins are inactivated by kinases such as LIM domain kinase-1 (LIMK1;
601329). The SSH family appears to play a role in actin dynamics by
reactivating ADF/cofilin proteins in vivo (Niwa et al., 2002).

CLONING

Niwa et al. (2002) identified the Drosophila 'slingshot' (ssh) gene,
which encodes a 1,045-amino acid phosphatase that binds F actin. The
phosphatase domain of ssh is distantly related to those of the family of
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatases (MKPs; see 602749). Niwa
et al. (2002) identified 3 human homologs of ssh, SSH1, SSH2 (606779),
and SSH3 (606780), by genomic sequence analysis. Transcript analysis
suggested that at least 6 polypeptides would be produced from these
genes. SSH1 encodes 3 isoforms, SSH1L (1,049 amino acids), SSH1S (692
amino acids), and SSH1B (148 amino acids), and SSH2 encodes 2 isoforms,
SSH2 (449 amino acids) and SSH2B (195 amino acids). The SSH3 protein has
471 amino acids. Besides the catalytic domain, 2 other domains are
conserved between Drosophila ssh and the human SSHs (domains A and B)
and are unique to the SSH family.

GENE FUNCTION

Niwa et al. (2002) found that loss of ssh function in Drosophila
dramatically increased levels of both F actin and phospho-cofilin
(P-cofilin) and disorganized epidermal cell morphogenesis. Two of the
human proteins, SSH1L and SSH2, were enzymatically active when reacted
with an artificial substrate, p-nitrophenyl phosphate. SSH3 did not
exhibit activity toward p-nitrophenyl phosphate, and its expression did
not reduce the level of P-cofilin in COS-7 cells. In mammalian cells,
SSH1L and SSH2 suppressed LIMK1-induced actin reorganization.
Furthermore, ssh, SSH1L, and SSH2 dephosphorylated P-cofilin in cultured
cells and in cell-free assays. These results suggested that the SSH gene
family plays a pivotal role in actin dynamics by reactivating
ADF/cofilin in vivo.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SSH1
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP stSG16406).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the SSH1
gene and porokeratosis, see 175900.

REFERENCE 1. Niwa, R.; Nagata-Ohashi, K.; Takeichi, M.; Mizuno, K.; Uemura,
T.: Control of actin reorganization by Slingshot, a family of phosphatases
that dephosphorylate ADF/cofilin. Cell 108: 233-246, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/10/2012

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 3/22/2002

EDITED carol: 12/06/2012
terry: 10/22/2012
ckniffin: 10/10/2012
carol: 10/30/2009
mgross: 3/22/2002

601917	TITLE *601917 ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 3 FAMILY, MEMBER B2; ALDH3B2
;;ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 8; ALDH8;;
ACETALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 8
DESCRIPTION See ALDH1 (100640). Hsu et al. (1995) and Hsu and Chang (1996) reported
the cloning, sequencing and expression of the human ALDH8 gene. Hsu et
al. (1997) determined the structure of the ALDH7 (600466) and ALDH8
genes. The ALDH7 gene spans about 20 kb of genomic DNA and contains 9
coding exons. The ALDH8 gene is over 10 kb long and contains at least 10
exons. The ALDH8 gene contains an in-frame stop codon at the seventeenth
codon position from the first initiator methionine. The coding region of
the ALDH7 gene shows about 86% nucleotide identity with the
corresponding region of the ALDH8 gene. The numbers and positions of the
introns of the 2 genes are conserved, suggesting that gene duplication
is involved in the expansion of the ALDH gene family. The human ALDH7
and ALDH8 genes have a close evolutionary relationship with human ALDH3
(100660).

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ALDH8
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP U37519).

REFERENCE 1. Hsu, L. C.; Chang, W.-C.: Sequencing and expression of the human
ALDH8 encoding a new member of the aldehyde dehydrogenase family. Gene 174:
319-322, 1996.

2. Hsu, L. C.; Chang, W.-C.; Lin, S. W.; Yoshida, A.: Cloning and
characterization of genes encoding four additional human aldehyde
dehydrogenase isozymes. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 372: 159-168, 1995.

3. Hsu, L. C.; Chang, W.-C.; Yoshida, A.: Human aldehyde dehydrogenase
genes, ALDH7 and ALDH8: genomic organization and gene structure comparison. Gene 189:
89-94, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/2/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/1/1997

EDITED joanna: 04/04/2001
carol: 4/3/2001
joanna: 4/2/2001
terry: 6/4/1998
alopez: 7/22/1997
mark: 7/2/1997
jenny: 7/1/1997

176977	TITLE *176977 PROTEIN KINASE C, DELTA; PRKCD
;;PKCD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The genes encoding the protein kinase C enzymes are widely distributed,
e.g., PRKCA (176960) on chromosome 17, PRKCB1 (176970) on 16, and PRKCG
(176980) on 19. Although the sequence homology among the PRKC family of
genes is extensive, the pattern of expression varies among tissues. For
example, the delta polypeptide appears to be the major isoform expressed
in mouse hematopoietic cells. Mischak et al. (1991) isolated and
characterized the mouse Prkcd gene.

Aris et al. (1993) obtained 2 PKC-delta clones from a HepG2 human liver
cell cDNA library. The clones differed at 3 nucleotides, resulting in
nonconservative changes at positions 375 (phe to ser) and 593 (val to
met) in the deduced 676-amino acid protein. Human PKC-delta shares about
90% amino acid identity with mouse and rat Pkc-delta. Western blot
analysis detected a 76-kD protein following expression of either
PKC-delta clone in insect cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Aris et al. (1993) found that PKC-delta underwent calcium-independent
autophosphorylation in the presence of phosphatidylserine and
diacylglycerol. Diacylglycerol was an absolute requirement for PKC-delta
activation. This and other cofactor and substrate requirements
distinguished human PKC-delta from its mouse homolog.

Liu et al. (2006) showed that preexisting nuclear RELA (164014), which
is an NFKB subunit, positively regulates ultraviolet (UV)
irradiation-induced activation of JNK (MAPK8; 601158). In UV-irradiated
mouse fibroblasts, they found that Pkc-delta was required for Rela to
activate Jnk, thereby contributing to UV-induced apoptosis.

Tu et al. (2007) showed that Wnt3a (606359) signaling induced
osteoblastogenesis in a mouse stromal bone marrow cell line, ST2,
through G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998) and G-alpha-11 (GNA11; 139313), leading
to activated phosphatidylinositol signaling and Prkcd. Wnt7b (601967),
expressed by osteogenic cells in vivo, induced osteoblast
differentiation in ST2 and mouse mesenchymal cells via the
Prkcd-mediated pathway. Tu et al. (2007) concluded that PRKCD is part of
a noncanonical WNT signaling cascade.

In a cultured bovine retinal pericyte model, Geraldes et al. (2009)
demonstrated that hyperglycemia persistently activates PRKCD and
p38-alpha MAPK (MAPK14; 600289), thus increasing expression of SHP1
(PTPN6; 176883), and that this occurs independently of NFKB (see 164011)
activation. This signaling cascade leads to PDGF receptor-beta (PDGFRB;
173410) dephosphorylation and a reduction in downstream signaling from
this receptor, resulting in pericyte apoptosis, the most specific
vascular histopathology associated with diabetic complications. The
authors observed increased PRKCD activity and an increase in the number
of acellular capillaries in diabetic mouse retinas, which were not
reversible with insulin treatment that achieved normoglycemia. Unlike
diabetic age-matched wildtype mice, diabetic Prkcd -/- mice did not show
activation of MAPK14 or SHP1, inhibition of PDGFB (190040) signaling in
vascular cells, or the presence of acellular capillaries. The authors
also observed PRKCD, MAPK14, and SHP1 activation in brain pericytes and
in the renal cortex of diabetic mice. Geraldes et al. (2009) concluded
that this represents a new signaling pathway by which hyperglycemia can
induce PDGFB resistance and increased vascular cell apoptosis to cause
diabetic vascular complications.

Haubensak et al. (2010) used molecular genetic approaches to map the
functional connectivity of a subpopulation of GABA-containing neurons
located in the lateral subdivision of the central amygdala (CEl), which
express PRKCD. Channelrhodopsin-2-assisted circuit mapping in amygdala
slices and cell-specific viral tracing indicated that PRKCD-positive
neurons inhibit output neurons in the medial central amygdala (CEm), and
also make reciprocal inhibitory synapses with PRKCD-negative neurons in
CEl. Electrical silencing of PRKCD-positive neurons in vivo suggested
that they correspond to physiologically identified units that are
inhibited by the conditioned stimulus, called CEl(off) units. Haubensak
et al. (2010) concluded that this correspondence, together with
behavioral data, defines an inhibitory microcircuit in CEl that gates
CEm output to control the level of conditioned freezing.

Ciocchi et al. (2010) used in vivo electrophysiologic, optogenetic, and
pharmacologic approaches in mice to demonstrate that neuronal activity
in the CEl is required for fear acquisition, whereas conditioned fear
responses are driven by output neurons in the CEm. Functional circuit
analysis revealed that inhibitory CEA microcircuits are highly organized
and that cell type-specific plasticity of phasic and tonic activity in
the CEl to CEm pathway may gate fear expression and regulate fear
generalization.

Burguillos et al. (2011) showed that the orderly activation of caspase-8
(601763) and caspase-3/7 (601761), known executioners of apoptotic cell
death, regulate microglia activation through a PRKCD-dependent pathway.
Burguillos et al. (2011) found that stimulation of microglia with
various inflammogens activates caspase-8 and caspase-3/7 in microglia
without triggering cell death in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown or
chemical inhibition of each of these caspases hindered microglia
activation and consequently, reduced neurotoxicity. The authors observed
that these caspases are activated in microglia in the ventral
mesencephalon of Parkinson disease (168600) and the frontal cortex of
individuals with Alzheimer disease (104300). Burguillos et al. (2011)
concluded that caspase-8 and caspase-3/7 are involved in regulating
microglia activation, and suggested that inhibition of these caspases
could be neuroprotective by targeting the microglia rather than the
neurons themselves.

Qu et al. (2012) showed that PRKCD phosphorylates NLRC4 (606831) and
that this phosphorylation is critical for inflammasome assembly. Using
knockin mice expressing NLRC4 with a carboxy-terminal 3XFlag tag, Qu et
al. (2012) identified phosphorylation of NLRC4 on a single,
evolutionarily conserved residue, ser533, following infection of
macrophages with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Western
blotting with an NLRC4 phospho-ser533 antibody confirmed that this
posttranslational modification occurs only in the presence of stimuli
known to engage NLRC4 and not the related protein NLRP3 (606416) or AIM2
(604578). Nlrc4-null macrophages reconstituted with NLRC4 mutant S533A,
unlike those reconstituted with wildtype NLRC4, did not activate
caspase-1 (147678) and pyroptosis in response to S. typhimurium,
indicating that S533 phosphorylation is critical for NLRC4 inflammasome
function. Conversely, phosphomimetic NLRC4 S533D caused rapid macrophage
pyroptosis without infection. Biochemical purification of the
NLRC4-phosphorylating activity and a screen of kinase inhibitors
identified PRKCD as a candidate NLRC4 kinase. Recombinant PRKCD
phosphorylated NLRC4 S533 in vitro, immunodepletion of PRKCD from
macrophage lysates blocked NLRC4 S533 phosphorylation in vitro, and
Prkcd-null macrophages exhibited greatly attenuated caspase-1 activation
and IL1-beta (147720) secretion specifically in response to S.
typhimurium. Phosphorylation-defective NLRC4 S533A failed to recruit
procaspase-1 and did not assemble inflammasome specks during S.
typhimurium infection, so phosphorylation of NLRC4 S533 probably drives
conformational changes necessary for NLRC4 inflammasome activity and
host innate immunity.

MAPPING

By study of a panel of somatic cell human/hamster hybrid DNAs, Huppi et
al. (1994) mapped the PRKCD gene to human chromosome 3. By analysis of
recombination frequency in an interspecific panel of backcross mice,
they mapped the murine homolog to chromosome 14 in a region syntenic
with human 3p.

ANIMAL MODEL

PRKCD is involved in B cell signaling and in the regulation of growth,
apoptosis, and differentiation of a variety of cell types. Prkcd is most
abundant in B and T lymphocytes of lymphoid organs, cerebrum, and
intestine of normal mice. By generating mice with a disruption in the
Prkcd gene, Miyamoto et al. (2002) observed that the mice are viable up
to 1 year but prone to autoimmune disease, with enlarged lymph nodes and
spleens containing numerous germinal centers. Flow cytometric analysis
showed increased numbers of bone marrow-derived B cells, but no change
in CD5+ B cells or T cells. Transfer of B cells into Rag1 (179615) -/-
mice resulted in greater numbers of splenic B cells and germinal centers
in mice receiving Prkcd -/- cells. Prkcd-deficient B cells also mounted
a stronger proliferative response than those from wildtype mice. RT-PCR
analysis detected higher levels of IL6 (147620), but not other
cytokines, in mutant than in wildtype B cells. EMSA analysis showed
increased DNA-binding activity of NFIL6 (CEBPB; 189965) but not NFKB.
Serum IgG1 and IgA, but not other isotype, concentrations were greater
in Prkcd-deficient mice. Although Miyamoto et al. (2002) did not detect
antinuclear antibodies, they did observe high levels of primarily IgG
antibodies to chromatin in older mutant mice. Histologic analysis
revealed evidence of glomerulonephritis with deposition of IgG and
complement component C3. Miyamoto et al. (2002) noted that crosslinking
of B cell receptors leads to activation of both Prkcb (176970) and
Prkcd, but that proliferation in mice deficient in these enzymes is
reduced and enhanced, respectively, possibly allowing for fine
regulation of the immune response.

Mecklenbrauker et al. (2002) generated mice with a null mutation in
Prkcd. They found that this deficiency prevents B cell tolerance and
allows maturation and terminal differentiation of self-reactive B cells
in the presence of a tolerizing antigen, soluble hen egg lysozyme. The
authors detected high levels of serum anti-DNA antibodies as well as
polyreactive antibodies to antigens without previous immunization. They
concluded that although Prkcd deficiency does not affect B cell
receptor-mediated activation in response to immunogens, induction of
tolerance is compromised in the mutant mice.

Using a mouse model, Mecklenbrauker et al. (2004) reported a mechanism
for the regulation of peripheral B-cell survival by serine/threonine
protein kinase C-delta: spontaneous death of resting B cells is
regulated by nuclear localization of Pkcd that contributes to
phosphorylation of histone H2B (see 609904) at serine-14. Treatment of B
cells with the potent B-cell survival factor Baff (603969) prevented
nuclear accumulation of Pkcd. Mecklenbrauker et al. (2004) concluded
that their data suggested the existence of a previously unknown
BAFF-induced and PKCD-mediated nuclear signaling pathway which regulates
B-cell survival.

Tu et al. (2007) found that Prkcd -/- mouse embryos showed much less
ossification and delayed chondrocyte maturation in long bones compared
to control embryos. The level of phospho-Marcks (177061) was lower in
the cytosol of Prkcd -/- limb primordial cells than in control cells at
embryonic day 14.5, suggesting MARCKS may be an endogenous PRKCD
substrate.

Schwegmann et al. (2007) used microarray and quantitative RT-PCR
analyses of Listeria monocytogenes (LM)-infected macrophages from Nfil6
-/- mice to identify candidate genes downstream of Nfil6 in pathways of
LM killing independent of reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates.
They found increased expression of Pkcd in LM-infected Nfil6 -/-
macrophages compared with wildtype controls. Compared with LM-infected
wildtype mice, LM-infected Pkcd -/- mice exhibited higher mortality
accompanied by higher LM burden and increased inflammation with hepatic
microabscesses, despite enhanced levels of Nfil6 and Il6. Pkcd -/-
macrophages showed no impairment in activation, but they had high
bacterial load and increased bacterial escape from phagosomes.
Schwegmann et al. (2007) concluded that PKCD is a critical factor for
confinement and killing of LM within macrophage phagosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Aris, J. P.; Basta, P. V.; Holmes, W. D.; Ballas, L. M.; Moomaw,
C.; Rankl, N. B.; Blobel, G.; Loomis, C. R.; Burns, D. J.: Molecular
and biochemical characterization of a recombinant human PKC-delta
family member. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1174: 171-181, 1993.

2. Burguillos, M. A.; Deierborg, T.; Kavanagh, E.; Persson, A.; Hajji,
N.; Garcia-Quintanilla, A.; Cano, J.; Brundin, P.; Englund, E.; Venero,
J. L.; Joseph, B.: Caspase signalling controls microglia activation
and neurotoxicity. Nature 472: 319-324, 2011.

3. Ciocchi, S.; Herry, C.; Grenier, F.; Wolff, S. B. E.; Letzkus,
J. J.; Vlachos, I.; Ehrlich, I.; Sprengel, R.; Deisseroth, K.; Stadler,
M. B.; Muller, C.; Luthi, A.: Encoding of conditioned fear in central
amygdala inhibitory circuits. Nature 468: 277-282, 2010.

4. Geraldes, P.; Hiraoka-Yamamoto, J.; Matsumoto, M.; Clermont, A.;
Leitges, M.; Marette, A.; Aiello, L. P.; Kern, T. S.; King, G. L.
: Activation of PKC-delta and SHP-1 by hyperglycemia causes vascular
cell apoptosis and diabetic retinopathy. Nature Med. 15: 1298-1306,
2009.

5. Haubensak, W.; Kunwar, P. S.; Cai, H.; Ciocchi, S.; Wall, N. R.;
Ponnusamy, R.; Biag, J.; Dong, H.-W.; Deisseroth, K.; Callaway, E.
M.; Fanselow, M. S.; Luthi, A.; Anderson, D. J.: Genetic dissection
of an amygdala microcircuit that gates conditioned fear. Nature 468:
270-276, 2010.

6. Huppi, K.; Siwarski, D.; Goodnight, J.; Mischak, H.: Assignment
of the protein kinase C delta-polypeptide gene (PRKCD) to human chromosome
3 and mouse chromosome 14. Genomics 19: 161-162, 1994.

7. Liu, J.; Yang, D.; Minemoto, Y.; Leitges, M.; Rosner, M. R.; Lin,
A.: NF-kappa-B is required for UV-induced JNK activation via induction
of PKC-delta. Molec. Cell 21: 467-480, 2006.

8. Mecklenbrauker, I.; Kalled, S. L.; Leitges, M.; Mackay, F.; Tarakhovsky,
A.: Regulation of B-cell survival by BAFF-dependent PKC-delta-mediated
nuclear signalling. Nature 431: 456-461, 2004.

9. Mecklenbrauker, I.; Saijo, K.; Zheng, N. Y.; Leitges, M.; Tarakhovsky,
A.: Protein kinase C-delta controls self-antigen-induced B-cell tolerance. Nature 416:
860-865, 2002.

10. Mischak, H.; Bodenteich, A.; Kolch, W.; Goodnight, J.; Hofer,
F.; Mushinski, J. F.: Mouse protein kinase C-delta, the major isoform
expressed in mouse hemopoietic cells: sequence of the cDNA, expression
patterns and characterization of the protein. Biochemistry 30: 7925-7931,
1991.

11. Miyamoto, A.; Nakayama, K.; Imaki, H.; Hirose, S.; Jiang, Y.;
Abe, M.; Tsukiyama, T.; Nagahama, H.; Ohno, S.; Hatakeyama, S.; Nakayama,
K. I.: Increased proliferation of B cells and auto-immunity in mice
lacking protein kinase C-delta. Nature 416: 865-869, 2002.

12. Qu, Y.; Misaghi, S.; Izrael-Tomasevic, A.; Newton, K.; Gilmour,
L. L.; Lamkanfi, M.; Louie, S.; Kayagaki, N.; Liu, J.; Komuves, L.;
Cupp, J. E.; Arnott, D.; Monack, D.; Dixit, V. M.: Phosphorylation
of NLRC4 is critical for inflammasome activation. Nature 490: 539-542,
2012.

13. Schwegmann, A.; Guler, R.; Cutler, A. J.; Arendse, B.; Horsnell,
W. G. C.; Flemming, A.; Kottmann, A. H.; Ryan, G.; Hide, W.; Leitges,
M.; Seoighe, C.; Brombacher, F.: Protein kinase C delta is essential
for optimal macrophage-mediated phagosomal containment of Listeria
monocytogenes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 16251-16256, 2007.

14. Tu, X.; Joeng, K. S.; Nakayama, K. I.; Nakayama, K.; Rajagopal,
J.; Carroll, T. J.; McMahon, A. P.; Long, F.: Noncanonical Wnt signaling
through G protein-linked PKC-delta activation promotes bone formation. Dev.
Cell 12: 113-127, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/4/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/12/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/7/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/30/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/30/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/24/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/8/1994

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2013
alopez: 12/7/2012
terry: 12/4/2012
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 4/7/2011
alopez: 12/1/2010
terry: 11/29/2010
wwang: 12/7/2009
terry: 12/2/2009
mgross: 11/8/2007
mgross: 2/12/2007
wwang: 2/7/2007
wwang: 3/30/2006
tkritzer: 12/1/2004
terry: 11/30/2004
alopez: 4/24/2002
dkim: 9/22/1998
alopez: 12/22/1997
carol: 2/8/1994

607741	TITLE *607741 TBC1 DOMAIN FAMILY, MEMBER 3; TBC1D3
;;TBC1D3A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Paulding et al. (2003) identified TBC1D3.
The deduced protein contains a TBC domain found in proteins involved in
RAB (see 179508) GTPase signaling. RT-PCR analysis of 15 human tissues
detected expression of TBC1D3 in liver, skeletal muscle, kidney,
pancreas, spleen, testis, ovary, small intestine, and peripheral blood
leukocytes.

By genomic sequence analysis, Hodzic et al. (2006) identified 8 paralogs
of the TBC1D3 gene on chromosome 17, including TBC1D3, which they called
paralog H. All TBC1D3 paralogs encode a deduced 549-amino acid protein,
but missense changes at 6 residues among the paralogs result in 5
different TBC1D3 isoforms. The TBC1D3 paralogs appeared to be
differentially expressed in human tissues. TBC1D3 was the only paralog
expressed in heart.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Paulding et al. (2003) mapped the TBC1D3
gene to chromosome 17q12. Genome assembly (build 35.1) indicated that
there is a nearly identical duplicated locus, TBC1D3B (610144), in the
same region (Scott, 2005).

By genomic sequence analysis, Hodzic et al. (2006) identified 8 TBC1D3
paralogs, including the TBC1D3 gene, on chromosome 17q12. The paralogs
are clustered in 2 groups of 4 genes, and each cluster spans
approximately 400 kb.

EVOLUTION

Paulding et al. (2003) determined that the TRE2 oncogene (USP6; 604334)
is derived from the chimeric fusion of the USP32 gene (607740) and the
TBC1D3 gene. USP32 is an ancient, highly conserved gene, whereas TBC1D3
is derived from a recent segmental duplication that is absent in most
other mammals and shows rapid amplification and dispersal through the
primate lineage. The chimeric TRE2 gene exists only in the hominoid
lineage of primates and arose as recently as 21 to 33 million years ago,
after proliferation of the TBC1D3 segmental duplication. In contrast to
the broad expression patterns of USP32 and TBC1D3, expression of TRE2 is
testis-specific, a pattern proposed for genes implicated in the
emergence of reproductive barriers. The authors concluded that the
sudden emergence of chimeric proteins, such as that encoded by TRE2, may
have contributed to hominoid speciation.

REFERENCE 1. Hodzic, D.; Kong, C.; Wainszelbaum, M. J.; Charron, A. J.; Su,
X.; Stahl, P. D.: TBC1D3, a hominoid oncoprotein, is encoded by a
cluster of paralogues located on chromosome 17q12. Genomics 88:
731-736, 2006.

2. Paulding, C. A.; Ruvolo, M.; Haber, D. A.: The Tre2 (USP6) oncogene
is a hominoid-specific gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 2507-2511,
2003.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/23/2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 02/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2005
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/24/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/1/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2007
mgross: 5/24/2006
terry: 5/12/2006
wwang: 6/15/2005
wwang: 6/13/2005
terry: 6/7/2005
joanna: 5/24/2005
mgross: 5/1/2003

611142	TITLE *611142 CYTOSKELETON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 5; CKAP5
;;COLONIC AND HEPATIC TUMOR OVEREXPRESSED GENE; CHTOG;;
MINI SPINDLES, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; MSPS;;
KIAA0097
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1995) cloned CKAP5, which they
designated KIAA0097. The deduced protein contains 2,032 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis detected highest expression in skeletal muscle
and lower expression in all other tissues and cell lines examined,
except peripheral blood leukocytes.

Using TACC1 (605301) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a mammary
epithelial cDNA library, Lauffart et al. (2002) cloned CKAP5, which they
called CHTOG. CHTOG contains a microtubule-binding domain in its
N-terminal half and a KXGS motif for binding tubulin (see 191110) dimers
in its C-terminal half.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference in HeLa cells, Gergely et al. (2003) found that
TACC3 (605303) depletion did not alter spindle organization, but partly
destabilized microtubules and redistributed CHTOG away from spindle
microtubules. In CHTOG-depleted cells, relatively robust spindles
formed, but they were highly disorganized. Gergely et al. (2003)
concluded that CHTOG plays a major role in organizing spindle poles,
whereas its role in stabilizing spindle microtubules is minor and, at
least in part, mediated via interaction with TACC3.

Brouhard et al. (2008) showed that the Xenopus CKAP5 ortholog, Xmap215,
functioned as a processive microtubule polymerase. Recombinant Xmap215
bound free porcine brain tubulin in a 1:1 complex that interacted with
the microtubule lattice and targeted the ends by a diffusion-facilitated
mechanism. Xmap215 persisted at the plus end and catalyzed the addition
of up to 25 tubulin dimers. Under some circumstances, Xmap215 catalyzed
the reverse reaction, microtubule shrinkage.

MAPPING

Using human-rodent hybrid cell lines, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the
CKAP5 gene to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Brouhard, G. J.; Stear, J. H.; Noetzel, T. L.; Al-Bassam, J.; Kinoshita,
K.; Harrison, S. C.; Howard, J.; Hyman, A. A.: XMAP215 is a processive
microtubule polymerase. Cell 132: 79-88, 2008.

2. Gergely, F.; Draviam, V. M.; Raff, J. W.: The ch-TOG/XMAP215 protein
is essential for spindle pole organization in human somatic cells. Genes
Dev. 17: 336-341, 2003.

3. Lauffart, B.; Howell, S. J.; Tasch, J. E.; Cowell, J. K.; Still,
I. H.: Interaction of the transforming acidic coiled-coil 1 (TACC1)
protein with ch-TOG and GAS41/NuBI1 suggests multiple TACC1-containing
protein complexes in human cells. Biochem. J. 363: 195-200, 2002.

4. Nagase, T; Miyajima, N; Tanaka, A.; Sazuka, T.; Seki, N.; Sato,
S.; Tabata, S.; Ishikawa, K.; Kawarabayashi, Y.; Kotani, H.; Nomura,
N.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
III. The coding sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0081-KIAA0120) deduced
by analysis of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2:
37-43, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/27/2007

EDITED mgross: 03/13/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
mgross: 6/27/2007

120550	TITLE *120550 COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 1, q SUBCOMPONENT, A CHAIN; C1QA
;;COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 1, q SUBCOMPONENT, ALPHA POLYPEPTIDE;;
COMPLEMENT COMPONENT C1q, A CHAIN;;
SERUM C1q
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The first component of complement is a calcium-dependent complex of the
3 subcomponents C1q, C1r (613785), and C1s (120580). Subcomponent C1q
binds to immunoglobulin complexes with resulting serial activation of
C1r (enzyme), C1s (proenzyme), and the other 8 components of complement.
C1q is composed of 3 different species of chains, called A, B (C1QB;
120570), and C (C1QC; 120575).

For a review of the complement system and its components, see Degn et
al. (2011).

CLONING

Reid (1974) reported a partial amino acid sequence of 95 residues of the
191 residues in the oxidized A chain of human subcomponent C1q. This
region of the A chain contains a repeating sequence of glycine-X-Y,
where X is often proline and Y is often hydroxyproline, for 78 residues.
The 5 hydroxylysine residues and 5 hydroxyproline residues in the
oxidized A chain are all in these 78 residues and only in the Y position
of the repeating sequence. Prolonged collagenase digestion of the
oxidized A chain yielded a large, apparently C-terminal peptide
containing most of the noncollagenous sequences present in the chain.
Reid (1974) concluded that the A chain of C1q contains a collagen-like
region that constitutes most of the N-terminal half of the chain.

Hedge et al. (1987) isolated a cDNA clone for the A chain of C1q from a
human monocyte cDNA library using a variety of synthetic
oligonucleotides as probes.

GENE FUNCTION

Bing et al. (1982) showed that fibronectin binds to C1q in the same
manner that it binds collagen. A major function of fibronectins is in
adhesion of cells to extracellular materials, such as solid substrata
and matrices. Because fibronectin stimulates endocytosis and promotes
clearance of particulate material from circulation, the results of Bing
et al. (1982) suggest that fibronectin functions in clearance of
C1q-coated material, such as immune complexes or cellular debris.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Hedge et al. (1987) assigned the gene
for the A chain of C1q to chromosome 1p, where the gene for the B chain
had been assigned previously. The genes for the A, B, and C chains of
C1q are tandemly arranged 5-prime to 3-prime in the order A-C-B on a
24-kb stretch of DNA (Sellar et al., 1991). A and C are separated by 4
kb and B and C are separated by 11 kb. Hybridization of cDNA probes to a
hybrid cell line containing the derived X chromosome from an
X;1(q21.2;p34) translocation described in a female patient with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy (Lindenbaum et al., 1979; Boyd et al., 1988) showed
that the A and B genes are located in the region 1p36.3-p34.1 (Sellar et
al., 1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with C1q deficiency (613652), Topaloglu et al. (1996) and
Petry et al. (1997) identified the same homozygous mutation in the C1QA
gene (120550.0001).

ANIMAL MODEL

The complement system plays a paradoxical role in development and
expression of autoimmunity in humans. The activation of complement in
SLE contributes to tissue injury. In contrast, inherited deficiency of
classic pathway components, particularly C1q, is probably associated
with development of SLE. This leads to the hypothesis that a physiologic
action of the early part of the classic pathway protects against
development of SLE and implies that C1q may play a key role in this
respect. Botto et al. (1998) generated C1q-deficient (C1qa -/-) mice by
gene targeting and monitored them for 8 months. C1qa -/- mice had
increased mortality and higher titers of autoantibodies, compared with
strain-matched controls. Of the C1qa -/- mice, 25% had
glomerulonephritis with immune deposits and multiple apoptotic cell
bodies. Among mice without glomerulonephritis, there were significantly
greater numbers of glomerular apoptotic bodies in C1q-deficient mice
compared with controls. The phenotype associated with C1q deficiency was
modified by background genes. These findings are compatible with the
hypothesis that C1q deficiency causes autoimmunity by impairment of the
clearance of apoptotic cells.

Formation of mature neural circuits during development requires
selective elimination of inappropriate synaptic connections. Using
RT-PCR, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry, Stevens et al.
(2007) found that mouse C1q was expressed by postnatal neurons in
response to immature astrocytes and was localized to synapses throughout
the postnatal central nervous system (CNS) and retina. Mice lacking C1q
(C1qa -/-) or the downstream complement protein C3 (120700), exhibited
large, sustained defects in CNS synapse elimination. Neuronal C1q was
downregulated in the CNS in adulthood. However, in a mouse model of
glaucoma (see 137750), C1q exhibited upregulated expression and
relocalization to adult retina early in the disease. Stevens et al.
(2007) concluded that unwanted synapses are tagged by components of the
classical complement cascade for elimination, and they proposed that
complement-mediated synapse elimination may be aberrantly reactivated in
neurodegenerative disease.

Lewis et al. (2009) generated mice lacking C1qa and/or serum IgM
(147020) as well as Ldlr (606945) and studied them on both low- and
high-fat semisynthetic diets. On both diets, serum IgM/Ldlr -/- mice
developed substantially larger and more complex en face and aortic root
atherosclerotic lesions, with accelerated cholesterol crystal formation
and increased smooth muscle content in aortic root lesions. TUNEL
analysis revealed increased apoptosis in both C1qa/Ldlr -/- and serum
IgM/Ldlr -/- mice. Overall lesions were larger in mice lacking IgM
rather than C1q, suggesting that IgM protective mechanisms are partially
independent of classic complement pathway activation and apoptotic cell
clearance. Lewis et al. (2009) concluded that IgM antibodies play a
central role in protection against atherosclerosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
C1q DEFICIENCY
C1QA, GLN186TER

In 2 sibs with homozygous C1q deficiency (613652), Topaloglu et al.
(1996) identified homozygosity for a C-to-T transition in codon 186 of
the A chain that resulted in a gln-to-stop (Q186X) substitution. The
mutation was present in heterozygous state in both parents and in 2
unaffected sibs. Topaloglu et al. (1996) stated that the same mutation
had been described in an affected member of a Slovakian family with C1q
deficiency by Petry et al. (1995).

Petry et al. (1997) identified homozygosity for the Q186X mutation in
affected members of 3 Turkish families. In 1 family, an asymptomatic
sister of the proband was also found to be homozygous for the mutation.
Petry et al. (1997) hypothesized that this defective allele is present
in the population of southeast Europe and Turkey.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Gilmour et al. (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Bing, D. H.; Almeda, S.; Isliker, H.; Lahav, J.; Hynes, R. O.:
Fibronectin binds to the C1q component of complement. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 79: 4198-4201, 1982.

2. Botto, M.; Dell'Agnola, C.; Bygrave, A. E.; Thompson, E. M.; Cook,
H. T.; Petry, F.; Loos, M.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Walport, M. J.: Homozygous
C1q deficiency causes glomerulonephritis associated with multiple
apoptotic bodies. Nature Genet. 19: 56-59, 1998.

3. Boyd, Y.; Cockburn, D.; Holt, S.; Munro, E.; van Ommen, G. J.;
Gillard, B.; Affara, N.; Ferguson-Smith, M.; Craig, I.: Mapping of
12 translocation breakpoints in the Xp21 region with respect to the
locus for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 48:
28-34, 1988.

4. Degn, S. E.; Jensenius, J. C.; Thiel, S.: Disease-causing mutations
in genes of the complement system. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 689-705,
2011.

5. Gilmour, S.; Randall, J. T.; Willan, K. J.; Dwek, R. A.; Torbet,
J.: The confirmation of subcomponent C1q of the first component of
human complement. Nature 285: 512-514, 1980.

6. Hedge, P. J.; Seller, G. C.; Reid, K. B. M.; Solomon, E.: Assignment
of the A chain of C1q (C1QA) to the short arm of chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 627 only, 1987.

7. Lewis, M. J.; Malik, T. H.; Ehrenstein, M. R.; Boyle, J. J.; Botto,
M.; Haskard, D. O.: Immunoglobulin M is required for protection against
atherosclerosis in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice. Circulation 120:
417-426, 2009.

8. Lindenbaum, R. H.; Clarke, G.; Patel, C.; Moncrieff, M.; Hughes,
J. T.: Muscular dystrophy in an X;1 translocation female suggests
that Duchenne locus is on X chromosome short arm. J. Med. Genet. 16:
389-392, 1979.

9. Petry, F.; Berkel, A. I.; Loos, M.: Multiple identification of
a particular type of hereditary C1q deficiency in the Turkish population:
review of the cases and additional genetic and functional analysis. Hum.
Genet. 100: 51-56, 1997.

10. Petry, F.; Le, D. T.; Kirschfink, M.; Loos, M.: Non-sense and
missense mutations in the structural genes of complement component
C1qA and C chains are linked with two different types of complete
selective C1q deficiencies. J. Immun. 155: 4734-4738, 1995.

11. Reid, K. B. M.: A collagen-like amino acid sequence in a polypeptide
chain of human C1q (a subcomponent of the first component of complement). Biochem.
J. 141: 189-203, 1974.

12. Sellar, G. C.; Blake, D. J.; Reid, K. B.: Characterization and
organization of the genes encoding the A-, B-, and C-chains of human
complement subcomponent C1q: the complete derived amino acid sequence
of human C1q. Biochem. J. 274: 481-490, 1991.

13. Sellar, G. C.; Cockburn, D.; Reid, K. B. M.: Localization of
the gene cluster encoding the A, B, and C chains of human C1q to 1p34.1-1p36.3. Immunogenetics 35:
214-216, 1992.

14. Stevens, B.; Allen, N. J.; Vazquez, L. E.; Howell, G. R.; Christopherson,
K. S.; Nouri, N.; Micheva, K. D.; Mehalow, A. K.; Huberman, A. D.;
Stafford, B.; Sher, A.; Litke, A. M.; Lambris, J. D.; Smith, S. J.;
John, S. W. M.; Barres, B. A.: The classical complement cascade mediates
CNS synapse elimination. Cell 131: 1164-1178, 2007.

15. Topaloglu, R.; Bakkaloglu, A.; Slingsby, J. H.; Mihatsch, M. J.;
Pascual, M.; Norsworthy, P.; Morley, B. J.; Saatci, U.; Schifferli,
J. A.; Walport, M. J.: Molecular basis of hereditary C1q deficiency
associated with SLE and IgA nephropathy in a Turkish family. Kidney
Int. 50: 635-642, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/5/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/13/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/13/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/28/1998
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 7/9/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 08/07/2013
carol: 11/28/2011
terry: 3/10/2011
carol: 3/1/2011
carol: 2/17/2011
alopez: 8/6/2010
terry: 8/5/2010
mgross: 3/14/2008
terry: 3/13/2008
alopez: 11/13/2002
carol: 4/21/1999
alopez: 4/29/1998
terry: 4/28/1998
alopez: 9/8/1997
alopez: 9/4/1997
terry: 11/14/1996
terry: 11/11/1996
jason: 6/29/1994
mimadm: 4/14/1994
carol: 10/13/1992
carol: 5/12/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/9/1991

600767	TITLE *600767 GDP-DISSOCIATION INHIBITOR 2; GDI2
;;RAB GDP-DISSOCIATION INHIBITOR, BETA; RABGDIB;;
RAB GDI-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GDI-beta (GDI2) is a member of the GDP-dissociation inhibitor family,
which includes GDI-alpha (GDI1; 300104). The rab GDIs modulate the
activity of G proteins of the rab family and play a role in the
regulation of vesicle-mediated cellular transport (summary by Sedlacek
et al., 1998).

CLONING

Shisheva et al. (1994) cloned mouse RABGDIB (which they referred to as
'smg p25A GDI') and reported the sequence. Sedlacek et al. (1994) found
that the human RABGDIB sequence is 86.5% similar to RABGDIA, which they
referred to as 'XAP-4.' Bachner et al. (1995) studied expression
patterns of the 2 human genes. They showed that the 2.5-kb mRNA for
RABGDIB is ubiquitously expressed, in contrast to RABGDIA, which is
expressed primarily in neural and sensory tissues.

Rak et al. (2003) used a combination of chemical synthesis and protein
engineering to generate and crystallize the monoprenylated YPT1-RABGDI
complex. The structure of this complex was determined to 1.5-angstrom
resolution and provided a structural basis for the ability of RABGDI to
inhibit nucleotide release by RAB proteins. Isoprenoid binding requires
a conformational change that opens a cavity in the hydrophobic core of
its domain II. Analysis of the structure provided a molecular basis for
understanding a RABGDI mutant that causes mental retardation.

GENE STRUCTURE

The GDI-beta gene contains 11 exons (Sedlacek et al., 1998).

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Sedlacek et al. (1998) demonstrated that the
GDI2 gene maps to 10p15; a processed pseudogene maps to 7p13-p11.

REFERENCE 1. Bachner, D.; Sedlacek, Z.; Korn, B.; Hameister, H.; Poustka, A.
: Expression patterns of two human genes coding for different rab
GDP-dissociation inhibitors (GDIs), extremely conserved proteins involved
in cellular transport. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 701-708, 1995.

2. Rak, A.; Pylypenko, O.; Durek, T.; Watzke, A.; Kushnir, S.; Brunsveld,
L.; Waldmann, H.; Goody, R. S.; Alexandrov, K.: Structure of Rab
GDP-dissociation inhibitor in complex with prenylated YPT1 GTPase. Science 302:
646-650, 2003.

3. Sedlacek, Z.; Konecki, D. S.; Korn, B.; Klauck, S. M.; Poustka,
A.: Evolutionary conservation and genomic organization of XAP-4,
an Xq28 located gene coding for a human rab GDP-dissociation inhibitor
(GDI). Mammalian Genome 5: 633-639, 1994.

4. Sedlacek, Z.; Munstermann, E.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.; Poustka,
A.: The human rab GDI beta gene with long retroposon-rich introns
maps to 10p15 and its pseudogene to 7p11-p13. Mammalian Genome 9:
78-80, 1998.

5. Shisheva, A.; Sudhof, T. C.; Czech, M. P.: Cloning, characterization,
and expression of a novel GDP dissociation inhibitor isoform from
skeletal muscle. Molec. Cell. Biol. 14: 3459-3468, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1998

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 9/11/1995

EDITED carol: 08/02/2011
carol: 8/1/2011
tkritzer: 11/12/2003
terry: 11/11/2003
alopez: 3/8/1999
terry: 2/19/1998
mark: 11/14/1997
mark: 10/27/1997
mark: 10/25/1997
joanna: 4/5/1996
mark: 9/11/1995

608726	TITLE *608726 PHOSPHATASE AND ACTIN REGULATOR 4; PHACTR4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to rat Phactr1 (608723),
Allen et al. (2004) identified a family of 4 PHACTR genes in mouse and
human, including PHACTR4. The PHACTR proteins share highest similarity
in sequences surrounding the N- and C-terminal RPEL repeats and in the
C-terminal actin- and protein phosphatase-1 (PP1; see 176875)-binding
domains. In situ hybridization of rat brain showed Phactr4 highly
expressed in periventricular regions, cerebellum, and hippocampus.

GENE FUNCTION

Allen et al. (2004) determined that mouse Phactr4 coprecipitated with
both PP1 and actin following expression in human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PHACTR4
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP SHGC-74491).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screens, Kim et al. (2007)
isolated the 'humpty dumpty' (humdy) mutant mouse line, which showed
failure to close the neural tube and optic fissure, causing exencephaly
and retinal coloboma. Homozygous humdy embryos exhibited complete
exencephaly, and most died by embryonic day 14.5, although a few
survived to birth and died shortly thereafter. About 8% of heterozygous
embryos displayed a midbrain-specific exencephaly, indicating an
incompletely penetrant dominant effect. Humdy was due to a missense
mutation in the Pp1-binding domain of Phactr4 that specifically
disrupted binding of Pp1 to Phactr4, leading to increased inhibitory
phosphorylation of thr320 on Pp1 in the ventral neural tube and eye and
disruption of Pp1 activity toward its target, Rb (RB1; 614041).
Consequently, Rb became hyperphosphorylated and inactivated, leading to
derepression of E2f (see E2F1; 189971) target genes. Loss of Phactr4
function resulted in shortening of the cell cycle, an increase in
proliferating neural progenitors, and ectopic cell division and/or cell
cycle exit defects in differentiating cells of the humdy neural tube and
retina. Loss of a single E2f1 allele rescued the exencephaly, coloboma,
and proliferation/differentiation defects of humdy mice, indicating that
the critical target of Phactr4 is the cell cycle regulator E2f1.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, P. B.; Greenfield, A. T.; Svenningsson, P.; Haspeslagh,
D. C.; Greengard, P.: Phactrs 1-4: a family of protein phosphatase
1 and actin regulatory proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 7187-7192,
2004.

2. Kim, T.-H.; Goodman, J.; Anderson, K. V.; Niswander, L.: Phactr4
regulates neural tube and optic fissure closure by controlling PP1-,
Rb-, and E2F1-regulated cell-cycle progression. Dev. Cell 13: 87-102,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/10/2004

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2011
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 6/10/2004

604764	TITLE *604764 ZINC FINGER AND HOMEODOMAIN PROTEIN 1; ZHX1
DESCRIPTION NFYA (189903), NFYB (189904), and NFYC (605344) comprise the
heterotrimeric transcription factor known as nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), or
CCAAT-binding protein (CBF). NF-Y binds many CCAAT box elements and Y
box elements, which are inverted CCAAT boxes. Mutations of these
elements that disrupt the binding of NF-Y result in decreased
transcription from various tissue-specific and inducible promoters. To
identify proteins that interact with NF-Y and that may play a role in
tissue-specific or hormone-inducible promoter activity, Yamada et al.
(1999) screened a human liver cDNA library using a yeast 2-hybrid system
with the NFYA subunit as bait. They isolated a partial ZHX1 cDNA lacking
5-prime coding sequence. Yamada et al. (1999) subsequently cloned the
remaining ZHX1 coding sequence. The predicted 873-amino acid ZHX1
protein contains 2 N-terminal zinc fingers, 5 central and C-terminal
homeodomains, a C-terminal acidic region, and 2 putative nuclear
localization signals. Human and mouse ZHX1 share 91% amino acid sequence
identity. The authors demonstrated that ZHX1 specifically interacts with
NFYA both in vivo and in vitro. This interaction does not require the
zinc fingers of ZHX1. Northern blot analysis detected major 4.5- and
5-kb ZHX1 transcripts in all tissues tested, namely heart, lung, liver,
pancreas, kidney, brain, skeletal muscle, and placenta. The 5-kb
transcript was more highly expressed than the 4.5-kb transcript in most
of these tissues.

By analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel, Yamada et al. (1999) mapped
the ZHX1 gene to chromosome 8. They localized the ZHX1 gene to 8q by
radiation hybrid mapping.

REFERENCE 1. Yamada, K.; Printz, R. L.; Osawa, H.; Granner, D. K.: Human ZHX1:
cloning, chromosomal location, and interaction with transcription
factor NF-Y. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 261: 614-621, 1999.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/30/2000

EDITED mgross: 10/16/2000
mcapotos: 4/12/2000
psherman: 3/30/2000

607245	TITLE *607245 ADAPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN COMPLEX 4, BETA-1 SUBUNIT; AP4B1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The heterotetrameric adaptor protein (AP) complexes sort integral
membrane proteins at various stages of the endocytic and secretory
pathways. AP4 is composed of 2 large chains, beta-4 (AP4B1) and
epsilon-4 (AP4E1; 607244), a medium chain, mu-4 (AP4M1; 602296), and a
small chain, sigma-4 (AP4S1; 607243).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of the beta subunits of AP
complexes, followed by 5-prime RACE of a skeletal muscle cDNA library,
Dell'Angelica et al. (1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding AP4B1.
The deduced 739-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
about 83 kD and contains an N-terminal 'trunk' region, a
solvent-accessible random coil 'hinge' region, and a C-terminal 'ear'
domain with a high alpha helix content. Homology with other beta
subunits is restricted to the N-terminal trunk region, where AP4B1
shares 28% identity with mammalian Ap1b1 (600157) and Ap2b1 (601025) and
21% identity with human AP3B1 (603401) and AP3B2 (602166). Northern blot
analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of a 2.5-kb transcript; a minor
6-kb species was detected in some tissues. Western blot analysis of HeLa
cell lysates confirmed an apparent molecular mass of 83 kD, and
fractionation studies revealed that it can partition as both a cytosolic
and a membrane protein. The membrane portion could be partially
extracted with high salt, indicating that AP4B1 is a peripheral membrane
protein. Gel filtration of human fibroblast cytosol revealed that AP4B1
is part of a 280-kD complex containing other proteins of 140, 50, and 17
kD. Western blot analysis identified these proteins as AP4E1, AP4M1, and
AP4S1, respectively. Immunolocalization of AP4B1 in HeLa cells indicated
that the AP4 complex associates with the trans-Golgi network or an
adjacent structure. This association was sensitive to brefeldin-A
treatment, indicating that the membrane localization of AP4 is dependent
upon the small GTP-binding protein ARF1 (103180).

By searching an EST database and screening a brain cDNA library, Hirst
et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding AP4B1. The predicted AP4B1
protein contains several motifs shared with other AP beta subunits,
including a WIIGEY motif at amino acid 500 and a KKLVYLY motif near the
N terminus. They noted that AP4B1 is smaller that AP1B1, AP2B1, and
AP3B1 and appears to be missing most of the C-terminal hinge and/or ear
domain. By coimmunoprecipitation and yeast 2-hybrid analysis, the
authors confirmed that AP4B1 interacts with AP4E1 and AP4M1.

Abou Jamra et al. (2011) found ubiquitous AP4B1 expression in all fetal
and adult brain structures examined.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Consortium mapped the AP4B1 gene to
chromosome 1 (TMAP W87476).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing of a
consanguineous Israeli Arab family with autosomal recessive mental
retardation and spasticity (SPG47; 614066), Abou Jamra et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the AP4B1 gene
(607245.0001). The authors concluded that AP4-complex-mediated vesicular
trafficking plays a crucial role in brain development and function.

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Arab parents, with SPG47, Bauer et al.
(2012) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the AP4B1 gene
(607245.0002). The mutation was found by exome sequencing of the
candidate region on chromosome 1p13-p12 identified by linkage analysis
(Blumkin et al., 2011). Bauer et al. (2012) noted the phenotypic
similarities to the patients reported by Abou Jamra et al. (2011).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 47, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AP4B1, 3-BP INS, 487TAT

By linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing of a
consanguineous Israeli Arab family with autosomal recessive mental
retardation and spasticity (SPG47; 614066), Abou Jamra et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 3-bp insertion (487insTAT) in exon 5 of the
AP4B1 gene, resulting in premature protein termination. PCR analysis
showed decreased AP4B1 transcripts in patient cells compared to
controls, consistent with nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mutation was
not found in 796 control chromosomes, including 160 Israeli Arab control
chromosomes.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 47, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AP4B1, 1-BP DEL, 664C

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Arab parents, with autosomal recessive
complicated spastic paraplegia-47 (614066), Bauer et al. (2012)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (664delC) in exon 5 of the AP4B1
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. Each
unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found
in 316 Caucasian and 200 ethnically matched control chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R.; Philippe, O.; Raas-Rothschild, A.; Eck, S. H.;
Graf, E.; Buchert, R.; Borck, G.; Ekici, A.; Brockschmidt, F. F.;
Nothen, M. M.; Munnich, A.; Strom, T. M.; Reis, A.; Colleaux, L.:
Adaptor protein complex 4 deficiency causes severe autosomal-recessive
intellectual disability, progressive spastic paraplegia, shy character,
and short stature. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 788-795, 2011.

2. Bauer, P.; Leshinsky-Silver, E.; Blumkin, L.; Schlipf, N.; Schroder,
C.; Schicks, J.; Lev, D.; Riess, O.; Lerman-Sagie, T.; Schols, L.
: Mutation in the AP4B1 gene cause hereditary spastic paraplegia type
47 (SPG47). Neurogenetics 13: 73-76, 2012.

3. Blumkin, L.; Lerman-Sagie, T.; Lev, D.; Yosovich, K.; Leshinsky-Silver,
E.: A new locus (SPG47) maps to 1p13.2-1p12 in an Arabic family with
complicated autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia and
thin corpus callosum. J. Neurol. Sci. 305: 67-70, 2011.

4. Dell'Angelica, E. C.; Mullins, C.; Bonifacino, J. S.: AP-4, a
novel protein complex related to clathrin adaptors. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
7278-7285, 1999.

5. Hirst, J.; Bright, N. A.; Rous, B.; Robinson, M. S.: Characterization
of a fourth adaptor-related protein complex. Molec. Biol. Cell 10:
2787-2802, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/24/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/29/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/19/2002

EDITED carol: 09/20/2013
carol: 4/24/2012
ckniffin: 4/24/2012
wwang: 7/7/2011
wwang: 7/5/2011
ckniffin: 6/29/2011
mgross: 9/19/2002

613465	TITLE *613465 NONMETASTATIC CELLS 7, PROTEIN EXPRESSED IN; NME7
;;NM23H7;;
NUCLEOSIDE DIPHOSPHATE KINASE 7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In a review of human Nm23/nucleoside diphosphate kinases (EC 2.7.4.6),
Lacombe et al. (2000) stated that the NME7 gene encodes a deduced
376-amino acid protein containing 2 kinase-like domains, each of which
lacks 3 residues deemed crucial for catalysis. RT-PCR detected highest
NME7 expression in testis, and weaker expression in liver, heart, brain,
ovary, small intestine, and spleen.

GENE FUNCTION

Hutchins et al. (2010) showed that mouse Nme7 associated with the
centralspindlin complex (see KIF23, 605064) in transfected HeLa cells.
This complex is believed to have a role in spindle assembly and
cytokinesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lacombe et al. (2000) determined that the NME7 gene contains 12 exons
spanning over 180 kb.

MAPPING

Lacombe et al. (2000) mapped the NME7 gene to chromosome 1q24. They
noted that NME7 and ATP1B1 (182330) lie on opposite strands, with
overlapping 3-prime UTRs.

REFERENCE 1. Hutchins, J. R. A.; Toyoda, Y.; Hegemann, B.; Poser, I.; Heriche,
J.-K.; Sykora, M. M.; Augsburg, M.; Hudecz, O.; Buschhorn, B. A.;
Bulkescher, J.; Conrad, C.; Comartin, D.; and 18 others: Systematic
analysis of human protein complexes identifies chromosome segregation
proteins. Science 328: 593-599, 2010.

2. Lacombe, M.-L.; Milon, L.; Munier, A.; Mehus, J. G.; Lambeth, D.
O.: The human Nm23/nucleoside diphosphate kinases. J. Bioenerg.
Biomembr. 32: 247-258, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/29/2010

EDITED carol: 06/29/2010
carol: 6/29/2010

176847	TITLE *176847 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 10; PSMB10
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT MECL1;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-2I
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CpG islands are useful landmarks in the genome for identifying genes. By
database screening, Larsen et al. (1992) found that 57% of human genes
are associated with CpG islands. Sites for rare cutting restriction
enzymes are mainly found in CpG islands. Clustered sites for at least 2
such enzymes are good indicators of a CpG island, and an estimated 78%
of island-associated genes can be located in this way. Guided by
identification of an island in a 40-kb cosmid insert, Larsen et al.
(1993) identified a cluster of 5 unrelated human genes on chromosome
16q22.1. One of the genes encodes a putative subunit of the proteasome
complex, MECL1, an intracellular, multicatalytic proteinase (Goldberg
and Rock, 1992). The derived protein sequence shares about 50% identity
with a putative yeast proteasome subunit and is similar to the sequence
of a peptide fragment from a rat proteasome subunit.

Cruz et al. (1997) characterized a full-length mouse Lmp10 cDNA and
found that Lmp10 encodes a protein of 273 amino acids with a calculated
molecular mass of 29 kD. Northern blot analysis showed that mouse Lmp2
(PSMB9; 177045), Lmp7 (PSMB8; 177046), and Lmp10 were expressed in
heart, liver, thymus, lung, and spleen, but not in brain, kidney,
skeletal muscle, or testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Cruz et al. (1997) found that mouse Lmp2, Lmp7, and Lmp10 were induced
by gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570).

GENE STRUCTURE

Larsen et al. (1993) determined that the MECL1 gene has 8 exons, covers
2.3 kb, and is transcribed in the same direction as the LCAT gene
(606967), from which it is separated by 3.1 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Larsen et al. (1993) mapped the PSMB10 gene to
chromosome 16q22.1. Cruz et al. (1997) found that in mice the Psmb10
gene is present in single copy localized on chromosome 8 in a region of
conserved synteny with human chromosome 16.

ANIMAL MODEL

Basler et al. (2006) generated fertile and viable Mecl1 -/- mice. Flow
cytometric analysis showed that these mice had reduced numbers of
splenic Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells. The cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) response to dominant epitopes of lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus (LCMV) was impaired in Mecl1 -/- mice. The defect was not
attributable to alterations in antigen presentation, but Mecl1 -/- mice
had reduced numbers of CTLs expressing the V-beta-10 segment of the
T-cell receptor (see 186930), which was prominent in the wildtype
anti-LCMV response. Basler et al. (2006) concluded that MECL1 has a role
in determining the T-cell repertoire for an antiviral T-cell response.

REFERENCE 1. Basler, M.; Moebius, J.; Elenich, L.; Groettrup, M.; Monaco, J.
J.: An altered T cell repertoire in MECL-1-deficient mice. J. Immun. 176:
6665-6672, 2006.

2. Cruz, M.; Elenich, L. A.; Smolarek, T. A.; Menon, A. G.; Monaco,
J. J.: DNA sequence, chromosomal localization, and tissue expression
of the mouse proteasome subunit Lmp10 (Psmb10) gene. Genomics 45:
618-622, 1997.

3. Goldberg, A. L.; Rock, K. L.: Proteolysis, proteasomes and antigen
presentation. Nature 357: 375-379, 1992.

4. Larsen, F.; Gundersen, G.; Lopez, R.; Prydz, H.: CpG islands as
gene markers in the human genome. Genomics 13: 1095-1107, 1992.

5. Larsen, F.; Solheim, J.; Kristensen, T.; Kolsto, A.-B.; Prydz,
H.: A tight cluster of five unrelated human genes on chromosome 16q22.1. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 2: 1589-1595, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/10/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/18/1993

EDITED mgross: 06/25/2007
mgross: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
ckniffin: 5/29/2002
dkim: 7/23/1998
mark: 12/18/1997
terry: 12/10/1997
carol: 10/20/1993
carol: 10/19/1993
carol: 10/18/1993

608726	TITLE *608726 PHOSPHATASE AND ACTIN REGULATOR 4; PHACTR4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to rat Phactr1 (608723),
Allen et al. (2004) identified a family of 4 PHACTR genes in mouse and
human, including PHACTR4. The PHACTR proteins share highest similarity
in sequences surrounding the N- and C-terminal RPEL repeats and in the
C-terminal actin- and protein phosphatase-1 (PP1; see 176875)-binding
domains. In situ hybridization of rat brain showed Phactr4 highly
expressed in periventricular regions, cerebellum, and hippocampus.

GENE FUNCTION

Allen et al. (2004) determined that mouse Phactr4 coprecipitated with
both PP1 and actin following expression in human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PHACTR4
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP SHGC-74491).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screens, Kim et al. (2007)
isolated the 'humpty dumpty' (humdy) mutant mouse line, which showed
failure to close the neural tube and optic fissure, causing exencephaly
and retinal coloboma. Homozygous humdy embryos exhibited complete
exencephaly, and most died by embryonic day 14.5, although a few
survived to birth and died shortly thereafter. About 8% of heterozygous
embryos displayed a midbrain-specific exencephaly, indicating an
incompletely penetrant dominant effect. Humdy was due to a missense
mutation in the Pp1-binding domain of Phactr4 that specifically
disrupted binding of Pp1 to Phactr4, leading to increased inhibitory
phosphorylation of thr320 on Pp1 in the ventral neural tube and eye and
disruption of Pp1 activity toward its target, Rb (RB1; 614041).
Consequently, Rb became hyperphosphorylated and inactivated, leading to
derepression of E2f (see E2F1; 189971) target genes. Loss of Phactr4
function resulted in shortening of the cell cycle, an increase in
proliferating neural progenitors, and ectopic cell division and/or cell
cycle exit defects in differentiating cells of the humdy neural tube and
retina. Loss of a single E2f1 allele rescued the exencephaly, coloboma,
and proliferation/differentiation defects of humdy mice, indicating that
the critical target of Phactr4 is the cell cycle regulator E2f1.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, P. B.; Greenfield, A. T.; Svenningsson, P.; Haspeslagh,
D. C.; Greengard, P.: Phactrs 1-4: a family of protein phosphatase
1 and actin regulatory proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 7187-7192,
2004.

2. Kim, T.-H.; Goodman, J.; Anderson, K. V.; Niswander, L.: Phactr4
regulates neural tube and optic fissure closure by controlling PP1-,
Rb-, and E2F1-regulated cell-cycle progression. Dev. Cell 13: 87-102,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/10/2004

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2011
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 6/10/2004

601681	TITLE *601681 PROTEASOME 26S SUBUNIT, ATPase, 5; PSMC5
;;THYROID HORMONE RECEPTOR INTERACTOR 1; TRIP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PSMC5 is a member of the AAA (ATPases Associated with diverse cellular
Activities) gene family (Hoyle et al., 1997).

GENE FAMILY

Members of the AAA gene family are most similar throughout an
approximately 230-amino acid ATPase domain (the AAA domain), and related
genes have been described in organisms as distant as archaebacteria and
eubacteria. All the known AAA proteins contain either 1 or 2 AAA
domains, and the family can be subdivided into 2 groups on this basis.
It appears that 2-domain AAA proteins (e.g., NSF, 601633) are associated
with membrane functions. In eukaryotes, the 1-domain AAA proteins such
as PSMC5 appear to be involved largely in the regulatory subunit of the
26S protease (summary by Hoyle et al., 1997).

CLONING

Lee et al. (1995) used the yeast interaction trap, a version of the
yeast 2-hybrid system, to identify proteins that specifically interact
with the ligand-binding domain of rat thyroid hormone receptor-beta
(THRB; 190160). They isolated HeLa cell cDNAs encoding several different
thyroid hormone receptor (TR)-interacting proteins (TRIPs), including
TRIP1 (PSMC5). TRIP1 strongly interacted with rat Thrb only in the
presence of thyroid hormone. It also showed a ligand-dependent
interaction with retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRA; 180245), but did not
interact with the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1; 138040) under any
condition. The deduced 406-amino acid TRIP1 protein shares a high degree
of sequence similarity with the yeast transcriptional coactivator SUG1.
TRIP1 contains an AAA domain that is positioned toward the C terminus,
which is typical in the AAA family. Lee et al. (1995) found that TRIP1
is ubiquitously expressed as an approximately 1.4-kb transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1995) showed that TRIP1 can functionally substitute for Sug1
in yeast, and that both proteins interact in vitro with the TR and with
the transcriptional activation domains of yeast GAL4 and herpes virus
VP16.

MAPPING

By PCR amplification of a partial sequence of PSMC5 in a panel of human
monochromosomal cell hybrids, Hoyle et al. (1997) demonstrated that the
PSMC5 gene is located on chromosome 17. By fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), they refined the localization to chromosome
17q24-q25. Tanahashi et al. (1998) mapped the PSMC5 gene to chromosome
17q23.1-q23.3 by FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Hoyle, J.; Tan, K. H.; Fisher, E. M. C.: Localization of genes
encoding two human one-domain members of the AAA family: PSMC5 (the
thyroid hormone receptor-interacting protein, TRIP1) and PSMC3 (the
Tat-binding protein, TBP1). Hum. Genet. 99: 285-288, 1997.

2. Lee, J. W.; Choi, H.-S.; Gyuris, J.; Brent, R.; Moore, D. D.:
Two classes of proteins dependent on either the presence or absence
of thyroid hormone for interaction with the thyroid hormone receptor. Molec.
Endocr. 9: 243-254, 1995.

3. Lee, J. W.; Ryan, F.; Swaffield, J. C.; Johnston, S. A.; Moore,
D. D.: Interaction of thyroid-hormone receptor with a conserved transcriptional
mediator. Nature 374: 91-94, 1995.

4. Tanahashi, N.; Suzuki, M.; Fujiwara, T.; Takahashi, E.; Shimbara,
N.; Chung, C. H.; Tanaka, K.: Chromosomal localization and immunological
analysis of a family of human 26S proteasomal ATPases. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 243: 229-232, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 8/31/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/7/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/10/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1997

EDITED carol: 02/23/2011
alopez: 9/21/2010
mcapotos: 9/12/2000
psherman: 8/31/2000
mgross: 2/8/2000
psherman: 2/7/2000
alopez: 8/4/1998
psherman: 6/10/1998
jamie: 2/18/1997
mark: 2/13/1997

608197	TITLE *608197 PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN 3; PGLYRP3
;;PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN, INTERMEDIATE, ALPHA;;
PGRPI-ALPHA; PGRPIA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Peptidoglycan recognition proteins, such as PGRPI-alpha, are part of the
innate immune system and recognize peptidoglycan, a ubiquitous component
of bacterial cell walls.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of PGRPS (PGLYRP1; 604963),
followed by PCR of a pooled cDNA library, Liu et al. (2001) cloned
PGRPI-alpha. The deduced 341-amino acid precursor protein contains an
N-terminal signal peptide, followed by PGRP domain IV, a transmembrane
segment, PGRP domains III and II, a second transmembrane segment, and
PGRP domain I at the C terminus. PGRP domain IV at the N terminus and
PGRP domain I at the C terminus are extracellular. PGRPI-alpha shares
33%, 43%, and 68% amino acid identity with PGRPL (PGLYRP2; 608199),
PGRPS, and PGRPI-beta (PGLYRP4; 608198), respectively. PGRP domain IV in
PGRPI-alpha is 96% identical to PGRPI domain IV in PGRPI-beta. RNA dot
blot analysis detected strong PGRPI-alpha expression only in esophagus.
Northern blot analysis detected a 2.8-kb transcript in esophagus and
thymus, and PCR detected expression in esophagus, tonsils, and thymus,
with much lower expression in stomach, descending colon, rectum, and
brain. Transiently transfected COS-7 and human embryonic kidney cells
expressed PGRPI-alpha as a Triton X-100-soluble membrane protein with an
apparent molecular mass of 38 kD.

Sun et al. (2006) found relatively high expression of the PGLYRP3 and
PGLYRP4 genes in human skin, tongue, tonsil, and placenta. Both mRNAs
were found in primary keratinocytes. In the tonsil, immunohistochemical
analysis detected PGLYRP3 in squamous epithelium and follicular
dendritic cells in the germinal center.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2001) determined that the PGRPI-alpha gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the PGRPI-alpha
gene to chromosome 1q21, close to the PGRPI-beta gene.

Sun et al. (2006) noted that the PGLYRP3 and PGLYRP4 genes are located
adjacent to one another within the approximately 2-Mb region on 1q21
known as the epidermal differentiation complex (EDC; see 152445). Many
of the genes in the EDC are expressed in epidermal cells, specifically
keratinocytes, and are known to encode structural components.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2001) determined that recombinant PGRPI-alpha expressed by
COS-7 cells and human embryonic kidney cells bound to gram-positive
bacteria, B. subtilis and M. luteus, with high affinity.

Using purified PGLYRP1, PGLYRP3, PGLYRP4, and a PGLYRP3/PGLYRP4
heterodimer, Kashyap et al. (2011) showed that these PGRPs interacted
with the bacterial cell wall and activated bacterial 2-component
systems, resulting in membrane depolarization, cessation of
peptidoglycan, protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis, and production of
hydroxyl radicals to cause bacterial death. Fluorescence microscopy
demonstrated that, in B. subtilis, a gram-positive bacteria, PGRPs
entered the cell wall at the site of daughter cell separation during
cell division and activated the CssR-CssS 2-component system. In E.
coli, a gram-negative bacteria, PGRPs bound the outer membrane and
activated the CpxA-CpxR 2-component system. Kashyap et al. (2011)
excluded other bactericidal mechanisms, including inhibition of
peptidoglycan synthesis, peptidoglycan hydrolysis, and membrane
permeabilization. They concluded that PGRPs are innate immunity proteins
that bind the cell wall or outer membrane and exploit the bacterial
stress response to kill bacteria.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sun et al. (2006) analyzed 13 SNPs in or near the PGLYRP3 and PGLYRP4
genes for association with psoriasis (PSORS4; 603935) in 2 independent
patient cohorts: a family-based patient set comprising 375 individuals
from 101 families and a case-control collection of 282 patients and 192
controls. Results were conflicting: there was evidence for association
with SNPs in both genes as well as transmission disequilibrium in the
family analysis, but there was no association with any of the SNPs in
the case-control analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Kashyap, D. R.; Wang, M.; Liu, L.-H.; Boons, G.-J.; Gupta, D.;
Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition proteins kill bacteria by
activating protein-sensing two-component systems. Nature Med. 17:
676-683, 2011.

2. Liu, C.; Xu, Z.; Gupta, D.; Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins: a novel family of four human innate immunity pattern recognition
molecules. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 34686-34694, 2001.

3. Sun, C.; Mathur, P.; Dupuis, J.; Tizard, R.; Ticho, B.; Crowell,
T.; Gardner, H.; Bowcock, A. M.; Carulli, J.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins Pglyrp3 and Pglyrp4 are encoded from the epidermal differentiation
complex and are candidate genes for the Psors4 locus on chromosome
1q21. Hum. Genet. 119: 113-125, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/14/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/17/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/23/2003

EDITED mgross: 09/15/2011
terry: 9/14/2011
mgross: 2/13/2009
wwang: 5/18/2006
ckniffin: 5/17/2006
mgross: 9/28/2004
mgross: 10/24/2003

192225	TITLE *192225 VASCULAR CELL ADHESION MOLECULE 1; VCAM1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, a cell surface glycoprotein expressed
by cytokine-activated endothelium, mediates the adhesion of monocytes
and lymphocytes (Cybulsky et al., 1991). In inflammatory conditions and
in cardiac allografts undergoing rejection, VCAM1 is upregulated in
endothelium of postcapillary venules. Arterial expression of VCAM1 is
also found in experimental models of atherosclerosis in the rabbit.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cybulsky et al. (1991) demonstrated that VCAM1 is present in single copy
in the human genome and contains 9 exons spanning about 25 kb of DNA. At
least 2 different VCAM1 precursors can be generated from the human gene
as a result of alternative mRNA splicing events, which include or
exclude exon 5.

MAPPING

Cybulsky et al. (1991) mapped the VCAM1 gene to chromosome 1 by Southern
analysis of somatic cell hybrids. A study of 2 hybrid lines carrying
translocations involving chromosome 1 permitted regionalization to
1p34-p21. Fluorescence in situ hybridization to metaphase chromosomes
further narrowed the localization to 1p32-p31. (Another endothelial
leukocyte adhesion molecule, ELAM1 (131210), is located on chromosome 1,
but on the long arm.)

Kumar et al. (1994) mapped the murine Vcam1 gene to chromosome 3 near
Amy1.

GENE FUNCTION

In a review of molecular pathways controlling heart development, Olson
and Srivastava (1996) cited studies indicating that deficiencies of the
cell adhesion molecules VCAM and alpha-4 integrin (192975) result in
epicardial dissolution and subsequent myocardial thinning.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA1 (see 153370/600065) and
alpha-4 (192975)-beta-1 (135630), and that the marginal zone B cells
bind to the ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1. These ligands are
expressed within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner.
Combined inhibition of LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and
selective release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

Garmy-Susini et al. (2005) demonstrated that integrin alpha-4-beta-1 and
VCAM1 are expressed by proliferating but not quiescent endothelial cells
and mural cells, respectively. Antagonists of this integrin-ligand pair
blocked the adhesion of mural cells to proliferating endothelia in vitro
and in vivo, thereby inducing apoptosis of endothelial cells and
pericytes and inhibiting neovascularization. Garmy-Susini et al. (2005)
concluded that integrin alpha-4-beta-1 and VCAM1 facilitate a critical
cell-cell adhesion event required for survival of endothelial and mural
cells during vascularization.

Garrison et al. (2005) described cotransin, a small molecule that
inhibits protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum. Cotransin
acts in a signal-sequence-discriminatory manner to prevent the stable
insertion of select nascent chains (specifically VCAM1, and P-selectin,
173610) into the Sec61 translocation channel. Garrison et al. (2005)
concluded that the range of substrates accommodated by the channel can
be specifically and reversibly modulated by a cell-permeable small
molecule that alters the interaction between signal sequences and the
Sec61 complex. This has various implications for drug development.

Besemer et al. (2005) developed a very similar VCAM1 depressing agent,
which they called CAM741. CAM741 works similar to cotransin in that it
represses the biosynthesis of VCAM1 cells by blocking the process of
cotranslational translocation, which is dependent on the signal peptide
of VCAM1. CAM741 does not inhibit targeting of the VCAM1 nascent chains
to the translocon channel but prevents translocation to the luminal side
of the endoplasmic reticulum through a process that involves the
translocon component Sec61-beta (609214). Consequently, the VCAM1
precursor protein is synthesized towards the cytosolic compartment of
the cells, where it is degraded.

By in vivo selection, transcriptomic analysis, functional verification,
and clinical validation, Minn et al. (2005) identified a set of genes
that marks and mediates breast cancer metastasis to the lungs. Some of
these genes serve dual functions, providing growth advantages both in
the primary tumor and in the lung microenvironment. Others contribute to
aggressive growth selectivity in the lung. Among the lung metastasis
signature genes identified, several, including VCAM1, were functionally
validated. Those subjects expressing the lung metastasis signature had a
significantly poorer lung metastasis-free survival, but not bone
metastasis-free survival, compared to subjects without the signature.

Campbell et al. (2006) found that increased serum levels of soluble
VCAM1 predicted recurrent ischemic stroke (601367) in a study of 252
patients. A smaller but similar trend was noted for serum levels of
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NPPB; 600295). Patients in
the highest quarters for both sVCAM1 and NT-proBNP levels had 3.6 times
the risk of recurrent ischemic stroke compared to patients in the lowest
quarters for both biologic markers.

By database analysis, Harris et al. (2008) identified a potential target
sequence for miR126 (MIRN126; 611767), a microRNA selectively expressed
in endothelial cells, in the 3-prime UTR of VCAM1. Transfection of human
endothelial cells with antisense miR126 permitted an increase in
TNF-alpha (TNF; 191160)-stimulated VCAM1 expression. Conversely,
overexpression of the miR126 precursor increased miR126 levels and
decreased VCAM1 expression. Decreasing endogenous miR126 levels
increased leukocyte adherence to endothelial cells. Harris et al. (2008)
concluded that miR126 inhibits VCAM1 expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Taylor et al. (2002) identified 33 SNPs in the VCAM1 locus. They then
analyzed a subset of these SNPs in 51 cases of stroke in sickle cell
disease (603903) patients derived from a single institution in Jamaica
and in 51 matched controls. They found that the C variant allele of the
nonsynonymous SNP 1238G-C, which results in a gly413-to-ala amino acid
change (G413A), may be associated with protection from stroke (odds
ratio = 0.35). Dover (2002) stated that sickle cell disease is not a
single gene disorder and emphasized the need for further studies of the
relationship of VCAM1 to strokes in this disorder.

Idelman et al. (2007) stated that VCAM1 transcription induction is
highly dependent on cell and organ type and mode of stimulation by
various transcription factors. The authors identified 8 VCAM1 promoter
haplotypes comprising 13 SNPs previously identified by Taylor et al.
(2002) in African Americans. Functional cellular expression studies in T
cells stimulated by T-cell mitogens assessed the inducibility of
expression of the different haplotypes. A -540A-G SNP (dbSNP rs3783605)
was found to gain an ETS2 (164740)-binding site, which was postulated by
Idelman et al. (2007) to have functional importance.

REFERENCE 1. Besemer, J.; Harant, H.; Wang, S.; Oberhauser, B.; Marquardt, K.;
Foster, C. A.; Schreiner, E. P.; de Vries, J. E.; Dascher-Nadel, C.;
Lindley, I. J. D.: Selective inhibition of cotranslational translocation
of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1. (Letter) Nature 436: 290-293,
2005.

2. Campbell, D. J.; Woodward, M.; Chalmers, J. P.; Colman, S. A.;
Jenkins, A. J.; Kemp, B. E.; Neal, B. C.; Patel, A.; MacMahon, S.
W.: Soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide in predicting ischemic stroke in patients with
cerebrovascular disease. Arch. Neurol. 63: 60-65, 2006.

3. Cybulsky, M.; Fries, J. W.; Williams, A. J.; Sultan, P.; Eddy,
R. L.; Byers, M. G.; Shows, T. B.; Gimbrone, M. A., Jr.; Collins,
T.: The human VCAM1 gene is assigned to chromosome 1p31-p32. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 58: 1852, 1991.

4. Cybulsky, M. I.; Fries, J. W. U.; Williams, A. J.; Sultan, P.;
Eddy, R.; Byers, M.; Shows, T.; Gimbrone, M. A., Jr.; Collins, T.
: Gene structure, chromosomal location, and basis for alternative
mRNA splicing of the human VCAM1 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
7859-7863, 1991.

5. Dover, G. J.: SS disease is not a single gene disorder. (Letter) Blood 100:
4255 only, 2002.

6. Garmy-Susini, B.; Jin, H.; Zhu, Y.; Sung, R.-J.; Hwang, R.; Varner,
J.: Integrin alpha-4-beta-1--VCAM-1--mediated adhesion between endothelial
and mural cells is required for blood vessel maturation. J. Clin.
Invest. 115: 1542-1551, 2005.

7. Garrison, J. L.; Kunkel, E. J.; Hedge, R. S.; Taunton, J.: A substrate-specific
inhibitor of protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum.
(Letter) Nature 436: 285-289, 2005.

8. Harris, T. A.; Yamakuchi, M.; Ferlito, M.; Mendell, J. T.; Lowenstein,
C. J.: MicroRNA-126 regulates endothelial expression of vascular
cell adhesion molecule 1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 1516-1521,
2008.

9. Idelman, G.; Taylor, J. G.; Tongbai, R.; Chen, R. A.; Haggerty,
C. M.; Bilke, S.; Chanock, S. J.; Gardner, K.: Functional profiling
of uncommon VCAM1 promoter polymorphisms prevalent in African American
populations. Hum. Mutat. 28: 824-829, 2007.

10. Kumar, A. G.; Dai, X. Y.; Kozak, C. A.; Mims, M. P.; Gotto, A.
M.; Ballantyne, C. M.: Murine VCAM-1: molecular cloning, mapping,
and analysis of a truncated form. J. Immun. 153: 4088-4098, 1994.

11. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell
retention in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

12. Minn, A. J.; Gupta, G. P.; Siegel, P. M.; Bos, P. D.; Shu, W.;
Giri, D. D.; Viale, A.; Olshen, A. B.; Gerald, W. L.; Massague, J.
: Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature 436:
518-524, 2005.

13. Olson, E.; Srivastava, D.: Molecular pathways controlling heart
development. Science 272: 671-676, 1996.

14. Taylor, J. G., VI; Tang, D. C.; Savage, S. A.; Leitman, S. F.;
Heller, S. I.; Serjeant, G. R.; Rodgers, G. P.; Chanock, S. J.: Variants
in the VCAM1 gene and risk for symptomatic stroke in sickle cell disease. Blood 100:
4303-4309, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 04/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/10/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/14/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2002
Moyra Smith - Updated: 5/18/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/8/1991

EDITED mgross: 04/15/2008
wwang: 10/18/2007
ckniffin: 10/10/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
carol: 7/19/2006
ckniffin: 7/14/2006
alopez: 8/23/2005
alopez: 8/18/2005
terry: 8/17/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
wwang: 7/19/2005
wwang: 7/13/2005
terry: 7/8/2005
carol: 2/27/2003
tkritzer: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/12/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
dkim: 7/17/1998
carol: 5/18/1996
carol: 1/27/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 9/27/1991
carol: 8/30/1991
carol: 8/8/1991

611127	TITLE *611127 UBIQUITIN-LIKE 4B; UBL4B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screen using Tex15 (605795) as bait, Yang et al.
(2007) cloned mouse Ubl4b. The deduced 188-amino acid protein contains a
72-amino acid ubiquitin domain. RT-PCR and Western blot analysis
detected Ubl4b mRNA and protein only in mouse testis. Immunofluorescence
analysis revealed Ubl4b in the cytoplasm of elongated spermatids, but
not in spermatocytes, round spermatids, Leydig cells, or Sertoli cells,
suggesting Ubl4b functions in late spermiogenesis. By database analysis,
Yang et al. (2007) identified human UBL4B and several mammalian
orthologs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2007) determined that the mouse Ubl4b gene contains no
introns.

MAPPING

Yang et al. (2007) stated that the mouse Ubl4b gene maps to chromosome 3
and that the human UBL4B gene is in a syntenic region where it is
flanked by ALX3 (606014) and SLC6A17 (610299) on chromosome 1p13.3.

EVOLUTION

Yang et al. (2007) presented evidence that Ubl4b arose by retroposition
of the 4-exon Ubl4a gene (312070) at least 170 million years ago, prior
to the radiation of therian mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Yang, F.; Skaletsky, H.; Wang, P. J.: Ubl4b, an X-derived retrogene,
is specifically expressed in post-meiotic germ cells in mammals. Gene
Expr. Patterns 7: 131-136, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/20/2007

EDITED wwang: 06/20/2007

609375	TITLE *609375 LIN9, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; LIN9
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By homology searches using C. elegans Lin9 as query, Gagrica et al.
(2004) identified human LIN9, and subsequently used RACE PCR to clone a
full-length LIN9 cDNA from HeLa cells. LIN9 encodes a 542-amino acid
protein that contains 2 regions highly conserved between C. elegans Lin9
and 2 Drosophila orthologs (Aly and Twit).

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunofluorescence, Gagrica et al. (2004) showed that LIN9
localizes to the nucleus, and fractionation and crosslinking experiments
showed LIN9 is associated with chromatin. Immunoprecipitation
experiments with GST fusion proteins showed that LIN9 binds via its
amino-terminal portion to RB1 protein (614041) both in vitro and in
vivo. Coexpression of LIN9 with RB protein in Saos-2 cells enhanced the
formation of flat (senescent-like) cells. Transactivation assays with a
panel of incompletely penetrant RB mutants demonstrated that LIN9
enhances RB-dependent transactivation. Using a variety of transformation
assays, Gagrica et al. (2004) showed that LIN9 inhibited oncogenic
transformation of mouse fibroblasts in an RB-dependent manner, and that
inactivation of LIN9 substituted for inactivation of RB protein in the
transformation of human fibroblasts.

By gel filtration of MOLT-4 human T cells, Schmit et al. (2007)
identified LIN9 as a subunit of the over 669-kD LIN complex. Other
stable LIN complex components included LIN37, LIN54 (613367), BMYB
(MYBL2; 601415), and RBAP48 (RBBP4; 602923). All endogenous or
epitope-tagged LIN complex subunits coimmunoprecipitated with one
another, and all were efficiently codepleted together with antibodies
directed to LIN9. The LIN complex associated with E2F (see
189971)-regulated promoters in the T98G human glioblastoma cell line and
was required for activation of G2/M genes. Depletion of LIN complex
subunits had no significant effect on expression of G1/S genes.

REFERENCE 1. Gagrica, S.; Hauser, S.; Kolfschoten, I.; Osterloh, L.; Agami,
R.; Gaubatz, S.: Inhibition of oncogenic transformation by mammalian
Lin-9, a pRB-associated protein. EMBO J. 23: 4627-4638, 2004.

2. Schmit, F.; Korenjak, M.; Mannefeld, M.; Schmitt, K.; Franke, C.;
von Eyss, B.; Gagrica, S.; Hanel, F.; Brehm,A.; Gaubatz, S.: LINC,
a human complex that is related to pRB-containing complexes in invertebrates
regulates the expression of G2/M genes. Cell Cycle 6: 1903-19113,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2010

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/17/2005

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2011
mgross: 4/16/2010
alopez: 5/17/2005

611422	TITLE *611422 MEIOTIC NUCLEAR DIVISION 1, S. CEREVISIAE. HOMOLOG OF; MND1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The product of the MND1 gene associates with HOP2 (608665) to form a
stable heterodimeric complex that binds DNA and stimulates the
recombinase activity of RAD51 (179617) and DMC1 (602721) (Chi et al.,
2007). Both the MND1 and HOP2 genes are indispensable for meiotic
recombination.

GENE FUNCTION

Tsubouchi and Roeder (2002) found that Mnd1-null yeast cells arrested in
meiotic prophase, with most double-strand breaks unrepaired.
Synaptonemal complex formation was incomplete, and homolog pairing was
severely reduced. Mnd1 localized to chromatin throughout meiotic
prophase, and this localization required Hop2. Mnd1 localized to
chromosomes even in mutants that failed to initiate meiotic
recombination. Hop2 and Mnd1 proteins coimmunoprecipitated from meiotic
cell extracts. Tsubouchi and Roeder (2002) concluded that HOP2 and MND1
work as a complex to promote meiotic chromosome pairing and
double-strand break repair.

Enomoto et al. (2006) demonstrated that coexpression of human MND1 and
HOP2 in E. coli resulted in the formation of stable heterodimers. The
HOP2-MND1 complex stimulated DMC1- and RAD51-mediated DNA strand
exchange, and preferentially bound to a 3-stranded DNA branch, which
mimics the strand-exchange intermediate. Enomoto et al. (2006) concluded
that the HOP2-MND1 complex may ensure proper pairing between homologous
chromosomes by stimulating strand exchange during meiosis.

Chi et al. (2007) showed that the Hop2 component of the mouse
recombinant Hop2-Mnd1 complex was the major DNA-binding subunit, and
that Mnd1 interacted with Rad51. Hop2-Mnd1 stabilized the
Rad51-single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) nucleoprotein filament, and enhanced
the ability of the Rad51-ssDNA nucleoprotein filament to capture duplex
DNA, which is an obligatory step in the formation of the synaptic
complex critical for DNA joint formation.

Pezza et al. (2007) found that the mouse Hop2-Mnd1 complex stimulated
Dmc1 to promote synaptic complex formation on long duplex DNAs. Synaptic
alignment was a consequence of the ability of Hop2-Mnd1 to stabilize
Dmc1-ssDNA nucleoprotein complex and facilitate the conjoining of DNA
molecules through the capture of double-stranded DNA by the Dmc1-ssDNA
nucleoprotein filament.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the MND1 gene to chromosome 4q31.3 based on an
alignment of the MND1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY028916) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Chi, P.; San Filippo, J.; Sehorn, M. G.; Petukhova, G. V.; Sung,
P.: Bipartite stimulatory action of the Hop2-Mnd1 complex on the
Rad51 recombinase. Genes Dev. 21: 1747-1757, 2007.

2. Enomoto, R.; Kinebuchi, T.; Sato, M.; Yagi, H.; Kurumizaka, H.;
Yokoyama, S.: Stimulation of DNA strand exchange by the human TBPIP/Hop2-Mnd1
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 5575-5581, 2006.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/11/2007.

4. Pezza, R. J.; Voloshin, O. N.; Vanevski, F.; Camerini-Otero, R.
D.: Hop2/Mnd1 acts on two critical steps in Dmc1-promoted homologous
pairing. Genes Dev. 21: 1758-1766, 2007.

5. Tsubouchi, H.; Roeder, G. S.: The Mnd1 protein forms a complex
with Hop2 to promote homologous chromosome pairing and meiotic double-strand
break repair. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3078-3088, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/11/2007

EDITED alopez: 09/11/2007
alopez: 9/11/2007

602443	TITLE *602443 X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE 1; XPNPEP1
;;X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE-LIKE; XPNPEPL;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P-LIKE;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, SOLUBLE; SAMP;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, CYTOSOLIC;;
APP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

X-prolyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.9) is a proline-specific
metalloaminopeptidase that specifically catalyzes the removal of any
unsubstituted N-terminal amino acid that is adjacent to a penultimate
proline residue. Because of its specificity toward proline, it has been
suggested that X-prolyl aminopeptidase is important in the maturation
and degradation of peptide hormones, neuropeptides, and tachykinins, as
well as in the digestion of otherwise resistant dietary protein
fragments, thereby complementing the pancreatic peptidases. Deficiency
of X-prolyl aminopeptidase results in excretion of large amounts of
imino-oligopeptides in urine (Blau et al., 1988).

CLONING

X-prolyl aminopeptidase has been isolated from different tissues and
species. Vergas Romero et al. (1995) reported the complete amino acid
sequence of the pig kidney enzyme. The nucleotide sequences of the
X-prolyl aminopeptidase-encoding genes (pepP) from several
microorganisms have been reported. By RT-PCR of
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocyte mRNA, Vanhoof et al. (1997)
isolated a novel human cDNA, named XPNPEPL, that encodes a 623-amino
acid protein exhibiting 44% sequence identity and 62% sequence
similarity to pig kidney X-prolyl aminopeptidase and high sequence
homology to proteins in S. pombe and S. cerevisiae. Northern blot
analysis indicated ubiquitous expression of XPNPEPL as a 2.7-kb
transcript, with the highest expression in pancreas, followed by heart
and muscle.

Sprinkle et al. (2000) cloned XPNPEPL, which they termed soluble
aminopeptidase P (SAMP), or XPNPEP1. They noted the presence of 4 blocks
of sequences homologous to E. coli methionine aminopeptidase, which is
part of the 'pita-bread fold' family. Like the bacteria enzyme, XPNPEPL
contains a putative proton shuttle (residue 395) and 5 divalent metal
ligands (residues 415, 426, 485, 523, and 537). Sprinkle et al. (2000)
proposed that the enzyme inactivates bradykinin and is part of an
intracellular kallikrein-kinin system, possibly in secretory vesicles.

Cottrell et al. (2000) cloned and characterized XPNPEPL, which they
designated cytosolic APP. They identified an arg residue at position 332
instead of the pro residue reported by Vanhoof et al. (1997) and
determined that the cytosolic protein is 43% identical to membrane
aminopeptidase P (XPNPEP2; 300145). The cytosolic enzyme lacks the
hydrophobic signal sequences for an N-terminal signal peptide and a
C-terminal GPI anchor found in the membrane-bound enzyme. Immunoblot
analysis showed expression of a 71-kD homodimer protein capable of
hydrolyzing bradykinin in a divalent cation-dependent manner, similar to
XPNPEP2. The principal metal in the purified recombinant protein was
manganese, at an approximately 1:1 molar ratio.

Using RT-PCR, Ersahin et al. (2005) detected APP1 expression in all
human tissues examined with high expression in pancreas, liver, kidney,
and testis. There was fairly uniform expression in T cells, B cells, and
monocytes. APP1 functions as a soluble cytosolic homodimer of about 70
kD and exhibits broad substrate specificity.

GENE FUNCTION

Oh et al. (2004) described a hypothesis-driven, systems biology approach
to identifying a small subset of proteins induced at the tissue-blood
interface that are inherently accessible to antibodies injected
intravenously. They used subcellular fractionation, subtractive
proteomics, and bioinformatics to identify endothelial cell surface
proteins exhibiting restricted tissue distribution and apparent tissue
modulation. Expression profiling and gamma-scintigraphic imaging with
antibodies established 2 of these proteins, aminopeptidase-P and annexin
A1 (151690), as selective in vivo targets for antibodies in lung and
solid tumors, respectively. Radioimmunotherapy to annexin A1 destroyed
tumors and increased animal survival.

MAPPING

Using FISH and somatic hybrid analysis, Sprinkle et al. (2000) mapped
the XPNPEPL gene to chromosome 10q25.3, distinct from the Xq25
localization of XPNPEP2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

To identify loci contributing to susceptibility to biliary atresia
(210500), characterized by the progressive fibrosclerosing obliteration
of the extrahepatic biliary system during the first few weeks of life,
Garcia-Barcelo et al. (2010) carried out a genomewide association study
(GWAS) using nearly 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
200 Chinese biliary atresia patients and 481 ethnically matched control
subjects. The 10 most associated SNPs from the GWAS were genotyped in an
independent set of 124 BA and 90 control subjects. The strongest overall
association was found for dbSNP rs17095355 on chromosome 10q24, 68 kb
downstream from XPNPEP1.

REFERENCE 1. Blau, N.; Niederwieser, A.; Shmerling, D. H.: Peptiduria presumably
caused by aminopeptidase-P deficiency: a new inborn error of metabolism. J.
Inherit. Metab. Dis. 11 (suppl): 240-242, 1988.

2. Cottrell, G. S.; Hooper, N. M.; Turner, A. J.: Cloning, expression,
and characterization of human cytosolic aminopeptidase P: a single
manganese(II)-dependent enzyme. Biochemistry 39: 15121-15128, 2000.

3. Ersahin, C.; Szpaderska, A. M.; Orawski, A. T.; Simmons, W. H.
: Aminopeptidase P isozyme expression in human tissues and peripheral
blood mononuclear cell fractions. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 435: 303-310,
2005.

4. Garcia-Barcelo, M.-M.; Yeung, M.-Y.; Miao, X.-P.; Tang, C. S.-M.;
Chen, G.; So, M.-T.; Ngan, E. S.-W.; Lui, V. C.-H.; Chen, Y.; Liu,
X.-L.; Hui, K.-J. W. S.; Li, L.; and 13 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies a susceptibility locus for biliary atresia on 10q24.2. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2917-2925, 2010.

5. Oh, P.; Li, Y.; Yu, J.; Durr, E.; Krasinska, K. M.; Carver, L.
A.; Testa, J. E.; Schnitzer, J. E.: Subtractive proteomic mapping
of the endothelial surface in lung and solid tumours for tissue-specific
therapy. Nature 429: 629-635, 2004.

6. Sprinkle, T. J.; Caldwell, C.; Ryan, J. W.: Cloning, chromosomal
sublocalization of the human soluble aminopeptidase P gene (XPNPEP1)
to 10q25.3 and conservation of the putative proton shuttle and metal
ligand binding sites with XPNPEP2. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 378:
51-56, 2000.

7. Vanhoof, G.; Goossens, F.; Juliano, M. A.; Juliano, L.; Hendriks,
D.; Schatteman, K.; Lin, A. H.; Scharpe, S.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of a human cDNA clone (XPNPEPL) homologous to X-prolyl aminopeptidase
(aminopeptidase P). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 275-280, 1997.

8. Vergas Romero, C.; Neudorfer, I.; Mann, K.; Schafer, W.: Purification
and amino acid sequence of aminopeptidase P from pig kidney. Europ.
J. Biochem. 229: 262-269, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/06/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/24/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/06/2013
wwang: 9/7/2010
alopez: 7/26/2004
terry: 7/26/2004
alopez: 11/3/2003
mgross: 6/24/2002
mgross: 6/21/2002
dholmes: 4/1/1998
psherman: 3/16/1998

602106	TITLE *602106 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 15; KCNJ15
;;KIR4.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The potassium channel inward rectifiers (Kir) constitute a family of
potassium channels that maintain the resting membrane potential close to
the equilibrium potential for potassium ions.

CLONING

By isolating, mapping, and sequencing trapped exons and captured cDNAs
from cosmids of the Down syndrome (190685) chromosome region (DSCR) on
21q22.2, Gosset et al. (1997) discovered a gene, designated KCNJ15,
encoding a member of the Kir family. The deduced protein contains 375
amino acids. Gosset et al. (1997) found that KCNJ15 is expressed in
kidney and lung during human development and in several adult tissues
including kidney and brain.

Okamoto et al. (2010) stated that expression of KCNJ15 in the pancreas
is relatively high, as is that in the kidney, thymus, and whole blood.
Immunofluorescence staining of tissue from nondiabetic patients revealed
that expression of KCNJ15 in Langerhans islets of the pancreas was
prominent compared to that of the exocrine glands.

MAPPING

Gosset et al. (1997) identified the KCNJ15 gene within the Down syndrome
chromosome region on 21q22.2. Another inwardly rectifying potassium
channel gene, that encoding Kir3.2 (KCNJ6; 600877), had been mapped
within the DSCR.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Okamoto et al. (2010) identified a synonymous SNP in exon 4 of the
KCNJ15 gene (dbSNP rs3746876, C566T) that showed significant association
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM; 125853) affecting lean individuals
in 3 independent Japanese sample sets (p = 2.5 x 10(-7); odds ratio,
2.54) and with unstratified T2DM (p = 6.7 x 10(-6); OR, 1.76). The
diabetes risk allele frequency was, however, very low among Europeans
and no association between the variant and T2DM could be shown in a
Danish case-control study. Functional analysis in HEK293 cells
demonstrated that the risk T allele increased KCNJ15 expression via
increased mRNA stability, which resulted in higher expression of protein
compared to the C allele.

REFERENCE 1. Gosset, P.; Ghezala, G. A.; Korn, B.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Poutska, A.;
Lehrach, H.; Sinet, P.-M.; Creau, N.: A new inward rectifier potassium
channel gene (KCNJ15) localized on chromosome 21 in the Down syndrome
chromosome region 1 (DCR1). Genomics 44: 237-241, 1997.

2. Okamoto, K.; Iwasaki, N.; Nishimura, C.; Doi, K.; Noiri, E.; Nakamura,
S.; Takizawa, M.; Ogata, M.; Fujimaki, R.; Grarup, N.; Pisinger, C.;
Borch-Johnsen, K.; and 13 others: Identification of KCNJ15 as a
susceptibility gene in Asian patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 86: 54-64, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 02/26/2010

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1997

EDITED carol: 02/26/2010
carol: 3/8/2001
carol: 11/23/1998
jenny: 11/7/1997

600282	TITLE *600282 GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR, IONOTROPIC, KAINATE 4; GRIK4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian
central nervous system. Its physiologic action is exerted through the
activation of ligand-gated ion channels and G protein-coupled membrane
receptors. Glutamate-gated ionic channels are broadly classified into
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and non-NMDA types. Three related non-NMDA
receptor subunit gene families have been defined: the AMPA-preferring
family, e.g., GLUR1 (138248), and the 2 kainate-preferring families.
GRIK1 (138245), GRIK2 (138244), and GRIK3 (138243) constitute one of the
GRIK gene families, and KA1 and KA2 (gene symbols, GRIK4 and GRIK5
(600283), respectively) constitute the second GRIK gene family. GRIK4
and GRIK5 form functional heteromeric kainate-preferring ionic channels
with the subunits encoded by the GRIK1, GRIK2, and GRIK3 genes, but not
with those falling in the AMP-preferring family (Szpirer et al., 1994).

CLONING

The KA1 and KA2 subunits display 68% identity in their amino acid
sequence (Szpirer et al., 1994).

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of rat/mouse and human/mouse somatic cell hybrid
panels and by fluorescence in situ hybridization, Szpirer et al. (1994)
determined that the GRIK4 and GRIK5 genes are located on human 11q22.3
and human 19q13.2, respectively; on mouse chromosome 9 and mouse
chromosome 7, respectively; and on rat chromosome 8 and rat chromosome
1, respectively. (The localization of the mouse Grik4 and Grik5 genes
was established by interspecific backcross mapping.)

EVOLUTION

Human evolution is characterized by a dramatic increase in brain size
and complexity. To probe its genetic basis, Dorus et al. (2004) examined
the evolution of genes involved in diverse aspects of nervous system
biology. These genes, including GRIK4, displayed significantly higher
rates of protein evolution in primates than in rodents. This trend was
most pronounced for the subset of genes implicated in nervous system
development. Moreover, within primates, the acceleration of protein
evolution was most prominent in the lineage leading from ancestral
primates to humans. Dorus et al. (2004) concluded that the phenotypic
evolution of the human nervous system has a salient molecular correlate,
i.e., accelerated evolution of the underlying genes, particularly those
linked to nervous system development.

REFERENCE 1. Dorus, S.; Vallender, E. J.; Evans, P. D.; Anderson, J. R.; Gilbert,
S. L.; Mahowald, M.; Wyckoff, G. J.; Malcom, C. M.; Lahn, B. T.:
Accelerated evolution of nervous system genes in the origin of Homo
sapiens. Cell 119: 1027-1040, 2004.

2. Szpirer, C.; Molne, M.; Antonacci, R.; Jenkins, N. A.; Finelli,
P.; Szpirer, J.; Riviere, M.; Rocchi, M.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Gallo, V.: The genes encoding the glutamate receptor subunits
KA1 and KA2 (GRIK4 and GRIK5) are located on separate chromosomes
in human, mouse, and rat. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 11849-11853,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 01/10/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/5/1995

EDITED mgross: 01/10/2005
joanna: 5/7/1997
carol: 1/5/1995

601836	TITLE *601836 KINESIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 3; KIFAP3
;;KAP3;;
smg GDS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; SMAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system, Shimizu et al. (1996) isolated the gene
encoding a protein which interacts with smg GDS (see 179502) and named
it SMAP, for 'smg GDS-associated protein.' The cDNA encodes a 792-amino
acid polypeptide containing 9 Armadillo repeats, found in the Drosophila
'Armadillo' protein and implicated in protein-protein interactions. SMAP
protein is phosphorylated by v-src (SRC; 190090), and this
phosphorylation reduces the affinity of SMAP for smg GDS. Northern blot
and tissue distribution analyses revealed that SMAP is expressed
ubiquitously and is highly concentrated in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Shimizu et al. (1996) also noted that SMAP is homologous to the sea
urchin gene SpKAP115, an accessory subunit of sea urchin kinesin.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the KIFAP3
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP WI-6302).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the KIFAP3
gene and survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), see 105400.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1; 147450) gene cause
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS1; 105400), likely due to the
toxic properties of misfolded mutant SOD1 protein. Tateno et al. (2009)
demonstrated that, starting from the pre-onset stage of ALS, misfolded
SOD1 species associated specifically with Kifap3 in the ventral white
matter of SOD1G93A-transgenic mouse spinal cord. KIFAP3 is responsible
for binding to cargoes including choline acetyltransferase (CHAT;
118490) as a component of the kinesin-2 motor complex. Motor axons in
SOD1G93A-Tg mice also showed a reduction in ChAT transport from the
pre-onset stage. Using a purified hybrid mouse neuroblastoma/rat glioma
cell line NG108-15 transfected with SOD1 mutations, the authors showed
that microtubule-dependent release of acetylcholine was significantly
impaired by misfolded SOD1 species and that impairment was normalized by
KIFAP3 overexpression. KIFAP3 was incorporated into SOD1 aggregates in
spinal motor neurons from human ALS patients as well. Tateno et al.
(2009) suggested that KIFAP3 sequestration by misfolded SOD1 species and
the resultant inhibition of ChAT transport play a role in the
pathophysiology of ALS.

REFERENCE 1. Shimizu, K.; Kawabe, H.; Minimi, S.; Honda, T.; Takaishi, K.; Shirataki,
H.; Takai, Y.: SMAP, an Smg GDS-associating protein having arm repeats
and phosphorylated by Src tyrosine kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 27013-27017,
1996.

2. Tateno, M.; Kato, S.; Sakurai, T.; Nukina, N.; Takahashi, R.; Araki,
T.: Mutant SOD1 impairs axonal transport of choline acetyltransferase
and acetylcholine release by sequestering KAP3. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
942-955, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/12/2009
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 11/26/2001

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/29/1997

EDITED carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 8/25/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
joanna: 11/26/2001
alopez: 6/10/1997
alopez: 6/9/1997

159555	TITLE +159555 MYELOID/LYMPHOID OR MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA GENE; MLL
;;MLL1;;
TRITHORAX, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; TRX1;;
HRX;;
MYELOID/LYMPHOID LEUKEMIA GENE;;
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA GENE;;
ALL1 GENE; ALL1;;
CXXC FINGER PROTEIN 7; CXXC7
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF4 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/ENL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF9 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GMPS FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/FBP17 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LPP FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GPH FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/PNUTL1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CDK6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LASP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GRAF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/ABI1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LAF4 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CBL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LARG FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF15q14 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CIP29 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/SEPT6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/MAML2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/KIAA1524 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MLL gene encodes a DNA-binding protein that methylates histone H3
(see 602810) lys4 (H3K4) and positively regulates expression of target
genes, including multiple HOX genes (see 142980). MLL is a frequent
target for recurrent translocations in acute leukemias that may be
characterized as acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626), acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), or mixed lineage (biphenotypic) leukemia
(MLL). Leukemias with translocations involving MLL possess unique
clinical and biologic characteristics and are often associated with poor
prognosis. MLL rearrangements are found in more than 70% of infant
leukemias, whether the immunophenotype is more consistent with ALL or
AML6, but are less frequent in leukemias from older children. MLL
translocations are also found in approximately 10% of AMLs in adults, as
well as in therapy-related leukemias, most often characterized as AML,
that develop in patients previously treated with topoisomerase II
inhibitors for other malignancies. More than 50 different MLL fusion
partners have been identified. Leukemogenic MLL translocations encode
MLL fusion proteins that have lost H3K4 methyltransferase activity. A
key feature of MLL fusion proteins is their ability to efficiently
transform hematopoietic cells into leukemia stem cells (Krivtsov and
Armstrong, 2007).

CLONING

Recurring chromosomal translocations involving chromosome 11q23 have
been observed in both acute lymphoid leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML; 601626), especially acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5) and acute
myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML-M4). Rowley et al. (1990) demonstrated
that the breakpoints in four 11q23 translocations associated with
leukemia were contained within a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone
bearing the CD3D (186790) and CD3G (186740) genes. Within this YAC,
Ziemin-van der Poel et al. (1991) identified a transcription unit
spanning the breakpoint junctions of 3 of these translocations, 4;11,
9;11, and 11;19. They described 2 other related transcripts that were
upregulated in a translocation cell line. Ziemin-van der Poel et al.
(1991) named the gene MLL for myeloid/lymphoid, or mixed lineage,
leukemia. Cimino et al. (1991) identified the same gene and called it
ALL1.

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the ALL1 gene encodes a protein of more
than 3,910 amino acids containing 3 regions with homology to sequences
within the Drosophila 'trithorax' gene, including cysteine-rich regions
that can be folded into 6 zinc finger-like domains. Tkachuk et al.
(1992) showed that the ALL1 gene, which they referred to as HRX (for
'homolog of trithorax'), codes for a 431-kD protein. Djabali et al.
(1992) also cloned an 11.5-kb transcript spanning the 11q23
translocation breakpoint.

Parry et al. (1993) showed that the sequence of a partial TRX1 cDNA
contained an open reading frame encoding 1,012 amino acids with
extensive homology to the Drosophila trithorax protein, particularly in
the zinc finger-like domains. The TRX1 gene appears to be unique in the
human genome and has been conserved during evolution.

Butler et al. (1997) analyzed the distribution and localization of HRX
proteins in cell lines and human tissues, using both polyclonal and
monoclonal antibodies. Immunocytochemical analysis showed a punctate
distribution of wildtype and chimeric HRX proteins within cell nuclei,
suggesting that HRX localizes to nuclear structures in cells with and
without 11q23 translocations. Nuclear staining was found in the majority
of tissues studied, with the strongest reactivity in cerebral cortex,
kidney, thyroid, and lymphoid tissues. Thus, Butler et al. (1997)
concluded that HRX is widely expressed in most cell types, including
hematopoietic cells, a finding that precludes an immunocytochemical
approach for diagnosis of leukemias bearing 11q23 structural
abnormalities.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the MLL gene spans approximately 100 kb
and contains at least 21 exons.

MAPPING

The MLL gene maps to chromosome 11q23 (Ziemin-van der Poel et al., 1991;
Cimino et al., 1991).

GENE FUNCTION

Milne et al. (2002) showed that MLL regulates target HOX gene expression
through direct binding to promoter sequences. They determined that the
MLL SET domain is a histone H3 (see 601128) lys4 (K4)-specific
methyltransferase whose activity is stimulated with acetylated H3
peptides. This methylase activity was found to be associated with HOX
gene activation and H3 K4 methylation at cis regulatory sequences in
vivo. A leukemogenic MLL fusion protein that activates HOX expression
had no effect on histone methylation, suggesting a distinct mechanism
for gene regulation by MLL and MLL fusion proteins.

Nakamura et al. (2002) found that ALL1 is present within a stable
multiprotein supercomplex composed of at least 29 proteins. The majority
of the complex proteins are components of transcription complexes,
including TFIID (see 604912). Other components are involved in RNA
processing or histone methylation. The authors found that the complex
remodels, acetylates, deacetylates, and methylates nucleosomes and/or
free histones, and that the H3 K4 methylation activity of the complex is
conferred by the ALL1 SET domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitations showed
that ALL1 and other complex components examined were bound at the
promoter of an active ALL1-dependent HOXA9 gene (142956). In parallel,
H3 K4 was methylated, and histones H3 and H4 were acetylated at this
promoter.

The MLL gene encodes a large nuclear protein that is required for the
maintenance of HOX gene expression. MLL is cleaved at 2 conserved sites
to generate an N-terminal 320-kD fragment (N320) and a C-terminal 180-kD
fragment (C180), which heterodimerize to stabilize the complex and
confer its subnuclear destination. Hsieh et al. (2003) purified and
cloned the protease responsible for cleaving MLL, which they entitled
taspase-1 (608270). They determined that taspase-1 initiates a class of
endopeptidases that utilize an N-terminal threonine as the active-site
nucleophile to proteolyze polypeptide substrates following aspartate.
RNA interference-mediated knockdown of taspase-1 in HeLa cells resulted
in the appearance of unprocessed MLL and the loss of proper HOX gene
expression.

Lim et al. (2009) showed that Mll1 is required for neurogenesis in the
mouse postnatal brain. Mll1-deficient subventricular zone neural stem
cells survive, proliferate, and efficiently differentiate into glial
lineages; however, neuronal differentiation is severely impaired. In
Mll1-deficient cells, early proneural Mash1 (100790) and gliogenic Olig2
(606386) expression are preserved, but Dlx2 (126255), a key downstream
regulator of subventricular zone neurogenesis, is not expressed.
Overexpression of Dlx2 can rescue neurogenesis in Mll1-deficient cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates that Dlx2 is a direct target
of MLL in subventricular zone cells. In differentiating wildtype
subventricular zone cells, Mash1, Olig2, and Dlx2 loci have high levels
of histone-3 trimethylated at lys4 (H3K4me3), consistent with their
transcription. In contrast, in Mll1-deficient subventricular zone cells,
chromatin at Dlx2 is bivalently marked by both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, and
the Dlx2 gene fails to properly activate. Lim et al. (2009) concluded
that their data supported a model in which Mll1 is required to resolve
key silenced bivalent loci in postnatal neural precursors to the
actively transcribed state for the induction of neurogenesis, but not
for gliogenesis.

Liu et al. (2010) assigned MLL as a novel effector in the mammalian
S-phase checkpoint network and identified checkpoint dysfunction as an
underlying mechanism of MLL leukemias. MLL is phosphorylated at ser516
by ATR (601215) in response to genotoxic stress in the S phase, which
disrupts its interaction with, and hence its degradation by, the
SCF(Skp2) E3 ligase (see 601436), leading to its accumulation.
Stabilized MLL protein accumulates on chromatin, methylates histone H3
lysine-4 at late replication origins, and inhibits the loading of CDC45
(603465) to delay DNA replication. Cells deficient in MLL showed
radioresistant DNA synthesis and chromatid-type genomic abnormalities,
indicative of S-phase checkpoint dysfunction. Reconstitution of Mll-null
mouse embryonic fibroblasts with wildtype but not S516A or delta-SET
mutant MLL rescued the S-phase checkpoint defects. Moreover, murine
myeloid progenitor cells carrying an Mll-CBP (600140) knockin allele
that mimics human t(11;16) leukemia showed a severe radioresistant DNA
synthesis phenotype. Liu et al. (2010) demonstrated that MLL fusions
function as dominant-negative mutants that abrogate the ATR-mediated
phosphorylation/stabilization of wildtype MLL on damage to DNA, and thus
compromise the S-phase checkpoint. Together, Liu et al. (2010) concluded
that their results identified MLL as a key constituent of the mammalian
DNA damage response pathway and showed that deregulation of the S-phase
checkpoint incurred by MLL translocations probably contributes to the
pathogenesis of human MLL leukemias.

- MLL Fusion Proteins

Human ML-2 leukemia cells lack a normal MLL gene and exclusively express
an MLL/AF6 (MLLT4; 159559) fusion protein. Yokoyama et al. (2005) showed
that MLL/AF6 associated with menin (MEN1; 613733) in ML-2 cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed both proteins present on
upstream sites of the HOXA7 (142950), HOXA9 (142956), and HOXA10
(142957) promoters. Deletions and point mutations performed in the MLL
portion of the MLL/ENL (MLLT1; 159556) fusion protein revealed a high
affinity menin-binding motif (RXRFP) near the N terminus. Interaction
between oncogenic MLL and menin was required for initiation of
MLL-mediated leukemogenesis in mouse stem/progenitor cells, and menin
was essential to maintain MLL-associated myeloid transformation. Acute
genetic ablation of menin in mice reversed aberrant Hox gene expression
mediated by MLL-menin promoter-associated complexes and specifically
abrogated differentiation arrest and oncogenic properties of
MLL-transformed leukemic blasts.

By gel filtration, mass spectrometry, and Western blot analysis of human
cell lines, Nie et al. (2003) identified unique low-abundance SWI/SWF
complexes that contained ENL, several common SWI/SNF subunits, and
either BAF250A (ARID1A; 603024) or BAF250B (ARID1B; 614556). Western
blot analysis of HB(11;19) leukemia cells, which express the oncogenic
MLL/ENL fusion protein, revealed that MLL/ENL also interacted with the
BAF250B-containing complex. MLL/ENL-containing SWI/SNF complexes
coactivated the HOXA7 promoter in a reporter gene assay.

CYTOGENETICS

- MLL Breakpoint Cluster Region

The ALL1 gene is rearranged in acute leukemias with interstitial
deletions or reciprocal translocations between chromosome 11q23 and
chromosomes 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, or 19. Gu et al. (1992) cloned translocation
fragments from leukemic cells from t(4;11) and showed clustering of the
breakpoints in areas of 7 to 8 kb on both chromosome 4 and 11.
Sequencing indicated heptamer and nonamer-like sequences, associated
with rearrangements of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes, near
the breakpoints. This suggested a direct involvement of the VDJ
recombinase in the 11q23 translocations. Gu et al. (1992) determined
that the breakpoint cluster region within ALL1 spans 8 kb and
encompasses several small exons, most of which begin in the same phase
of the open reading frame.

McCabe et al. (1992) presented evidence that the breakpoints in all the
translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia cells, e.g., t(4;11) t(6;11),
t(9;11), and t(11;19), are clustered within a 9-kb BamHI genomic region
of the MLL gene. McCabe et al. (1992) detected rearrangements of DNA in
a fragment of the MLL gene by Southern blot hybridization. Djabali et
al. (1992) concluded that most of the breakpoints in infant leukemias
with t(4;11) and t(9;11) translocations lie within a 5-kb region.

Using a human TRX1 cDNA as a probe, Parry et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the gene is interrupted in both infant and adult acute myeloid
(AML) and lymphoid (ALL) leukemia patients with 11q23 translocations.
The structure of the TRX1 gene around the breakpoints show that this
part of the human gene is interrupted by 9 introns. As a result of the
rearrangement, zinc finger domains are translocated in both ALL and AML
patients.

Strout et al. (1998) analyzed the fusion sequences in genomic DNA from 9
patients with AML. Each had a partial tandem repeat spanning exons 2 to
6 of the ALL1 gene on 11q23. The breakpoint in intron 6 occurred in the
breakpoint cluster region and the other near the 3-prime end of intron
1. In 7 cases, a distinct point of fusion could not be identified;
instead, the sequence gradually diverged from an Alu element in intron 6
to an Alu element in intron 1 through heteroduplex fusion. The results
supported the hypothesis that a recombination event between homologous
Alu sequences is responsible for the partial tandem duplication of ALL1,
probably through an intrastrand slipped-mispairing mechanism, in the
majority of AML cases with this defect. This appeared to be the first
demonstration identifying Alu element-mediated recombination as a
consistent mechanism for gene rearrangement in somatic tissue.

- MLL/AF4 Fusion Gene

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the t(4;11) chromosome translocation in
leukemia results in 2 reciprocal fusion products coding for chimeric
proteins derived from ALL1 and from a gene on chromosome 4 that they
termed AF4 (MLLT2; 159557).

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL (159556). Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes
with which it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9;
159558) show high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of
the AF4, AF9, and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as
well as serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

Independently, Domer et al. (1993) characterized the MLL/AF4 fusion
product generated by the t(4;11) translocation. The sequence of the
complete open reading frame for this fusion transcript revealed that the
MLL protein is homologous to DNA methyltransferase. In the fusion gene,
the 5-prime portion is derived from the MLL gene and the 3-prime portion
from the AF4 gene.

Gale et al. (1997) demonstrated that unique or clonotypic MLL-AF4
genomic fusion sequences were detectable in neonatal blood spots from
individuals who developed ALL at ages 5 months to 2 years, thus
providing unequivocal evidence for a prenatal initiation of acute
leukemia in young patients. They stated that common subtypes due to
other translocation fusion genes can be expected to have a similar
prenatal initiation.

In an infant diagnosed at the age of 3 weeks with ALL after presenting
with hepatosplenomegaly and marked leukocytosis, Raffini et al. (2002)
found a 3-way rearrangement of the MLL, AF4, and CDK6 (603368) genes. By
reverse-panhandle PCR, they identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6
from band 7q21-q22 and MLL intron 9. Thus, the patient had an in-frame
CDK6-MLL transcript along with an in-frame MLL-AF4 transcript.

Wang et al. (2010) studied leukemia stem cells in mouse models of acute
myelogenous leukemia induced by either coexpression of the Hoxa9
(142956) and Meis1a (601739) oncogenes or by the fusion oncoprotein
MLL-AF9. The authors showed that the Wnt (see 164820)/beta-catenin
(116806) signaling pathway is required for self-renewal of leukemia stem
cells that are derived from either hematopoietic stem cells or more
differentiated granulocyte-macrophage progenitors. Because the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is normally active in hematopoietic stem cells
but not in granulocyte-macrophage progenitors, Wang et al. (2010)
concluded that reactivation of beta-catenin signaling is required for
the transformation of progenitor cells by certain oncogenes.
Beta-catenin is not absolutely required for self-renewal of adult
hematopoietic stem cells; thus, targeting the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
may represent a new therapeutic opportunity in acute myelogenous
leukemia.

- MLL/ENL Fusion Gene

In studies of a t(11;19)-carrying cell line, Tkachuk et al. (1992)
identified fusion transcripts expressed from both derivative
chromosomes. The more abundant derivative 11 transcript coded for a
chimeric protein containing the amino terminal 'AT-hook' motifs of the
HRX gene fused to the ENL gene (MLLT1; 159556) from chromosome 19. (ENL
was so named for '11-19 leukemia.') The HRX protein may have effects
mediated by DNA binding within the minor groove at AT-rich sites.
Tkachuk et al. (1992) referred to this type of leukemia as representing
the multilineage leukemias rather than mixed lineage leukemias. The cell
line carrying the t(11;19) was from a patient with T-cell precursor
acute lymphocytic leukemia (Smith et al., 1989).

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL. Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes with which
it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9; 159558) show
high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of the AF4, AF9,
and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as
serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

- MLL/AF9 Fusion Gene

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL. Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes with which
it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9; 159558) show
high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of the AF4, AF9,
and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as
serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

The human AF9 gene is one of the most common fusion partner genes with
MLL, resulting in the t(9;11)(p22;q23). Strissel et al. (2000)
identified several different structural elements in AF9, including a
colocalizing DNA topo II cleavage site and a DNase I hypersensitive
(DNase I HS) site. In addition, 2 scaffold-associated regions (SARs) are
located centromeric to the topo II and DNase I HS cleavage sites and
border breakpoint regions in 2 leukemic cell lines. The authors thus
demonstrated that the patient breakpoint regions of AF9 share the same
structural elements as the MLL BCR, and they proposed a DNA breakage and
repair model for nonhomologous recombination between MLL and its partner
genes, particularly AF9.

- MLL/AF6 Fusion Gene

Prasad et al. (1993) identified AF6 (MLLT4; 159559) as the fusion
partner of MLL in a common translocation, t(6;11)(q27;q23), associated
with leukemia. The t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation results in a chimeric
MLL/AF6 protein with a calculated molecular mass of 325 kD. In the
chimeric protein, the N-terminal portion of MLL, including 3 AT hook
motifs, is fused to all of AF6 except the first 35 amino acids, leaving
the Ras-interacting domain and the DHR motif of AF6 intact. By Western
blot analysis of transfected COS cells and a human cell line with the
t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation, Joh et al. (1997) found that the MLL/AF6
fusion protein had an apparent molecular mass of 360 kD.
Immunolocalization and cell fractionation followed by Western blot
analysis indicated that MLL/AF6 was targeted to the nucleus, whereas AF6
itself was cytoplasmic. Mutation analysis indicted that the region of
MLL containing AT hook motifs was responsible for the nuclear
localization of the chimeric protein.

- MLL/GPH Fusion Gene

Eguchi et al. (2001) found that the gephyrin gene (GPH; 603930) can
partner with MLL in leukemia associated with the translocation
t(11;14)(q23;q24). The child in whom this translocation was discovered
showed signs of acute undifferentiated leukemia 3 years after intensive
chemotherapy that included the topoisomerase II inhibitor VP16. The AT
hook motifs and a DNA methyltransferase homology domain of the MLL gene
were fused to the C-terminal half of GPH, including a presumed
tubulin-binding site and a domain homologous to the E. coli molybdenum
cofactor biosynthesis protein. Eguchi et al. (2001) suggested that
MLL-GPHN may have been generated by the chemotherapeutic agent, followed
by error-prone DNA repair via nonhomologous end-joining.

- MLL/GMPS Fusion Gene

In a patient with treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia and the
karyotype t(3;11)(q25;q23), Pegram et al. (2000) identified GMPS
(600358) to be the partner gene of MLL. The authors stated that GMPS was
the first partner gene of MLL to be identified on 3q and the first gene
of this type to be found in leukemia-associated translocations.

- MLL/FBP17 Fusion Gene

Fuchs et al. (2001) reported fusion of the gene encoding formin-binding
protein-17 (FBP17; 606191) to MLL in a child with acute myelogeneous
leukemia and a complex chromosome rearrangement,
ins(11;9)(q23;134)inv(11)(q13q23). The fused mRNA was represented by MLL
at the 5-prime end and FBP17 at the 3-prime end.

- MLL/LPP Fusion Gene

By FISH and Southern blot analyses, Daheron et al. (2001) identified a
rearrangement in the mixed lineage leukemia gene due to a novel
t(3;11)(q28;q23) translocation in a patient who developed acute myeloid
leukemia of the M5 type 3 years after treatment for a follicular
lymphoma. Through inverse PCR, they identified the LPP gene (600700) on
3q28 as the MLL fusion partner. The breakpoint occurred in intron 8 of
MLL and LPP. They found that the MLL/LPP and LPP/MLL predicted proteins
contain many of the features present in other MLL rearrangements.

- MLL/PNUTL1 Fusion Gene

Megonigal et al. (1998) examined the MLL genomic translocation
breakpoint in acute myeloid leukemia of infant twins. Southern blot
analysis showed 2 identical MLL gene rearrangements indicating
chromosomal translocation. The rearrangements were detected in the
second twin before signs of clinical disease and the intensity relative
to the normal fragment indicated that the translocation was not
constitutional. Fluorescence in situ hybridization with an MLL-specific
probe and karyotype analyses suggested that a t(11;22)(q23;q11.2)
disrupted MLL. Megonigal et al. (1998) used panhandle variant PCR to
clone the translocation breakpoint and identified a region of 22q11.2
involved in both leukemia and a constitutional disorder. By ligating a
single-stranded oligonucleotide that was homologous to known 5-prime MLL
genomic sequence to the 5-prime ends of BamHI-digested DNA through a
bridging oligonucleotide, they formed the stem-loop template for
panhandle variant PCR, which yielded products of 3.9 kb. The MLL genomic
breakpoint was in intron 7. The sequence of the partner DNA from 22q11.2
was identical to the human CDCrel (cell division cycle-related) gene
(PNUTL1; 602724) that maps to chromosome 22. Both MLL and PNUTL1
contained homologous CT, TTTGTG, and GAA sequences within a few
basepairs of their respective breakpoints, which may have been important
in uniting these 2 genes by translocation. RT-PCR amplified an in-frame
fusion of MLL exon 7 to PNUTL1 exon 3, indicating that a chimeric mRNA
had been transcribed.

- MLL/CDK6 Fusion Gene

In an infant diagnosed at the age of 3 weeks with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL; 613065) after presenting with hepatosplenomegaly and
marked leukocytosis, Raffini et al. (2002) found a 3-way rearrangement
of the MLL, AF4, and CDK6 (603368) genes. By reverse-panhandle PCR, they
identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6 from band 7q21-q22 and MLL
intron 9. Thus, the patient had an in-frame CDK6-MLL transcript along
with an in-frame MLL-AF4 transcript.

- MLL/LASP1 Fusion Gene

Strehl et al. (2003) identified a new MLL fusion partner on chromosome
17q in the case of an infant with AML-M4 and a t(11;17)(q23;q21)
translocation. FISH and RT-PCR analyses indicated a rearrangement of the
MLL gene, but no fusion with previously identified MLL fusion partners
at 17q, such as AF17 (600328) or MSF (604061). RACE revealed an in-frame
fusion of MLL to LASP1 (602920), a gene that is amplified and
overexpressed in breast cancer. The authors stated that retroviral
transduction of myeloid progenitors demonstrated that MLL/LASP1 was the
fourth known fusion of MLL with a cytoplasmic protein that has no in
vitro transformation capability, the others being GRAF (605370), ABI1
(603050), and FBP17.

- MLL/LAF4 Fusion Gene

Von Bergh et al. (2002) identified an MLL/LAF4 (601464) fusion gene in
an infant with ALL and a t(2;11)(p15;p14) translocation. Bruch et al.
(2003) also reported an infant with ALL and an MLL/LAF4 fusion caused by
an ins(11;2)(q23;q11.2q11.2) insertion.

- MLL/LARG Fusion Gene

In a patient with primary acute myeloid leukemia and a complex
karyotype, Kourlas et al. (2000) found that the 5-prime end of MLL at
exon 6 was fused in-frame with the 3-prime end of almost the entire open
reading frame of the LARG gene (604763), which lies on 11q23.
Transcriptional orientation of both genes at 11q23 was found to be from
centromere to telomere, consistent with other data that suggested that
the MLL/LARG fusion resulted from an interstitial deletion rather than a
balanced translocation.

- MLL/CBL Fusion Gene

Fu et al. (2003) found that the CBL gene (165360), which lies telomeric
to MLL on 11q23, was fused to MLL in an adult patient with de novo acute
myeloid leukemia (FAB M1). MLL exon 6 was fused in-frame with CBL exon
8. The genomic junction region involved the fusion of the 3-prime
portion of an Alu element in intron 6 of MLL with the 5-prime portion of
an Alu element in intron 7 of CBL. The absence of extensive sequence
similarity at both breakpoints of MLL and CBL indicated that the
recombination was not generated through homologous recombination. The
transcriptional orientation of both genes is from centromere to
telomere. The results of Southern blot analysis in conjunction with FISH
suggested that the MLL/CBL fusion was the result of an interstitial
deletion. CBL was the second MLL fusion partner identified on 11q23, the
first being the LARG gene. Fu et al. (2003) stated that at least 34
partner genes for MLL had been identified.

- MLL/AF10 Fusion Gene

Tanabe et al. (1996) identified an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12) and other
complex chromosomal rearrangements in a 2-year old boy with acute
monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5). Cloning of the proximal 10p breakpoint
showed that the MLL gene at chromosome 11q23 was fused to the 3-prime
portion of AF10 (MLLT10; 602409) at chromosome 10p12. Cloning of the
telomeric 10p junction revealed that the 5-prime portion of AF10 was
fused with the HEAB gene (608757). The 5-prime AF10/HEAB fusion
transcript was out of frame, while the MLL/3-prime AF10 fusion was in
frame.

- MLL/AF15q14 Fusion Gene

Hayette et al. (2000) described a 48-year-old man with AML-M4 who was
cytogenetically characterized as 46,XY,-3,t(11;15)(q23;q1 4),+mar. The
bone marrow was hypercellular, with 80% blast cells. The patient was
treated by intensive chemotherapy and died 4 month after diagnosis. The
translocation resulted in a in-frame fusion between exon 8 of the MLL
gene and exon 10 of the AF15q14 gene (609173). The fusion transcript was
predicted to encode a 1,503-amino acid protein composed of 1,418
N-terminal amino acids of MLL and 85 C-terminal amino acids of AF15q14,
including the bipartite nuclear localization signal.

Kuefer et al. (2003) identified a similar t(11;15)(q23;q14) in a
3-year-old boy with de novo T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In this
translocation, exon 9 of the MLL gene was fused in-frame to exon 12 of
the AF15q14 gene. The deduced 1,886-amino acid fusion protein, which
contains the N terminus of MLL up to lys1362 fused to the entire C
terminus of AF15q14 starting from residue ile1819, has a calculated
molecular mass of 208 kD. It differs from the fusion protein described
by Hayette et al. (2000) in that it has a coiled-coil domain but no
nuclear localization signal.

- MLL/CIP29 Fusion Gene

In an infant with AML-M4, Hashii et al. (2004) identified a
translocation, t(11;12)(q23;q13), in which the coding region of the
CIP29 gene (610049) was fused in-frame to exon 9 of the MLL gene. The
fusion protein had the N-terminal AT hooks and central DNA
methyltransferase homology region of MLL fused to nearly all of the
CIP29 protein, including the N-terminal SAP domain and 2 C-terminal
nuclear localization signals. RT-PCR confirmed expression of the fusion
transcript in patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

- MLL/SEPT6 Fusion Gene

Kadkol et al. (2006) described an infant with AML who had a
rearrangement between chromosomes 11q23 and Xq24. FISH analysis showed a
break in MLL, and RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression of an MLL/SEPT6
(300683) fusion transcript.

- MLL/MAML2 Fusion Gene

Nemoto et al. (2007) isolated MLL/MAML2 (607537) fusion transcripts from
secondary AML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) cells with
inv(11)(q21q23). RT-PCR revealed that exon 7 of MLL was fused to exon 2
of MAML2 in the AML and MDS cells. The inv(11)(q21q23) resulted in a
chimeric RNA encoding a putative fusion protein containing 1,408 amino
acids from the N-terminal part of MLL and 952 amino acids from the
C-terminal part of MAML2. The N-terminal part of MAML2, a basic domain
that includes a binding site for the NOTCH (see NOTCH1; 190198)
intracellular domain, was deleted in MLL/MAML2. The MLL/MAML2 fusion
protein in secondary AML and MDS and the MECT1/MAML2 fusion protein in
mucoepithelioid carcinoma, benign Warthin tumor, and clear cell
hidradenoma contained the same C-terminal part of MAML2. Reporter gene
assays revealed that MLL/MAML2 suppressed HES1 (139605) promoter
activation by the NOTCH1 intracellular domain.

- MLL/GRAF Fusion Gene

Borkhardt et al. (2000) found that the GRAF gene (605370) was fused with
MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) that occurred in an infant with
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

- MLL/ABI1 Fusion Gene

Taki et al. (1998) analyzed a patient with AML and t(10;11)(p11.2;q23)
and identified, as a fusion partner with MLL, the gene ABI1 (603050) on
10p11.2. The ABI1 gene bore no homology with partner genes of MLL
previously described, but the ABI1 protein exhibited sequence similarity
to protein of homeotic genes, contained several polyproline stretches,
and included a Src homology-3 (SH3) domain at the C terminus. The
MLL-ABI1 fusion transcript in this patient was formed by an
alternatively spliced ABI1. In-frame MLL-ABI1 fusion transcripts
combined the MLL AT-hook motifs and DNA methyltransferase homology
region with the homeodomain homologous region, polyproline stretches,
and SH3 domain of the alternatively spliced transcript of ABI1.

- MLL/KIAA1524 Fusion Gene

Coenen et al. (2011) identified the karyotype 46,XX,t(3;11)(q12-13;q23)
in bone marrow of a 4-month-old Caucasian girl who presented with the M5
subtype of AML and central nervous system involvement. The patient died
9 weeks after diagnosis. The translocation resulted in fusion of intron
10 of the MLL gene on chromosome 11 to intron 16 of the KIAA1524 gene
(610643) on chromosome 3. The 2 genes are transcribed in opposite
orientations, suggesting that the translocation also required a
microinversion. RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression of the fusion
transcript, which was predicted to encode a 1,673-amino acid protein
containing the N-terminal AT-hook domain, subnuclear localization sites,
and methyltransferase domain of MLL fused to the C-terminal coiled-coil
domain of KIAA1524.

- MLL Duplication

In a study of patients with acute leukemia but no microscopically
visible change at 11q23, Schichman et al. (1994) found molecular
evidence of partial duplication of the ALL1 gene. The direct tandem
duplication involved a region spanning exons 2 to 6, and a partially
duplicated protein gene product was demonstrated. Thus, the ALL1 gene is
leukemogenic when it fuses with itself as well as when it fuses with one
of the genes on other chromosomes.

In addition to the translocations involving fusion of the ALL1 gene with
genes on other chromosomes producing acute lymphoblastic and myelogenous
leukemia, the ALL1 gene undergoes self-fusion in acute myeloid leukemias
with normal karyotype or trisomy 11. In addition, Baffa et al. (1995)
reported rearrangement of the ALL1 gene in a gastric carcinoma cell
line. A complex, 3-way translocation involving chromosomes 1 and 11 and
resulting in partial duplication of the ALL1 gene was found. Sequencing
of RT-PCR products and Northern blot analysis show that only the
partially duplicated ALL1 gene was transcribed, producing an mRNA with
exon 8 fused to exon 2. Thus, ALL1 gene rearrangement may play a role in
the pathogenesis of some solid malignancies. The absence of the normal
transcript in this cell line, in association with loss of heterozygosity
on 11q23 seen in solid tumors, suggests that ALL1 is involved in
tumorigenesis by a loss-of-function mechanism.

Approximately 90% of adult patients with de novo AML and trisomy 11
(+11) as a sole abnormality and 11% of adult patients with de novo AML
and normal cytogenetics carry a molecular rearrangement of the ALL1
gene. The rearranged ALL1 gene results from the direct tandem
duplication of a portion of ALL1 itself. Caligiuri et al. (1997) showed
that in cytogenetically normal cases of AML and cases with +11 as the
sole cytogenetic abnormality, only 1 chromosome contains the mutated
ALL1 allele. Thus, a single mutated ALL1 allele with the partial tandem
duplication is sufficient for ALL1-associated leukemogenesis,
irrespective of the number of normal genes present. The frequently
occurring specific association of +11 and ALL1 gene mutation in the
leukemic clone remained unexplained.

- Detection of MLL Rearrangements

Thirman et al. (1993) demonstrated that MLL gene rearrangements can be
detected with a single probe and a single restriction-enzyme digest. The
ability to detect an MLL gene rearrangement rapidly and reliably,
especially in patients with limited material for cytogenetic analysis,
should make it possible to identify patients who have a poor prognosis
and therefore require aggressive chemotherapy or marrow transplantation.

PHENOTYPE

The MLL gene spans the breakpoint in translocations involving 11q23,
which are responsible for approximately 70% of AML and ALL in infants
and are also observed in treatment-related leukemias, especially in
patients previously treated with drugs inhibiting topoisomerase II
(Gibbons et al., 1990; Thirman et al., 1993).

In 15 of 26 AML cases in infants, Sorensen et al. (1994) found
rearrangement of the MLL gene at the molecular level. These
rearrangements were clustered within an 11-kb region containing 9 exons
of the gene. In 14 of the 15 cases with rearrangements, the leukemia was
associated with myelomonocytic or monocytic phenotypes (M4 or M5 FAB
subtypes, respectively), both of which are associated with a poor
prognosis in childhood AML. In contrast, only 1 of 11 nonrearranged
cases had an M4 or M5 phenotype. Rearrangement also correlated
significantly with hyperleukocytosis, another clinical parameter
associated with poor outcome.

Kobayashi et al. (1993) described a case of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in a 44-year-old woman after adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer;
they demonstrated rearrangement of the HRX gene.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemias carrying a chromosomal translocation
involving the MLL gene have a particularly poor prognosis. Armstrong et
al. (2002) showed that they have a characteristic, highly distinct gene
expression profile that is consistent with an early hematopoietic
progenitor expressing select multilineage markers and individual HOX
genes. Clustering algorithms showed that lymphoblastic leukemias with
MLL translocations can clearly be separated from conventional acute
lymphoblastic and acute myelogenous leukemias. Armstrong et al. (2002)
proposed that they constitute a distinct disease, denoted as MLL, and
showed that the differences in gene expression are robust enough to
classify leukemias correctly as MLL versus acute lymphoblastic leukemia
or acute myelogenous leukemia. Establishing that MLL is a unique entity
is critical, as it mandates the examination of selectively expressed
genes for urgently needed molecular targets.

PATHOGENESIS

Chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene occur in about 80% of
infant leukemias. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that maternal
exposure to various substances such as pesticides, marijuana, or an
excess of flavonoids (naturally occurring inhibitors of topoisomerase
II) might be associated with acute leukemia in infants (Ross et al.,
1994). In search of possible agents inducing infant leukemia, Strick et
al. (2000) investigated bioflavonoids, natural substances in food as
well as in dietary supplements, that cause site-specific DNA cleavage in
the MLL breakpoint cluster region (BCR) in vivo. The MLL BCR DNA
cleavage was shown in primary progenitor hematopoietic cells from
healthy newborns and adults as well as in cell lines; it colocalized
with the MLL BCR cleavage site induced by chemotherapeutic agents, such
as etoposide (VP16) and doxorubicin (Dox). Both in vivo and additional
in vitro experiments demonstrated topoisomerase II (TOP2A; 126430) as
the target of bioflavonoids similar to the 2 chemotherapeutic agents.
Based on 20 bioflavonoids tested, Strick et al. (2000) identified a
common structure essential for topoisomerase II cleavage. The authors'
observations supported a 2-stage model of cellular processing of
topoisomerase II inhibitors: the first and reversible stage of this
cleavage resulted in DNA repair, but also rarely in chromosome
translocations; whereas the second, nonreversible stage led to cell
death because of an accumulation of DNA damage. These results suggested
that maternal ingestion of bioflavonoids may induce MLL breaks and
potentially translocations in utero leading to infant and early
childhood leukemia. Strick et al. (2000) concluded that although
bioflavonoids may be beneficial in certain circumstances, a potential
counterbalancing disadvantage is their possible role in causing
chromosome translocations leading to leukemia in all age groups,
analogous to the translocation forms of AML and ALL after cancer
chemotherapy. Ross (2000) commented on the observations of Strick et al.
(2000) in the context of clinical and epidemiologic findings on
childhood leukemia.

Wang et al. (2008) reported pharmacologic, physiologic, and genetic
studies that demonstrated an oncogenic requirement for glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK3; see 606784) in the maintenance of a specific subtype of
poor prognosis human leukemia, genetically defined by mutations of the
MLL protooncogene. In contrast to its previously characterized roles in
suppression of neoplasia-associated signaling pathways, GSK3
paradoxically supports MLL leukemia cell proliferation and
transformation by a mechanism that ultimately involves destabilization
of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(KIP1) (600778). Inhibition
of GSK3 in a preclinical murine model of MLL leukemia provided promising
evidence of efficacy and earmarked GSK3 as a candidate cancer drug
target.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Huang et al. (2012) reported the crystal structures of human menin
(613733) in its free form and in complexes with MLL1 or with JUND
(165162), or with an MLL1-LEDGF (603620) heterodimer. These structures
showed that menin contains a deep pocket that binds short peptides of
MLL1 or JUND in the same manner, but that it can have opposite effects
on transcription. The menin-JUND interaction blocks JUN N-terminal
kinase-mediated JUND phosphorylation and suppresses JUND-induced
transcription. In contrast, menin promotes gene transcription by binding
the transcription activator MLL1 through the peptide pocket while still
interacting with the chromatin-anchoring protein LEDGF at a distinct
surface formed by both menin and MLL1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yu et al. (1995) reported that Mll deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. Mll +/- mice had retarded growth, hemopoietic abnormalities, and
bidirectional homeotic transformation of the axial skeleton, as well as
sternal malformations.

Yamashita et al. (2006) examined the role of MLL in the immune system
using Mll +/- mice. Mll +/- Cd4-positive T cells differentiated normally
into antigen-specific effector Th1 and Th2 cells in vitro, but the
ability of memory Th2 cells to produce Th2 cytokines was dramatically
decreased. Histone methylation and acetylation at Th2 cytokine gene loci
was not maintained in Mll +/- memory Th2 cells. Levels of Gata3 (131320)
mRNA were normal in Mll +/- effector Th2 cells, but they were
substantially decreased in Mll +/- memory Th2 cells; mRNA levels of
other transcription factors were not affected in Mll +/- memory Th2
cells. Histone modifications of Gata3 were also aberrant in Th2 cell
lines in which Mll expression had been knocked down by small interfering
RNA. Ovalbumin-induced allergic eosinophilic inflammation was reduced in
Mll +/- Th2 cell-transferred mice. Yamashita et al. (2006) concluded
that MLL plays a crucial role in control of memory Th2 cell responses by
maintaining expression of GATA3 and production of Th2 cytokines.

Barabe et al. (2007) demonstrated that upon transplantation into
immunodeficient mice, primitive human hematopoietic cells expressing a
mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion gene generated myeloid or lymphoid
acute leukemias, with features that recapitulated human diseases.
Analysis of serially transplanted mice revealed that the disease is
sustained by leukemia-initiating cells that have evolved over time from
a primitive cell type with a germline immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)
gene configuration to a cell type containing rearranged IgH genes. The
leukemia-initiating cells retained both myeloid and lymphoid lineage
potential and remained responsive to microenvironmental cues. Barabe et
al. (2007) concluded that the properties of these cells provide a
biologic basis for several clinical hallmarks of MLL leukemias.

McMahon et al. (2007) found that fetal liver from Mll-knockout mouse
embryos showed defects in the hematopoietic stem and progenitor pool,
including reductions in long-term and short-term hematopoietic stem cell
numbers and a decrease in the quiescent hematopoietic stem cell
fraction. Adult mice with conditional Mll knockout had no apparent
abnormalities in mature hematopoietic cells in bone marrow, spleen, and
thymus. However, conditional Mll-knockout bone marrow cells produced
reduced numbers of colony-forming units and showed reduced ability to
compete in hematopoietic reconstitution assays. McMahon et al. (2007)
concluded that MLL has a critical role in regulating stem cell
self-renewal.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Jones et al. (2012) performed whole-exome sequencing in 4 patients with
hypertrichosis cubiti, short stature, a distinctive facial appearance,
and intellectual disability (Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome; 605130), and
identified 3 different heterozygous de novo truncating mutations, all
within exon 27 of the MLL gene (159555.0001-159555.0003) in 3 of the 4
patients. Analysis of MLL in 2 additional patients with a similar
phenotype revealed heterozygosity for 2 more de novo truncating
mutations (159555.0004 and 159555.0005). The variants were confirmed by
Sanger sequencing, and none were found in dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes
Project, 600 unrelated control exome profiles, or DNA from the
unaffected parents.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 4-BP DEL, NT8806

In a 6-year-old boy with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (Wiedemann-Steiner
syndrome; 605130), Jones et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a
de novo 4-bp deletion (8806_8809del) in exon 27 of the MLL gene,
predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination (Val2936Ter).
The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000
Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome profiles.

.0002
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DEL, NT8267

In an 8-year-old girl with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (605130), Jones et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp deletion (8267del)
in exon 27 of the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination (Leu2756Ter). The mutation was not found in the
unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated
control exome profiles.

.0003
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DEL, NT6913

In a 12-year-old girl with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (605130), Jones et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp deletion (6913del)
in exon 27 of the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination (Ser2305LeufsTer2). The mutation was not found in
the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600
unrelated control exome profiles. The level of MLL transcript in patient
skin fibroblasts was reduced in comparison to unrelated healthy
controls, indicating nonsense-mediated decay.

.0004
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, ARG2382TER

In an 8-year-old boy with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and mild developmental delay (605130), Jones et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 7144C-T transition in exon 27 of
the MLL gene, resulting in an arg2382-to-ter (R2382X) substitution. The
mutation was not found in the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000
Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome profiles.

.0005
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DUP, NT4599

In a 24-year-old woman with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and mild developmental delay (605130), Jones et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp duplication (4599dup) in
the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination
(Lys1534Ter). The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents,
dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome
profiles.

REFERENCE 1. Armstrong, S. A.; Staunton, J. E.; Silverman, L. B.; Pieters, R.;
den Boer, M. L.; Minden, M. D.; Sallan, S. E.; Lander, E. S.; Golub,
T. R.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: MLL translocations specify a distinct gene
expression profile that distinguishes a unique leukemia. Nature Genet. 30:
41-47, 2002.

2. Baffa, R.; Negrini, M.; Schichman, S. A.; Huebner, K.; Croce, C.
M.: Involvement of the ALL-1 gene in a solid tumor. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 4922-4926, 1995.

3. Barabe, F.; Kennedy, J. A.; Hope, K. J.; Dick, J. E.: Modeling
the initiation and progression of human acute leukemia in mice. Science 316:
600-604, 2007.

4. Borkhardt, A.; Bojesen, S.; Haas, O. A.; Fuchs, U.; Bartelheimer,
D.; Loncarevic, I. F.; Bohle, R. M.; Harbott, J.; Repp, R.; Jaeger,
U.; Viehmann, S.; Henn, T.; Korth, P.; Scharr, D.; Lampert, F.: The
human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) and both
alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute
myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 9168-9173,
2000.

5. Bruch, J.; Wilda, M.; Teigler-Schlegel, A.; Harbott, J.; Borkhardt,
A.; Metzler, M.: Occurrence of an MLL/LAF4 fusion gene caused by
the insertion ins(11;2)(q23;q11.2q11.2) in an infant with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. (Letter) Genes Chromosomes Cancer 37: 106-109, 2003.

6. Butler, L. H.; Slany, R.; Cui, X.; Cleary, M. L.; Mason, D. Y.
: The HRX proto-oncogene product is widely expressed in human tissues
and localizes to nuclear structures. Blood 89: 3361-3370, 1997.

7. Caligiuri, M. A.; Strout, M. P.; Oberkircher, A. R.; Yu, F.; de
la Chapelle, A.; Bloomfield, C. D.: The partial tandem duplication
of ALL1 in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics or trisomy
11 is restricted to one chromosome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 3899-3902,
1997.

8. Cimino, G.; Moir, D. T.; Canaani, O.; Williams, K.; Crist, W. M.;
Katzav, S.; Cannizzaro, L.; Lange, B.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.;
Canaani, E.: Cloning of ALL-1, the locus involved in leukemias with
the t(4;11)(q21;q23), t(9;11)(p22;q23), and t(11;19)(q23;p13) chromosome
translocations. Cancer Res. 51: 6712-6714, 1991.

9. Coenen, E. A.; Zwaan, C. M.; Meyer, C.; Marschalek, R.; Pieters,
R.; van der Veken, L. T.; Beverloo, H. B.; van den Heuvel-Eibrink,
M. M.: KIAA1524: a novel MLL translocation partner in acute myeloid
leukemia. Leukemia Res. 35: 133-135, 2011.

10. Daheron, L.; Veinstein, A.; Brizard, F.; Drabkin, H.; Lacotte,
L.; Guilhot, F.; Larsen, C. J.; Brizard, A.; Roche, J.: Human LPP
gene is fused to MLL in a secondary acute leukemia with a t(3;11)(q28;q23). Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 31: 382-389, 2001.

11. Djabali, M.; Selleri, L.; Parry, P.; Bower, M.; Young, B. D.;
Evans, G. A.: A trithorax-like gene is interrupted by chromosome
11q23 translocations in acute leukaemias. Nature Genet. 2: 113-118,
1992. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 4: 431 only, 1993.

12. Domer, P. H.; Fakharzadeh, S. S.; Chen, C.-S.; Jockel, J.; Johansen,
L.; Silverman, G. A.; Kersey, J. H.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Acute mixed-lineage
leukemia t(4;11)(q21;q23) generates an MLL-AF4 fusion product. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 7884-7888, 1993.

13. Eguchi, M.; Eguchi-Ishimae, M.; Seto, M.; Morishita, K.; Suzuki,
K.; Ueda, R.; Ueda, K.; Kamada, N.; Greaves, M.: GPHN, a novel partner
gene fused to MLL in a leukemia with t(11;14)(q23;q24). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 32: 212-221, 2001.

14. Fu, J.-F.; Hsu, J.-J.; Tang, T.-C.; Shih, L.-Y.: Identification
of CBL, a proto-oncogene at 11q23.3, as a novel MLL fusion partner
in a patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 37: 214-219, 2003.

15. Fuchs, U.; Rehkamp, G.; Haas, O. A.; Slany, R.; Konig, M.; Bojesen,
S.; Bohle, R. M.; Damm-Welk, C.; Ludwig, W.-D.; Harbott, J.; Borkhardt,
A.: The human formin-binding protein 17 (FBP17) interacts with sorting
nexin, SNX2, and is an MLL-fusion partner in acute myelogeneous leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8756-8761, 2001.

16. Gale, K. B.; Ford, A. M.; Repp, R.; Borkhardt, A.; Keller, C.;
Eden, O. B.; Greaves, M. F.: Backtracking leukemia to birth: identification
of clonotypic gene fusion sequences in neonatal blood spots. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13950-13954, 1997.

17. Gibbons, B.; Katz, F. E.; Ganly, P.; Chessells, J. M.: Infant
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia with t(11;19). Brit. J. Haemat. 74:
264-269, 1990.

18. Gu, Y.; Cimino, G.; Alder, H.; Nakamura, T.; Prasad, R.; Canaani,
O.; Moir, D. T.; Jones, C.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani,
E.: The (4;11)(q21;q23) chromosome translocations in acute leukemias
involve the VDJ recombinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 10464-10468,
1992.

19. Gu, Y.; Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Cimino,
G.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: The t(4;11) chromosome translocation
of human acute leukemias fuses the ALL-1 gene, related to Drosophila
trithorax, to the AF-4 gene. Cell 71: 701-708, 1992.

20. Hashii, Y.; Kim, J. Y.; Sawada, A.; Tokimasa, S.; Hiroyuki, F.;
Ohta, H.; Makiko, K.; Takihara, Y.; Ozono, K.; Hara, J.: A novel
partner gene CIP29 containing a SAP domain with MLL identified in
infantile myelomonocytic leukemia. (Letter) Leukemia 18: 1546-1548,
2004.

21. Hayette, S.; Tigaud, I.; Vanier, A.; Martel, S.; Corbo, L.; Charrin,
C.; Beillard, E.; Deleage, G.; Magaud, J. P.; Rimokh, R.: AF15q14,
a novel partner gene fused to the MLL gene in an acute myeloid leukaemia
with a t(11;15)(q23;q14). Oncogene 19: 446-4450, 2000.

22. Hsieh, J. J.-D.; Cheng, E. H.-Y.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Taspase1:
a threonine aspartase required for cleavage of MLL and proper HOX
gene expression. Cell 115: 293-303, 2003.

23. Huang, J.; Gurung, B.; Wan, B.; Matkar, S.; Veniaminova, N. A.;
Wan, K.; Merchant, J. L.; Hua, X.; Lei, M.: The same pocket in menin
binds both MLL and JUND but has opposite effects on transcription. Nature 482:
542-546, 2012.

24. Joh, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Kagami, Y.; Kakuda, H.; Sato, T.; Yamamoto,
T.; Takahashi, T.; Ueda, R.; Kaibuchi, K.; Seto, M.: Chimeric MLL
products with a Ras binding cytoplasmic protein AF6 involved in t(6;11)(q27;q23)
leukemia localize in the nucleus. Oncogene 15: 1681-1687, 1997.

25. Jones, W. D.; Dafou, D.; McEntagart, M.; Woollard, W. J.; Elmslie,
F. V.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Irving, M.; Saggar, A. K.; Smithson,
S.; Trembath, R. C.; Deshpande, C.; Simpson, M. A.: De novo mutations
in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91:
358-364, 2012.

26. Kadkol, S. S.; Bruno, A.; Oh, S.; Schmidt, M. L.; Lindgren, V.
: MLL-SEPT6 fusion transcript with a novel sequence in an infant with
acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 168: 162-167, 2006.

27. Kobayashi, Y.; Yang, J.; Shindo, E.; Tojo, A.; Tani, K.; Ozawa,
K.; Asano, S.: HRX gene rearrangement in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
after adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer. (Letter) Blood 82:
3220-3223, 1993.

28. Kourlas, P. J.; Strout, M. P.; Becknell, B.; Veronese, M. L.;
Croce, C. M.; Theil, K. S.; Krahe, R.; Ruutu, T.; Knuutila, S.; Bloomfield,
C. D.; Caligiuri, M. A.: Identification of a gene at 11q23 encoding
a guanine nucleotide exchange factor: evidence for its fusion with
MLL in acute myeloid leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 2145-2150,
2000.

29. Krivtsov, A. V.; Armstrong, S. A.: MLL translocations, histone
modifications and leukaemia stem-cell development. Nature Rev. Cancer 7:
823-833, 2007.

30. Kuefer, M. U.; Chinwalla, V.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Behm, F. G.;
Naeve, C. W.; Rakestraw, K. M.; Mukatira, S. T.; Raimondi, S. C.;
Morris, S. W.: Characterization of the MLL partner gene AF15q14 involved
in t(11;15)(q23;q14). Oncogene 22: 1418-1424, 2003.

31. Lim, D. A.; Huang, Y.-C.; Swigut, T.; Mirick, A. L.; Garcia-Verdugo,
J. M.; Wysocka, J.; Ernst, P.; Alvarez-Buylla, A.: Chromatin remodelling
factor Mll1 is essential for neurogenesis from postnatal neural stem
cells. Nature 458: 529-533, 2009.

32. Liu, H.; Takeda, S.; Kumar, R.; Westergard, T. D.; Brown, E. J.;
Pandita, T. K.; Cheng, E. H.-Y.; Hsieh, J. J.-D.: Phosphorylation
of MLL by ATR is required for execution of mammalian S-phase checkpoint. Nature 467:
343-346, 2010.

33. McCabe, N. R.; Burnett, R. C.; Gill, H. J.; Thirman, M. J.; Mbangkollo,
D.; Kipiniak, M.; van Melle, E.; Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; Rowley,
J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Cloning of cDNAs of the MLL gene that detect
DNA rearrangements and altered RNA transcripts in human leukemic cells
with 11q23 translocations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 11794-11798,
1992.

34. McMahon, K. A.; Hiew, S. Y.-L.; Hadjur, S.; Veiga-Fernandes, H.;
Menzel, U.; Price, A. J.; Kioussis, D.; Williams, O.; Brady, H. J.
M.: Mll has a critical role in fetal and adult hematopoietic stem
cell self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell 1: 338-345, 2007.

35. Megonigal, M. D.; Rappaport, E. F.; Jones, D. H.; Williams, T.
M.; Lovett, B. D.; Kelly, K. M.; Lerou, P. H.; Moulton, T.; Budarf,
M. L.; Felix, C. A.: t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) in acute myeloid leukemia
of infant twins fuses MLL with hCDCrel, a cell division cycle gene
in the genomic region of deletion in DiGeorge and velocardiofacial
syndromes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 6413-6418, 1998. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10344 only, 1998.

36. Milne, T. A.; Briggs, S. D.; Brock, H. W.; Martin, M. E.; Gibbs,
D.; Allis, C. D.; Hess, J. L.: MLL targets SET domain methyltransferase
activity to Hox gene promoters. Molec. Cell 10: 1107-1117, 2002.

37. Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Gu, Y.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Kamada,
N.; Gale, R. P.; Lange, B.; Crist, W. M.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.; Canaani, E.: Genes on chromosomes 4, 9, and 19 involved in 11q23
abnormalities in acute leukemia share sequence homology and/or common
motifs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4631-4635, 1993.

38. Nakamura, T.; Mori, T.; Tada, S.; Krajewski, W.; Rozovskaia, T.;
Wassell, R.; Dubois, G.; Mazo, A.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: ALL-1
is a histone methyltransferase that assembles a supercomplex of proteins
involved in transcriptional regulation. Molec. Cell 10: 1119-1128,
2002.

39. Nemoto, N.; Suzukawa, K.; Shimizu, S.; Shinagawa, A.; Takei, N.;
Taki, T.; Hayashi, Y.; Kojima, H.; Kawakami, Y.; Nagasawa, T.: Identification
of a novel fusion gene MLL-MAML2 in secondary acute myelogenous leukemia
and myelodysplastic syndrome with inv(11)(q21q23). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 46: 813-819, 2007.

40. Nie, Z.; Yan, Z.; Chen, E. H.; Sechi, S.; Ling, C.; Zhou, S.;
Xue, Y.; Yang, D.; Murray, D.; Kanakubo, E.; Cleary, M. L.; Wang,
W.: Novel SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes contain a mixed-lineage
leukemia chromosomal translocation partner. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
2942-2952, 2003.

41. Parry, P.; Djabali, M.; Bower, M.; Khristich, J.; Waterman, M.;
Gibbons, B.; Young, B. D.; Evans, G.: Structure and expression of
the human trithorax-like gene 1 involved in acute leukemias. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4738-4742, 1993.

42. Pegram, L. D.; Megonigal, M. D.; Lange, B. J.; Nowell, P. C.;
Rowley, J. D.; Rappaport, E. F.; Felix, C. A.: t(3;11) translocation
in treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia fuses MLL with the GMPS
(guanosine 5-prime monophosphate synthetase) gene. Blood 96: 4360-4362,
2000.

43. Prasad, R.; Gu, Y.; Alder, H.; Nakamura, T.; Canaani, O.; Saito,
H.; Huebner, K.; Gale, R. P.; Nowell, P. C.; Kuriyama, K.; Miyazaki,
Y.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: Cloning of the ALL-1 fusion partner,
the AF-6 gene, involved in acute myeloid leukemias with the t(6;11)
chromosome translocation. Cancer Res. 53: 5624-5628, 1993.

44. Raffini, L. J.; Slater, D. J.; Rappaport, E. F.; Lo Nigro, L.;
Cheung, N.-K. V.; Biegel, J. A.; Nowell, P. C.; Lange, B. J.; Felix,
C. A.: Panhandle and reverse-panhandle PCR enable cloning of der(11)
and der(other) genomic breakpoint junctions of MLL translocations
and identify complex translocation of MLL, AF-4, and CDK6. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 4568-4573, 2002.

45. Ross, J. A.: Dietary flavonoids and the MLL gene: a pathway to
infant leukemia? (Commentary) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4411-4413,
2000.

46. Ross, J. A.; Davies, S. M.; Potter, J. D.; Robison, L. L.: Epidemiology
of childhood leukemia, with a focus on infants. Epidemiol. Rev. 16:
243-272, 1994.

47. Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.; Espinosa, R., III; Patel, Y. D.; van
Melle, E.; Ziemin, S.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Lichter, P.; Evans, G.
A.; Kersey, J. H.; Ward, D. C.; Domer, P. H.; Le Beau, M. M.: Mapping
chromosome band 11q23 in human acute leukemia with biotinylated probes:
identification of 11q23 translocation breakpoints with a yeast artificial
chromosome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9358-9362, 1990.

48. Schichman, S. A.; Caligiuri, M. A.; Gu, Y.; Strout, M. P.; Canaani,
E.; Bloomfield, C. D.; Croce, C. M.: ALL-1 partial duplication in
acute leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 6236-6239, 1994.

49. Smith, S. D.; McFall, P.; Morgan, R.; Link, M.; Hecht, F.; Cleary,
M.; Sklar, J.: Long-term growth of malignant thymocytes in vitro. Blood 73:
2182-2187, 1989.

50. Sorensen, P. H. B.; Chen, C.-S.; Smith, F. O.; Arthur, D. C.;
Domer, P. H.; Bernstein, I. D.; Korsmeyer, S. J.; Hammond, G. D.;
Kersey, J. H.: Molecular rearrangements of the MLL gene are present
in most cases of infant acute myeloid leukemia and are strongly correlated
with monocytic or myelomonocytic phenotypes. J. Clin. Invest. 93:
429-437, 1994.

51. Strehl, S.; Borkhardt, A.; Slany, R.; Fuchs, U. E.; Konig, M.;
Haas, O. A.: The human LASP1 gene is fused to MLL in an acute myeloid
leukemia with t(11;17)(q23;q21). Oncogene 22: 157-160, 2003.

52. Strick, R.; Strissel, P. L.; Borgers, S.; Smith, S. L.; Rowley,
J. D.: Dietary bioflavonoids induce cleavage in the MLL gene and
may contribute to infant leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4790-4795,
2000.

53. Strissel, P. L.; Strick, R.; Tomek, R. J.; Roe, B. A.; Rowley,
J. D.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.: DNA structural properties of AF9 are similar
to MLL and could act as recombination hot spots resulting in MLL/AF9
translocations and leukemogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1671-1679,
2000.

54. Strout, M. P.; Marcucci, G.; Bloomfield, C. D.; Caligiuri, M.
A.: The partial tandem duplication of ALL1 (MLL) is consistently
generated by Alu-mediated homologous recombination in acute myeloid
leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 2390-2395, 1998.

55. Taki, T.; Shibuya, N.; Taniwaki, M.; Hanada, R.; Morishita, K.;
Bessho, F.; Yanagisawa, M.; Hayashi, Y.: ABI-1, a human homolog to
mouse Abl-interactor 1, fuses the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia
with t(10;11)(p11.2;q23). Blood 92: 1125-1130, 1998.

56. Tanabe, S.; Bohlander, S. K.; Vignon, C. V.; Espinosa, R., III;
Zhao, N.; Strissel, P. L.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.: AF10
is split by MLL and HEAB, a human homolog to a putative Caenorhabditis
elegans ATP/GTP-binding protein in an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12). Blood 88:
3535-3545, 1996.

57. Thirman, M. J.; Gill, H. J.; Burnett, R. C.; Mbangkollo, D.; McCabe,
N. R.; Kobayashi, H.; Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; Kaneko, Y.; Morgan,
R.; Sandberg, A. A.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Larson, R. A.; Le Beau, M.
M.; Diaz, M. O.; Rowley, J. D.: Rearrangement of the MLL gene in
acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemias with 11q23 chromosomal
translocations. New Eng. J. Med. 329: 909-914, 1993.

58. Tkachuk, D. C.; Kohler, S.; Cleary, M. L.: Involvement of a homolog
of Drosophila trithorax by 11q23 chromosomal translocations in acute
leukemias. Cell 71: 691-700, 1992.

59. von Bergh, A. R. M.; Beverloo, H. B.; Rombout, P.; van Wering,
E. R.; van Weel, M. H.; Beverstock, G. C.; Kluin, P. M.; Slater, R.
M.; Schuuring, E.: LAF4, an AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in
infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35:
92-96, 2002.

60. Wang, Y.; Krivtsov, A. V.; Sinha, A. U.; North, T. E.; Goessling,
W.; Feng, Z.; Zon, L. I.; Armstrong, S. A.: The Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway is required for the development of leukemia stem cells in
AML. Science 327: 1650-1653, 2010.

61. Wang, Z.; Smith, K. S.; Murphy, M.; Piloto, O.; Somervaille, T.
C. P.; Cleary, M. L.: Glycogen synthase kinase 3 in MLL leukaemia
maintenance and targeted therapy. Nature 455: 1205-1209, 2008.

62. Yamashita, M.; Hirahara, K.; Shinnakasu, R.; Hosokawa, H.; Norikane,
S.; Kimura, M. Y.; Hasegawa, A.; Nakayama, T.: Crucial role of MLL
for the maintenance of memory T helper type 2 cell responses. Immunity 24:
611-622, 2006.

63. Yokoyama, A.; Somervaille, T. C. P.; Smith, K. S.; Rozenblatt-Rosen,
O.; Meyerson, M.; Cleary, M. L.: The menin tumor suppressor protein
is an essential oncogenic cofactor for MLL-associated leukemogenesis. Cell 123:
207-218, 2005.

64. Yu, B. D.; Hess, J. L.; Horning, S. E.; Brown, G. A. J.; Korsmeyer,
S. J.: Altered Hox expression and segmental identity in Mll-mutant
mice. Nature 378: 505-508, 1995.

65. Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; McCabe, N. R.; Gill, H. J.; Espinosa,
R., III; Patel, Y.; Harden, A.; Rubinelli, P.; Smith, S. D.; Le Beau,
M. M.; Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Identification of a gene, MLL,
that spans the breakpoint in 11q23 translocations associated with
human leukemias. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10735-10739, 1991. Note:
Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4220 only, 1992.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Heme:
Acute lymphoid leukemia;
Acute myeloid leukemia;
Myeloid/lymphoid leukemia;
Mixed-lineage leukemia;
Acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5);
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML-M4)

Misc:
Homology to sequences within Drosophila 'trithorax' gene;
MLL protein is homologous to DNA methyltransferase

Lab:
Recurring 11q23 chromosomal translocations

Inheritance:
Autosomal dominant (11q23)

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/11/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/13/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/31/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/13/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 10/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/2/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/13/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/2/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 9/22/1999
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/27/1992

EDITED carol: 09/06/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 1/30/2013
carol: 10/9/2012
carol: 9/11/2012
carol: 8/17/2012
terry: 7/6/2012
mgross: 3/27/2012
terry: 3/23/2012
alopez: 3/14/2012
terry: 3/13/2012
joanna: 3/5/2012
mgross: 8/31/2011
carol: 4/7/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
terry: 11/3/2010
alopez: 10/5/2010
terry: 9/29/2010
terry: 9/8/2010
alopez: 4/21/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
wwang: 10/13/2009
alopez: 5/5/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
alopez: 12/31/2008
terry: 12/30/2008
carol: 12/4/2008
mgross: 10/13/2008
mgross: 5/2/2008
mgross: 3/19/2008
terry: 3/19/2008
mgross: 10/30/2007
terry: 9/14/2007
wwang: 8/17/2007
terry: 8/10/2007
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
mgross: 1/8/2007
mgross: 4/13/2006
mgross: 2/8/2006
carol: 5/27/2005
alopez: 2/7/2005
mgross: 1/28/2005
mgross: 1/7/2005
mgross: 8/26/2004
joanna: 3/16/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
alopez: 11/13/2003
carol: 11/6/2003
carol: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/12/2003
carol: 7/31/2003
tkritzer: 7/30/2003
mgross: 4/29/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
tkritzer: 3/26/2003
carol: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 10/17/2002
tkritzer: 10/14/2002
carol: 4/19/2002
carol: 4/18/2002
carol: 2/20/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
carol: 8/17/2001
carol: 4/2/2001
alopez: 9/18/2000
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
mcapotos: 7/11/2000
terry: 6/15/2000
carol: 9/27/1999
carol: 9/22/1999
carol: 7/23/1999
carol: 2/22/1999
terry: 9/8/1997
terry: 9/3/1997
alopez: 6/18/1997
mark: 10/18/1996
mark: 6/19/1995
mimadm: 12/2/1994
carol: 10/20/1994
pfoster: 3/30/1994
carol: 10/4/1993
carol: 9/20/1993

600129	TITLE *600129 PHOSPHODIESTERASE 4D, cAMP-SPECIFIC; PDE4D
;;DUNCE-LIKE PHOSPHODIESTERASE E3, FORMERLY; DPDE3, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cyclic nucleotides are important second messengers that regulate and
mediate a number of cellular responses to extracellular signals, such as
hormones, light, and neurotransmitters. Cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterases (PDEs) regulate the cellular concentrations of cyclic
nucleotides and thereby play a role in signal transduction. PDE4D is a
class IV cAMP-specific PDE. The PDE4D gene is complex, with at least 9
different variants encoding functional proteins (summary by Milatovich
et al. (1994) and Dominiczak and McBride (2003)).

CLONING

Using degenerate primers based on Drosophila Dnc and rat Dpd to amplify
human Dpd orthologs, followed by low-stringency hybridization of a brain
cDNA library, Bolger et al. (1993) cloned DPDE3, which they called
PDE43, and a partial splice variant, PDE39, that differs in its 5-prime
sequence. The deduced DPDE3 protein contains 657 amino acids and has 2
N-terminal domains that share a high degree of conservation with other
DPDE proteins, and a C-terminal catalytic domain. RNase protection
assays detected DPDE3 transcripts in 5 of 7 cell lines examined.

Using primers designed from rat Pde4d, Nemoz et al. (1996) cloned 2
alternatively spliced variants of PDE4D, which they designated PDE4D2
and PDE4D3, from peripheral blood mononuclear cell mRNA. These variants
differed from PDE4D1 primarily in the N-terminal region. In addition,
they found that variants PDE4D1 and PDE4D2, but not PDE4D3, lack an
upstream conserved region I (UCRI) found in the Drosophila 'dunce' PDE
sequence. Western blot analysis of endogenous PDE4D variants in
mononuclear cells and of PDE4D2 and PDE4D3 expressed by transfected
embryonic kidney cells revealed that PDE4D1, PDE4D2, and PDE4D3 have
apparent molecular masses of 72 kD, 67 kD, and 93 kD, respectively.

Bolger et al. (1997) cloned alternative splice variants PDE4D4 and
PDE4D5, which encode deduced proteins of 810 and 746 amino acids,
respectively. These differ from PDE4D1, PDE4D2, and PDE4D3 in the
N-terminal sequence. Transfection of PDE4D4 and PDE4D5 into COS-7 cells
resulted in the expression of proteins with apparent molecular masses of
119 kD and 105 kD, respectively.

Miro et al. (2000) identified 3 splice variants that were inactive due
to truncation of the C-terminal catalytic domains.

Using common sequences of rat and human PDE4D as probe, Wang et al.
(2003) identified PDE4D6 and PDE4D7 in a hippocampal cDNA library. Using
primers specific to each isoform, they cloned full-length PCE4D6 and
PDE4D7 by PCR of hippocampal cDNA. By searching an EST database for
5-prime alternatively spliced variants, followed by 5-prime RACE and
screening a skeletal muscle cDNA library, they cloned PDE4D8. The
protein structures of these variants conform to that of other PDE4D
isoforms, with a variable N-terminus containing UCR1 and UCR2, followed
by a C-terminal catalytic core. Sites for secondary modification include
several phosphorylation sites, a putative myristoylation site within
UCR2, and sites for N-linked glycosylation. PDE4D6 encodes a deduced
518-amino acid protein which lacks the N-terminal UCR1 and half of UCR2
and has a calculated molecular mass of about 59 kD; PDE4D7 encodes a
deduced 748-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of about
84.7 kD; and PDE4D8 encodes a deduced 687-amino acid protein. PDE4D7 and
PDE4D8 contain both UCR1 and UCR2, which places them in the class of
long PDE4D isoforms. Semiquantitative PCR detected PDE4D6 expressed only
in brain. PDE4D7 was expressed in several tissues, with stronger
expression in lung and kidney, and PDE4D8 was expressed at high levels
in heart and skeletal muscle, and more weakly in lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Bolger et al. (1993) confirmed that PDE43 showed cAMP PDE activity,
which was inhibited by several cyclin nucleotide PDE inhibitors.

Nemoz et al. (1996) demonstrated phosphodiesterase activity in embryonic
kidney cells following transfection of PDE4D2 and PDE4D3.

Bolger et al. (1997) found that COS cell-expressed and native PDE4D1 and
PDE4D2 were localized only in the cytosol, whereas PDE4D3, PDE4D4, and
PDE4D5 were expressed in both cytosolic and particulate fractions.
Rolipram, a specific PDE4 inhibitor, inhibited all PDE4D isoforms
tested, and showed a significantly lower IC50 for the cytosolic forms of
PDE4D than for the particulate forms. Bolger et al. (1997) concluded
that the N-terminal regions of the various isoforms determine both the
subcellular localization and the sensitivity to inhibitors.

Miro et al. (2000) demonstrated that TNFA (191160) upregulated the basal
expression of PDE4D in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVEC). Examination of the variants responsive to TNFA revealed that
PDE4D4, which was not detected in untreated cells, accumulated beginning
4 hours after treatment and increased at 24 hours. The expression of
PDE4D5, transiently induced after 4 hours, was inhibited and became
undetectable after 24 hours. The expression of PDE4D1, PDE4D2, and
PDE4D3 levels were unchanged.

Using a promoter/reporter assay, LeJeune et al. (2002) determined that
the promoter region for variant PDE4D5, which contains 2 putative cAMP
response elements (CREs), was activated in response to increased
cellular cAMP. Site-directed mutational analysis revealed that the CRE
at position -210 was the principal component underlying the cAMP
responsiveness. The authors further determined that cAMP induced PDE4D5
expression in primary cultured human airway smooth muscle cells, leading
to upregulated phosphodiesterase activity.

Wang et al. (2003) characterized PDE4D6 and PDE4D7 expressed in insect
cells, and showed that both enzymes have a high affinity for cAMP, and
both are inhibited by rolipram. The activity of PDE4D7, but not PDE4D6,
was elevated in response to protein kinase A (see 176911), presumably
through phosphorylation of a PKA site in UCR1.

Dodge-Kafka et al. (2005) identified a cAMP-responsive signaling complex
maintained by the muscle-specific A-kinase anchoring protein (AKAP6;
604691) that includes PKA (188830), PDE4D3, and EPAC1 (606057). These
intermolecular interactions facilitate the dissemination of distinct
cAMP signals through each effector protein. Anchored PKA stimulates
PDE4D3 to reduce local cAMP concentrations, whereas an AKAP6-associated
ERK5 (602521) kinase module suppresses PDE4D3. PDE4D3 also functions as
an adaptor protein that recruits EPAC1, an exchange factor for the small
GTPase RAP1 (179520), to enable cAMP-dependent attenuation of ERK5.
Pharmacologic and molecular manipulations of the AKAP6 complex show that
anchored ERK5 can induce cardiomyoctye hypertrophy. Thus, Dodge-Kafka et
al. (2005) concluded that 2 coupled cAMP-dependent feedback loops are
coordinated within the context of the AKAP6 complex, suggesting that
local control of cAMP signaling by AKAP proteins is more intricate than
previously appreciated.

McLachlan et al. (2007) found that all 9 PDE4D isoforms were expressed
in healthy adult human hippocampus and in hippocampus from a patient
with advanced Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300). However, the patient with
AD had very low levels of isoforms D3 (25% of controls) and D5 through
D9 (0.7 to 7.5%), whereas levels of the short isoform D1 were doubled
(262%). Levels of D2 and D4 were essentially unchanged compared to
normal.

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Peter et al. (2007) showed that stimulation
of CD4-positive T cells increased the expression of PDE4A (600126),
PDE4B (600127), and PDE4D in a specific and time-dependent manner.
Treatment with small interfering RNA revealed that the different PDE4
subtypes had nonredundant but complementary effects on T-cell cytokine
production, with PDE4D having a small but more significant effect than
the other PDE4 subtypes on proliferation and IL2 (147680), IL5 (147850),
and IFNG (147570) production.

GENE STRUCTURE

LeJeune et al. (2002) identified 17 exons of the PDE4D gene spanning
just under 1 Mb. They identified 4 putative intronic promoters upstream
from the start codons for each of the first 5 isoforms identified.
PDE4D1 and PDE4D2 share the same putative promoter which, in the rat
sequence, lacks a TATA box, but contains a cAMP-responsive region, a
number of GC-rich regions, and binding sites for SP1 (189906), AP1 (see
165160), and AP2 (107580). The promoter for the PDE4D5 variant contains
2 putative CREs and a number of CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-binding
sites (see CEBPA, 116897).

Wang et al. (2003) determined that the putative promoter regions of
PDE4D6, PDE4D7, and PDE4D8 contain multiple CREs within 2 kb upstream of
the starting methionine.

Gretarsdottir et al. (2003) determined that the PDE4D gene contains at
least 22 exons and spans about 1.5 Mb.

MAPPING

Milatovich et al. (1994) assigned the PDE4D gene to human chromosome 5
by Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrid lines and regionalized the
assignment to 5q12 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The
homologous locus was assigned to mouse chromosome 13 by Southern
analysis of recombinant inbred (RI) mouse strains.

Szpirer et al. (1995) mapped the PDE4D gene to human chromosome 5 and to
rat chromosome 2 using somatic cell hybrids segregating either human or
rat chromosomes, respectively.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Susceptibility to Ischemic Stroke

Gretarsdottir et al. (2002) mapped susceptibility to stroke to
chromosome 5q12; see STRK1 (606799). Gretarsdottir et al. (2003)
reported fine mapping of the locus and testing it for association with
stroke. They found the strongest association in the PDE4D gene,
especially for carotid and cardiogenic stroke, the forms of stroke
related to atherosclerosis (ischemic stroke). They observed a
substantial dysregulation of multiple PDE4D isoforms in affected
individuals. Notably, they found that haplotypes could be classified
into 3 distinct groups: wildtype, at-risk, and protective. The at-risk
haplotype had significantly lower expression of the PDE4D7 and PDE4D9
isoforms. They proposed that PDE4D is involved in the pathogenesis of
stroke, possibly through atherosclerosis, which is the primary
pathologic process underlying ischemic stroke.

Rosand et al. (2006) noted that 9 studies had been published as
follow-up to the report of Gretarsdottir et al. (2002): 5 had claimed
replication of the findings and 4 had not. A total of 11 SNPs in the
PDE4D gene had been investigated among different phenotypic groups of
stroke patients, such as small-vessel, large-vessel, cardioembolic, and
all ischemic. Using haplotype data to examine the correlation between
these various SNPs, Rosand et al. (2006) found that none of the SNPs was
significantly correlated to the at-risk haplotype identified by
Gretarsdottir et al. (2002). The authors concluded that the original
PDE4D association with stroke should be viewed with caution.

- Acrodysostosis 2

In 4 unrelated patients with acrodysostosis-2 (ACRDYS2; 614613), Michot
et al. (2012) identified 4 different de novo heterozygous missense
mutations in the PDE4D gene (600129.0001-600129.0004). The first 2
mutations were identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. Although all 4 missense mutations were predicted to be
pathogenic by PolyPhen and were absent from 200 controls, functional
studies were not performed. The patients ranged in age from 3 to 7
years. All had advanced bone age, facial dysostosis with nasal
hypoplasia and depressed nasal bridge, severe brachydactyly with short
metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges, and cone-shaped epiphyses. All
also had intellectual disability with speech and psychomotor
retardation. One had intrauterine growth retardation, but none had short
stature. None had evidence of hormone resistance, except 1 who had
increased parathyroid hormone (PTH). Two patients developed intracranial
hypertension due to sinus thrombosis. Michot et al. (2012) concluded
that the mutations resulted in decreased phosphodiesterase activity, a
dysregulation in cAMP levels, and alterations in the cAMP signaling
pathway, resulting in the growth and intellectual deficits in these
patients.

Independently and simultaneously, Lee et al. (2012) identified de novo
heterozygous missense mutations in the PDE4D gene
(600129.0005-600129.0007) in 3 unrelated patients with ACRDYS2. The
mutations were predicted to be pathogenic and were absent from almost
6,000 exomes, but no functional studies were performed. However, because
PDE4D is a dimer, the missense alleles may cause the phenotype via a
dominant-negative effect on the protein. All 3 patients had small hands
and midface hypoplasia, 2 had mild short stature, and 2 had lumbar
stenosis. One had normal psychomotor development, 1 had significantly
impaired development, and the third had mild developmental disability.
One had congenital hypothyroidism, 1 had cryptorchidism, and 1 had no
endocrine abnormalities.

In 3 sibs with ACRDYS2, Lynch et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous
mutation in the PDE4D gene (A243V; 600129.0008). Their father, who also
carried the mutation, was found to have subtle clinical abnormalities
consistent with the disorder. Four additional unrelated patients with a
similar phenotype were each found to carry a de novo heterozygous
missense mutation in the PDE4D gene. The data confirmed that PDE4D is a
major locus for acrodysostosis, as different mutations were identified
in all 5 probands in the series.

ANIMAL MODEL

PDE4D is the mammalian homolog of 'dunce' in Drosophila. Flies deficient
in this PDE display impairments of the central nervous system and
reproductive functions (Dudai et al., 1976). Although only 1 dunce PDE
has been described in the fly, 4 orthologous genes are present in mice,
rats, and humans: PDE4A, PDE4B, PDE4C (600128), and PDE4D. The encoded
proteins share considerable homology in their catalytic and regulatory
domains. To examine the role of a PDE in cAMP signaling in vivo, Jin et
al. (1999) inactivated the PDE4D gene in mice. This isozyme is involved
in feedback regulation of cAMP levels. Mice deficient in PDE4D exhibited
delayed growth as well as reduced viability and female fertility. The
decrease in fertility of the null female was caused by impaired
ovulation and diminished sensitivity of the granulosa cells to
gonadotropins. These pleiotropic phenotypes demonstrated that PDE4D
plays a critical role in cAMP signaling and that the activity of this
isoenzyme is required for the regulation of growth and fertility.

Muscarinic cholinergic signaling plays an essential role in the control
of normal airway functions and in the development of pulmonary disease
states, including asthma. Hansen et al. (2000) demonstrated that the
airways of mice deficient in the cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4D
were no longer responsive to cholinergic stimulation. Airway
hyperreactivity that followed exposure to antigen was also abolished in
PDE4D -/- mice, despite apparently normal lung inflammatory
infiltration. The loss of cholinergic responsiveness was specific to the
airway, not observed in the heart, and was associated with a loss of
signaling through muscarinic receptors with an inability to decrease
cAMP accumulation. These findings demonstrated that the PDE4D gene plays
an essential role in cAMP homeostasis and cholinergic stimulation of the
airway, and in the development of hyperreactivity. In view of the
therapeutic potentials of PDE4 inhibitors, the findings provided the
rationale for novel strategies that target a single PDE isoenzyme.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, PRO225THR

In a 7-year-old boy with acrodysostosis-2 (ACRDYS2; 614613), Michot et
al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 673C-A transversion in the
PDE4D gene, resulting in a pro225-to-thr (P225T) substitution in a
conserved residue. The mutation was identified by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing; it was not found in 200 controls. The
patient had intrauterine growth retardation, advanced bone age, facial
dysostosis with nasal hypoplasia and depressed nasal bridge, severe
brachydactyly with short metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges, and
cone-shaped epiphyses. Laboratory studies showed increased PTH, but no
other signs of hormone resistance. He had intellectual disability with
speech delay, as well as impairment of fine motor skills. He also
developed intracranial hypertension with sinus thrombosis.

.0002
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, PHE226SER

In a 4-year-old boy with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Michot et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 677T-C transition in the PDE4D gene,
resulting in a phe226-to-ser (F226S) substitution in a conserved
residue. The mutation was identified by exome sequencing and confirmed
by Sanger sequencing; it was not found in 200 controls. The patient had
advanced bone age, facial dysostosis with nasal hypoplasia and depressed
nasal bridge, severe brachydactyly with short metacarpals, metatarsals,
and phalanges, and cone-shaped epiphyses. He did not have signs of
hormone resistance. He had intellectual disability with speech delay, as
well as impairment of fine motor skills.

.0003
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, SER190ALA

In a 4-year-old boy with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Michot et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 568T-G transversion in the PDE4D gene,
resulting in a ser190-to-ala (S190A) substitution. He had advanced bone
age, facial dysostosis with nasal hypoplasia, depressed nasal bridge,
and prominent mandible, severe brachydactyly with short metacarpals,
metatarsals, and phalanges, and cone-shaped epiphyses. He did not have
signs of hormone resistance. He had intellectual disability with speech
and psychomotor retardation, as well as intracranial hypertension with
thrombophlebitis.

.0004
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, THR587PRO

In a 3-year-old boy with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Michot et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1759A-C transversion in the PDE4D
gene, resulting in a thr587-to-pro (T587P) substitution in a conserved
catalytic domain that confers the phosphodiesterase activity. The
patient had advanced bone age, facial dysostosis with nasal hypoplasia
and depressed nasal bridge, severe brachydactyly with short metacarpals,
metatarsals, and phalanges, and cone-shaped epiphyses. He did not have
signs of hormone resistance. He also had intellectual disability with
speech and psychomotor retardation.

.0005
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, GLN228GLU

In a girl with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Lee et al. (2012) identified a
de novo heterozygous 682C-G transversion in the PDE4D gene, resulting in
a gln228-to-glu (Q228E) substitution in a conserved residue in the
amino-terminal UCR1 domain present in the longer isoform. The mutation
was found by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The
patient had small hands and midface hypoplasia, but did not have short
stature or developmental delay. There were no endocrine abnormalities.

.0006
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, GLU590ALA

In a boy with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Lee et al. (2012) identified a
de novo heterozygous 1769A-C transition in the PDE4D gene, resulting in
a glu590-to-ala (E590A) substitution in a conserved residue in the
catalytic domain. The mutation was found by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The patient had previously been reported
by Graham et al. (2001) (case R1). He had intrauterine growth
retardation, mild short stature, small hands and feet, midface
hypoplasia, maxillonasal hypoplasia, and significantly delayed
development. Other features included lumbar stenosis and cryptorchidism,
but other endocrine abnormalities were not present.

.0007
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, GLY673ASP

In a boy with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Lee et al. (2012) identified a
de novo heterozygous 2018G-A transition in the PDE4D gene, resulting in
a gly673-to-asp (G673D) substitution in a conserved residue in the
catalytic domain. The mutation was found by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The patient had previously been reported
by Graham et al. (2001) (case 2). At age 4 years, he was referred for
developmental delay, speech delay, dysmorphic facial features, and
brachydactyly. He had acrodysostosis with brachydactyly, cone-shaped
epiphyses, and lumbar stenosis. He also had congenital hypothyroidism,
which resolved by age 3 years.

.0008
ACRODYSOSTOSIS 2
PDE4D, ALA243VAL

In 3 sibs with acrodysostosis-2 (614613), Lynch et al. (2013) identified
a heterozygous 728C-T transition in the PDE4D gene, resulting in an
ala243-to-val (A243V) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
upstream conserved region (UCR). The patients had typical features of
the disorder, including round face, nasal hypoplasia, flattened nasal
bridge, brachydactyly, speech delay, and intellectual deficits. Two also
developed obesity. None had endocrine abnormalities. The father, who was
found to carry the mutation, was observed retrospectively to have subtle
features of the disorder, including learning disabilities, shortened
metacarpals, and variable brachydactyly.

REFERENCE 1. Bolger, G.; Michaeli, T.; Martins, T.; St. John, T.; Steiner, B.;
Rodgers, L.; Riggs, M.; Wigler, M.; Ferguson, K.: A family of human
phosphodiesterases homologous to the dunce learning and memory gene
product of Drosophila melanogaster are potential targets for antidepressant
drugs. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 6558-6571, 1993.

2. Bolger, G. B.; Erdogan, S.; Jones, R. E.; Loughney, K.; Scotland,
G.; Hoffmann, R.; Wilkinson, I.; Farrell, C.; Houslay, M. D.: Characterization
of five different proteins produced by alternatively spliced mRNAs
from the human cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4D gene. Biochem.
J. 328: 539-548, 1997.

3. Dodge-Kafka, K. L.; Soughayer, J.; Pare, G. C.; Michel, J. J. C.;
Langeberg, L. K.; Kapiloff, M. S.; Scott, J. D.: The protein kinase
A anchoring protein mAKAP coordinates two integrated cAMP effector
pathways. Nature 437: 574-578, 2005.

4. Dominiczak, A. F.; McBride, M. W.: Genetics of common polygenic
stroke. Nature Genet. 35: 116-117, 2003.

5. Dudai, Y.; Jan, Y.-N.; Byers, D.; Quinn, W. G.; Benzer, S.: dunce,
a mutant of Drosophila deficient in learning. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 73:
1684-1688, 1976.

6. Graham, J. M., Jr.; Krakow, D.; Tolo, V. T.; Smith, A. K.; Lachman,
R. S.: Radiographic findings and Gs-alpha bioactivity studies and
mutation screening in acrodysostosis indicate a different etiology
from pseudohypoparathyroidism. Pediat. Radiol. 31: 2-9, 2001.

7. Gretarsdottir, S.; Sveinbjornsdottir, S.; Jonsson, H. H.; Jakobsson,
F.; Einarsdottir, E.; Agnarsson, U.; Shkolny, D.; Einarsson, G.; Gudjonsdottir,
H. M.; Valdimarsson, E. M.; Einarsson, O. B.; Thorgeirsson, G.; and
16 others: Localization of a susceptibility gene for common forms
of stroke to 5q12. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 593-603, 2002.

8. Gretarsdottir, S.; Thorleifsson, G.; Reynisdottir, S. T.; Manolescu,
A.; Jonsdottir, S.; Jonsdottir, T.; Gudmundsdottir, T.; Bjarnadottir,
S. M.; Einarsson, O. B.; Gudjonsdottir, H. M.; Hawkins, M.; Gudmundsson,
G.; and 20 others: The gene encoding phosphodiesterase 4D confers
risk of ischemic stroke. Nature Genet. 35: 131-138, 2003. Note:
Erratum: Nature Genet. 37: 555 only, 2005.

9. Hansen, G.; Jin, S.-L. C.; Umetsu, D. T.; Conti, M.: Absence of
muscarinic cholinergic airway responses in mice deficient in the cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase PDE4D. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6751-6756,
2000.

10. Jin, S.-L. C.; Richard, F. J.; Kuo, W.-P.; D'Ercole, A. J.; Conti,
M.: Impaired growth and fertility of cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase
PDE4D-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11998-12003, 1999.

11. Lee, H.; Graham, J. M., Jr.; Rimoin, D. L.; Lachman, R. S.; Krejci,
P.; Tompson, S. W.; Nelson, S. F.; Krakow, D.; Cohn, D. H.: Exome
sequencing identifies PDE4D mutations in acrodysostosis. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 90: 746-751, 2012.

12. Le Jeune, I. R.; Shepherd, M.; Van Heeke, G.; Houslay, M. D.;
Hall, I. P.: Cyclic AMP-dependent transcriptional up-regulation of
phosphodiesterase 4D5 in human airway smooth muscle cells: identification
and characterization of a novel PDE4D5 promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
35980-35989, 2002.

13. Lynch, D. C.; Dyment, D. A.; Huang, L.; Nikkel, S. M.; Lacombe,
D.; Campeau, P. M.; Lee, B.; Bacino, C. A.; Michaud, J. L.; Bernier,
F. P.; FORGE Canada Consortium; Parboosingh, J. S.; Innes, A. M.
: Identification of novel mutations confirms Pde4d as a major gene
causing acrodysostosis. Hum. Mutat. 34: 97-102, 2013. Note: Erratum:
Hum. Mutat. 34: 667 only, 2013.

14. McLachlan, C. S.; Chen, M. L.; Lynex, C. N.; Goh, D. L. M.; Brenner,
S.; Tay, S. K. H.: Changes in PDE4D isoforms in the hippocampus of
a patient with advanced Alzheimer disease. (Letter) Arch. Neurol. 64:
456-457, 2007.

15. Michot, C.; Le Goff, C.; Goldenberg, A.; Abhyankar, A.; Klein,
C.; Kinning, E.; Guerrot, A.-M.; Flahaut, P.; Duncombe, A.; Baujat,
G.; Lyonnet, S.; Thalassinos, C.; Nitschke, P.; Casanova, J.-L.; Le
Merrer, M.; Munnich, A.; Cormier-Daire, V.: Exome sequencing identifies
PDE4D mutations as another cause of acrodysostosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90:
740-745, 2012.

16. Milatovich, A.; Bolger, G.; Michaeli, T.; Francke, U.: Chromosome
localizations of genes for five cAMP-specific phosphodiesterases in
man and mouse. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 20: 75-86, 1994.

17. Miro, X.; Casacuberta, J. M.; Gutierrez-Lopez, M. D.; de Landazuri,
M. O.; Puigdomenech, P.: Phosphodiesterases 4D and 7A splice variants
in the response of HUVEC cells to TNF-alpha. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 274: 415-421, 2000.

18. Nemoz, G.; Zhang, R.; Sette, C.; Conti, M.: Identification of
cyclic AMP-phosphodiesterase variants from the PDE4D gene expressed
in human peripheral mononuclear cells. FEBS Lett. 384: 97-102, 1996.

19. Peter, D.; Jin, S. L. C.; Conti, M.; Hatzelmann, A.; Zitt, C.
: Differential expression and function of phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4)
subtypes in human primary CD4+ T cells: predominant role of PDE4D. J.
Immun. 178: 4820-4831, 2007.

20. Rosand, J.; Bayley, N.; Rost, N.; de Bakker, P. I. W.: Many hypotheses
but no replication for the association between PDE4D and stroke. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 38: 1091-1092, 2006.

21. Szpirer, C.; Szpirer, J.; Riviere, M.; Swinnen, J.; Vicini, E.;
Conti, M.: Chromosomal localization of the human and rat genes (PDE4D
and PDE4B) encoding the cAMP-specific phosphodiesterases 3 and 4. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 69: 11-14, 1995.

22. Wang, D.; Deng, C.; Bugaj-Gaweda, B.; Kwan, M.; Gunwaldsen, C.;
Leonard, C.; Xin, X.; Hu, Y.; Unterbeck, A.; De Vivo, M.: Cloning
and characterization of novel PDE4D isoforms PDE4D6 and PDE4D7. Cell.
Signal. 15: 883-891, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/3/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/1/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/15/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/26/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/9/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/6/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/23/1994

EDITED carol: 04/18/2013
carol: 2/20/2013
ckniffin: 2/19/2013
joanna: 5/4/2012
carol: 5/4/2012
ckniffin: 5/1/2012
mgross: 2/16/2010
terry: 2/3/2010
mgross: 12/4/2009
mgross: 10/22/2008
wwang: 10/3/2007
ckniffin: 10/1/2007
wwang: 2/20/2007
ckniffin: 2/20/2007
wwang: 2/20/2007
ckniffin: 2/15/2007
terry: 10/26/2006
alopez: 11/7/2005
terry: 11/3/2005
carol: 6/13/2005
alopez: 5/10/2005
alopez: 10/8/2003
alopez: 10/7/2003
terry: 10/1/2003
mcapotos: 8/28/2000
mcapotos: 8/11/2000
terry: 8/7/2000
carol: 12/9/1999
terry: 12/1/1999
alopez: 11/15/1999
terry: 11/9/1999
carol: 11/16/1998
terry: 11/6/1998
jamie: 6/3/1997
mark: 4/3/1995
carol: 9/23/1994

607796	TITLE *607796 PHD FINGER PROTEIN 11; PHF11
;;NY-REN-34
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using autologous antibody, Scanlan et al. (1999) cloned PHF11, which
they designated NY-REN-34, from a clear-cell renal carcinoma cDNA
library. The deduced 191-amino acid protein contains a zinc finger
motif. RT-PCR detected expression in all normal tissues tested,
including lung, testis, small intestine, breast, liver, and placenta.

Using a positional cloning approach, Zhang et al. (2003) cloned PHF11
from a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels and asthma (147050). PCR analysis detected
several splice variants, 1 of which was expressed in all tissues
examined. A variant utilizing an alternative exon 1 was expressed in
immune-related tissues and cells. Variants utilizing 2 alternative exons
following exon 5, both of which contain premature stop codons, were
detected only in lung and unactivated peripheral blood leukocytes, but
not in activated cells.

- PHF11/SETDB2 Fusion Transcripts

Using primers designed from exons utilized by SETDB2 (607865) and PHF11,
Zhang et al. (2003) amplified PCR products that spanned both and
represented 3 alternatively spliced fusion transcripts. Expression of
each transcript was tissue specific and was detected in nearly all
tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2003) determined that the PHF11 gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Scanlan et al. (1999) mapped the PHF11
gene to chromosome 13. Zhang et al. (2003) mapped the PHF11 gene to
chromosome 13q14. The SETDB2 gene is 4 kb proximal to the PHF11 gene and
is transcribed in the same direction.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Atopic or IgE-mediated diseases include the common disorders of asthma
(600807), atopic dermatitis (603165), and allergic rhinitis (607154).
Chromosome 13q14 shows consistent linkage to atopy and total serum IgE
concentration. Anderson et al. (2002) identified association between
total serum IgE levels and a novel 13q14 microsatellite (USAT24G1).
Zhang et al. (2003) localized the underlying quantitative trait locus
(QTL) in a comprehensive single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) map. They
found replicated association to IgE levels that was attributed to
several alleles in PHF11. They also found association with these
variants to severe clinical asthma.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, G. G.; Leaves, N. I.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Zhang, Y.; Walshe,
V.; Broxholme, J.; Abecasis, G.; Levy, E.; Zimmer, M.; Cox, R.; Cookson,
W. O. C. M.: Positive association to IgE levels and a physical map
of the 13q14 atopy locus. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10: 266-270, 2002.

2. Scanlan, M. J.; Gordan, J. D.; Williamson, B.; Stockert, E.; Bander,
N. H.; Jongeneel, V.; Gure, A. O.; Jager, D.; Jager, E.; Knuth, A.;
Chen, Y.-T.; Old, L. J.: Antigens recognized by autologous antibody
in patients with renal-cell carcinoma. Int. J. Cancer 83: 456-464,
1999.

3. Zhang, Y.; Leaves, N. I.; Anderson, G. G.; Ponting, C. P.; Broxholme,
J.; Holt, R.; Edser, P.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Dunham, A.; Adcock, I.
M.; Pulleyn, L.; Barnes, P. J.; and 11 others: Positional cloning
of a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma. Nature Genet. 34: 181-186, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/16/2003

EDITED carol: 06/26/2003
mgross: 6/9/2003
alopez: 6/3/2003
alopez: 5/19/2003
tkritzer: 5/19/2003
mgross: 5/16/2003

118503	TITLE *118503 CHOLINERGIC RECEPTOR, NEURONAL NICOTINIC, ALPHA POLYPEPTIDE 3; CHRNA3
;;ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR, NEURONAL NICOTINIC, ALPHA-3 SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are members of a
superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels that mediate fast signal
transmission at synapses. The nAChRs are thought to be (hetero)pentamers
composed of homologous subunits. See 118508 for additional background
information on nAChRs.

Fornasari et al. (1990) cloned the human alpha-3 subunit (CHRNA3) by
using a rat alpha-3 probe to screen a human neuroblastoma cDNA library.
The predicted 502-amino acid protein has a putative 28-amino acid signal
peptide. The mature protein is 93% identical to rat alpha-3 protein. On
Northern blots, alpha-3 was expressed predominantly as a 3.5-kb mRNA in
neuron-like cell lines, with an additional 2.0-kb mRNA seen in 1
ganglion-like cell line.

To examine the role of thymic AChRs in the anti-AChR response seen in
myasthenia gravis (254200), Mihovilovic and Roses (1991) independently
isolated the human alpha-3 subunit from a thymus cDNA library. The open
reading frame coded for a 503-amino acid protein with a 29-amino acid
putative signal peptide. On Northern blots, alpha-3 was transcribed as a
major 3.0-kb mRNA with other minor bands in thymus but not in muscle or
liver. Groot Kormelink and Luyten (1997) reported that alpha-3 was
transcribed as a 3.0-kb mRNA on Northern blots of a neuroblastoma cell
line.

Elliott et al. (1996) also cloned the human alpha-3 gene and
demonstrated that it encodes a functional receptor when expressed in
combination with human beta-2 (118507) or beta-4 (CHRNB4; 118509) in
Xenopus oocytes. Both Elliott et al. (1996) and Groot Kormelink and
Luyten (1997) noted differences with the sequence reported by Fornasari
et al. (1990).

GENE FUNCTION

Flora et al. (2000) found that CHRNA3 is partially coexpressed with
CHRNA5 (118505) in human tissues.

Transmitter-gated cation channels are detectors of excitatory chemical
signals at synapses in the nervous system. Khakh et al. (2000) showed
that structurally distinct alpha-3-beta-4 nicotinic and P2X(2) (600844)
channels influence each other when coactivated. The activation of one
channel type affects distinct kinetic and conductance states of the
other, and coactivation results in nonadditive responses owing to
inhibition of both channel types. State-dependent inhibition of
nicotinic channels was revealed most clearly with mutant P2X(2)
channels, and inhibition was decreased at lower densities of channel
expression. In synaptically coupled myenteric neurons, nicotinic fast
excitatory postsynaptic currents were occluded during activation of
endogenously coexpressed P2X channels. Khakh et al. (2000) concluded
that their data provide a molecular basis and a synaptic context for
cross-inhibition between transmitter-gated channels.

By using a combination of pharmacologic, molecular genetic,
electrophysiologic, and feeding studies, Mineur et al. (2011) found that
activation of hypothalamic alpha-3-beta-4 (118509) nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors leads to activation of proopiomelanocortin
(POMC; 176830) neurons. POMC neurons and subsequent activation of
melanocortin-4 receptors (MC4R; 155541) were critical for
nicotinic-induced decreases in food intake in mice. The study of Mineur
et al. (2011) demonstrated that nicotine decreases food intake and body
weight by influencing the hypothalamic melanocortin system and
identified critical molecular and synaptic mechanisms involved in
nicotine-induced decreases in appetite.

GENE STRUCTURE

Prompted by the finding that mutations in the CHRNA4 gene (118504) are
responsible for some cases of autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy (600513), Rempel et al. (1998) determined the genomic structure
of the CHRNA3 gene necessary for mutational analysis of this gene as a
candidate in families with epilepsy unlinked to CHRNA4.

MAPPING

Boulter et al. (1990) found that 3 genes encoding subunits of the
neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, alpha-3, alpha-5, and beta-4,
are clustered within a 68-kb segment of the rat genome. By somatic cell
hybrid analysis, Eng et al. (1991) mapped 3 cDNAs corresponding to these
genes to human chromosome 15 and to mouse chromosome 9. Linkage analysis
using CEPH pedigrees showed that the CHRNA5 gene (118505) is closely
linked to 5 DNA markers on chromosome 15. Using interspecies crosses in
mice, they found that the Acra5 gene is closely linked to the Mpi1 locus
(154550). Thus, the human gene is probably in the region 15q22-qter,
where the human MPI gene is located. Raimondi et al. (1992) mapped the
CHRNA3, CHRNA5, and CHRNB4 (118509) genes to 15q24 by in situ
hybridization. Furthermore, by Southern blot analysis of 2 genomic
clones, Raimondi et al. (1992) demonstrated that the 3 genes are
physically linked. Anand and Lindstrom (1992) confirmed the assignment
to human chromosome 15 by genomic Southern analysis of human/hamster
somatic cell hybrid DNAs. They similarly confirmed the assignment of
CHRNA5 and CHRNB4 to chromosome 15. Their Table 4 provided a
comprehensive listing of the chromosomal location of mouse and human
acetylcholinesterase receptor subunit genes.

Duga et al. (2001) showed that CHRNA3 and CHRNA5, which are encoded on
opposite DNA strands, share a 466-bp overlap region at their 3-prime
ends. This tail-to-tail overlap produces, at the mRNA level, a 100-bp
region of complementarity between CHRNA5 and CHRNA3 mature transcripts.
Several pairs of genes are arranged in a similar (tail-to-tail)
overlapping manner.

Amos et al. (2008) placed the CHRNA3, CHRNA5, CHRNB4, and PSMA4 (176846)
genes within a 100-kb region on chromosome 15q25.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In separate large genomewide association studies to find variants
associated with risk of lung cancer (see SQTL3; 612052), Hung et al.
(2008) and Thorgeirsson et al. (2008) identified strong association with
variation in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene cluster on
chromosome 15q24. These studies identified 2 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in strong linkage disequilibrium, one in the CHRNA3
gene (118503.0001) and the other in the CHRNA5 gene (118505.0001), as
representing the strongest associations.

In a multistage genomewide association study to identify risk variants
for nonsmall cell lung cancer, Amos et al. (2008) found that the SNP
dbSNP rs1051730 (118503.0001) was significantly associated with risk.

ANIMAL MODEL

The alpha-3 subunit of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is
widely expressed in autonomic ganglia and in some parts of the brain.
The alpha-3 subunit can form heteromultimeric ion channels with other
alpha subunits and with beta-2 and beta-4 subunits. To understand better
the function of CHRNA3 in vivo, Xu et al. (1999) prepared a null
mutation for the alpha-3 gene by the deletion of exon 5 and found that
homozygous -/- mice lacked detectable mRNA on Northern blotting. The
null mice survived to birth but had impaired growth and increased
mortality before and after weaning. The null mice had extreme bladder
enlargement, dribbling urination, bladder infection, urinary stones, and
widely dilated ocular pupils that did not contract in response to light.
Detailed histologic studies of null mice showed no significant
abnormalities in brain or peripheral tissues except urinary bladder,
where inflammation was prominent. Ganglion cells and axons were present
in bladder and bowel. Bladder strips from null mice failed to contract
in response to 0.1 mM nicotine, but did contract in response to
electrical field stimulation or carbamoylcholine. The number of
acetylcholine-activated single-channel currents was severely reduced in
the neurons of superior cervical ganglia in null mice with 5
physiologically distinguishable nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
subtypes with different conductance and kinetic properties in wildtype
mice, all of which were reduced in null mice. The findings in the
alpha-3-null mice suggested that this subunit is an essential component
of the nicotinic receptors mediating normal function of the autonomic
nervous system. Xu et al. (1999) suggested that the phenotype in null
mice may be similar to that of the rare megacystis-microcolon-intestinal
hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIH; 249210).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LUNG CANCER SUSCEPTIBILITY 2
NICOTINE DEPENDENCE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
CHRNA3, 831C-T

In a large genomewide association study, Thorgeirsson et al. (2008)
identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the CHRNA3 gene,
dbSNP rs1051730, that was highly associated with smoking quantity (see
188890) and with risk of lung cancer (LNCR2; 612052) and peripheral
arterial occlusive disease. The SNP dbSNP rs1051730 represents a
synonymous C/T transition in exon 5. Thorgeirsson et al. (2008)
concluded that their study demonstrated that a sequence variant
associated with nicotine dependence, a brain disorder, confers risk of
lung and cardiovascular diseases through an effect on behavior, which is
an example of active gene-environment correlation in the pathogenesis of
disease. The SNP dbSNP rs1051730 is in strong linkage disequilibrium
with a SNP in the CHRNA5 gene (118505.0001) (Hung et al., 2008;
Thorgeirsson et al., 2008).

To identify risk variants for nonsmall cell lung cancer, Amos et al.
(2008) conducted a multistage genomewide association study. In the
discovery phase, the authors analyzed 315,450 tagging SNPS in 1,154
current and former (ever) smoking cases of European ancestry with
nonsmall cell lung cancer versus 1,137 frequency-matched, ever-smoking
controls from Houston, Texas. For replication, Amos et al. (2008)
evaluated 10 SNPs most significantly associated with lung cancer in an
additional 711 cases and 632 controls from Texas and 2,013 cases and
3,062 controls from the UK. The authors found that the SNP dbSNP
rs1051730 was significantly associated with risk (combined P = 7.00 x
10(-18)).

REFERENCE 1. Amos, C. I.; Wu, X.; Broderick, P.; Gorlov, I. P.; Gu, J.; Eisen,
T.; Dong, Q.; Zhang, Q.; Gu, X.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; Sullivan, K.;
Matakidou, A.; Wang, Y.; Mills, G.; Doheny, K.; Tsai, Y.-Y.; Chen,
W. V.; Shete, S.; Spitz, M. R.; Houlston, R. S.: Genome-wide association
scan of tag SNPs identifies a susceptibility locus for lung cancer
at 15q25.1. Nature Genet. 40: 616-622, 2008.

2. Anand, R.; Lindstrom, J.: Chromosomal localization of seven neuronal
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit genes in humans. Genomics 13:
962-967, 1992.

3. Boulter, J.; O'Shea-Greenfield, A.; Duvoisin, R. M.; Connolly,
J. G.; Wada, E.; Jensen, A.; Gardner, P. D.; Ballivet, M.; Deneris,
E. S.; McKinnon, D.; Heinemann, S.; Patrick, J.: Alpha3, alpha5 and
beta4: three members of the rat neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-related
gene family form a gene cluster. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 4472-4482,
1990.

4. Duga, S.; Solda, G.; Asselta, R.; Bonati, M. T.; Dalpra, L.; Malcovati,
M.; Tenchini, M. L.: Characterization of the genomic structure of
the human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor CHRNA5/A3/B4 gene
cluster and identification of novel intragenic polymorphisms. J.
Hum. Genet. 46: 640-648, 2001.

5. Elliott, K. J.; Ellis, S. B.; Berckhan, K. J.; Urrutia, A.; Chavez-Noriega,
L. E.; Johnson, E. C.; Velicelebi, G.; Harpold, M. M.: Comparative
structure of human neuronal alpha(2)-alpha(7) and beta(2)-beta(4)
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits and functional expression
of the alpha(2), alpha(3), alpha(4), alpha(7), beta(2), and beta(4)
subunits. J. Molec. Neurosci. 7: 217-228, 1996.

6. Eng, C. M.; Kozak, C. A.; Beaudet, A. L.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: Mapping
of multiple subunits of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
to chromosome 15 in man and chromosome 9 in mouse. Genomics 9: 278-282,
1991.

7. Flora, A.; Schulz, R.; Benfante, R.; Battaglioli, E.; Terzano,
S.; Clementi, F.; Fornasari, D.: Transcriptional regulation of the
human alpha5 nicotinic receptor subunit gene in neuronal and non-neuronal
tissues. Europ. J. Pharm. 393: 85-95, 2000.

8. Fornasari, D.; Chini, B.; Tarroni, P.; Clementi, F.: Molecular
cloning of human neuronal nicotinic receptor alpha(3)-subunit. Neurosci.
Lett. 111: 351-356, 1990.

9. Groot Kormelink, P. J.; Luyten, W. H. M. L.: Cloning and sequence
of full-length cDNAs encoding the human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (nAChR) subunits beta-3 and beta-4 and expression of seven
nAChR subunits in the human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y and/or
IMR-32. FEBS Lett. 400: 309-314, 1997.

10. Hung, R. J.; McKay, J. D.; Gaborieau, V.; Boffetta, P.; Hashibe,
M.; Zaridze, D.; Mukeria, A.; Szeszenia-Dabrowska, N.; Lissowska,
J.; Rudnai, P.; Fabianova, E.; Mates, D.; and 53 others: A susceptibility
locus for lung cancer maps to nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit
genes on 15q25. Nature 452: 633-637, 2008.

11. Khakh, B. S.; Zhou, X.; Sydes, J.; Galligan, J. J.; Lester, H.
A.: State-dependent cross-inhibition between transmitter-gated cation
channels. Nature 406: 405-410, 2000.

12. Mihovilovic, M.; Roses, A. D.: Expression of mRNAs in human thymus
coding for the alpha-3 subunit of a neuronal acetylcholine receptor. Exp.
Neurol. 111: 175-180, 1991.

13. Mineur, Y. S.; Abizaid, A.; Rao, Y.; Salas, R.; DiLeone, R. J.;
Gundisch, D.; Diano, S.; De Biasi, M.; Horvath, T. L.; Gao, X.-B.;
Picciotto, M. R.: Nicotine decreases food intake through activation
of POMC neurons. Science 332: 1330-1332, 2011.

14. Raimondi, E.; Rubboli, F.; Moralli, D.; Chini, B.; Fornasari,
D.; Tarroni, P.; De Carli, L.; Clementi, F.: Chromosomal localization
and physical linkage of the genes encoding the human alpha-3, alpha-5,
and beta-4 neuronal nicotinic receptor subunits. Genomics 12: 849-850,
1992.

15. Rempel, N.; Heyers, S.; Engels, H.; Sleegers, E.; Steinlein, O.
K.: The structures of the human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor beta-2- and alpha-3-subunit genes (CHRNB2 and CHRNA3). Hum.
Genet. 103: 645-653, 1998.

16. Thorgeirsson, T. E.; Geller, F.; Sulem, P.; Rafnar, T.; Wiste,
A.; Magnusson, K. P.; Manolescu, A.; Thorleifsson, G.; Stefansson,
H.; Ingason, A.; Stacey, S. N.; Bergthorsson, J. T.; and 45 others
: A variant associated with nicotine dependence, lung cancer and peripheral
arterial disease. Nature 452: 638-641, 2008.

17. Xu, W.; Gelber, S.; Orr-Urtreger, A.; Armstrong, D.; Lewis, R.
A.; Ou, C.-N.; Patrick, J.; Role, L.; De Biasi, M.; Beaudet, A. L.
: Megacystis, mydriasis, and ion channel defect in mice lacking the
alpha-3 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 96: 5746-5751, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/21/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/27/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/29/1991

EDITED ckniffin: 04/23/2012
alopez: 8/8/2011
terry: 7/26/2011
wwang: 8/12/2010
terry: 8/6/2010
alopez: 8/19/2008
terry: 7/29/2008
alopez: 5/16/2008
terry: 4/16/2008
carol: 1/10/2002
mcapotos: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/7/2002
alopez: 8/14/2000
carol: 4/27/2000
carol: 6/8/1999
jlewis: 6/8/1999
terry: 6/2/1999
carol: 2/1/1999
terry: 1/21/1999
dkim: 12/11/1998
alopez: 4/27/1998
carol: 8/14/1992
carol: 4/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/27/1992
carol: 2/21/1991
carol: 1/29/1991

608549	TITLE *608549 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 11, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; VPS11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In yeast, Vps proteins are involved in the trafficking of endocytic and
biosynthetic proteins to the vacuole, which functionally resembles the
lysosome of higher organisms. Mutations in class C Vps proteins, which
includes Vps11, result in the most severe vacuolar protein sorting and
morphology defects (Huizing et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to yeast and
Drosophila Vps11, followed by 3-prime and 5-prime RACE, Huizing et al.
(2001) cloned VPS11. The deduced 941-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 107.8 kD. VPS11 contains a clathrin repeat domain and
a RING-H2 finger domain, and it is likely a cytosolic protein. VPS11
shares 24% amino acid identity with yeast Vps11. ESTs sharing
significant identity were also identified in rat, bovine, chicken, and
frog databases. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.3-kb VPS11 mRNA in
all tissues examined, with highest expression in heart and pancreas and
lowest expression in lung. A weaker band of about 6.0 kb was also
detected in most tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

- Role of VPS11 in Ebola Virus Infection

Infections by the Ebola and Marburg filoviruses cause a rapidly fatal
hemorrhagic fever in humans for which no approved antivirals are
available. Filovirus entry is mediated by the viral spike glycoprotein
(GP), which attaches viral particles to the cell surface, delivers them
to endosomes, and catalyzes fusion between viral and endosomal
membranes. Additional host factors in the endosomal compartment are
likely required for viral membrane fusion. Using a replication-competent
vesicular stomatitis virus bearing Ebola virus GP (rVSV-GP-EboV) for a
genomewide haploid genetic screen in human cells, followed by selection
of rVSV-GP-EboV-resistant cells, Carette et al. (2011) confirmed a role
for cathepsin B (CTSB; 116810) and identified roles for NPC1 (607623)
and all 6 subunits of the HOPS complex, VPS11, VPS16 (608550), VPS18
(608551), VPS33A (610034), VPS39 (612188), and VPS41 (605485), in Ebola
virus entry. Subcloned cells lacking VPS11, VPS33A, or NPC1 displayed
marked resistance to rVSV-GP-EboV or Marburg virus-GP, and
susceptibility could be restored by expression of the corresponding
cDNAs. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that cells lacking
NPC1, VPS11, or VPS33A had an altered distribution of virus within
cells. Carette et al. (2011) concluded that most of the genes involved
in filovirus entry are involved in lysosome function, indicating that
filoviruses exploit this organelle differently than other viruses.

MAPPING

Huizing et al. (2001) stated that the VPS11 gene maps to chromosome
11q23.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cote et al. (2011)
REFERENCE 1. Carette, J. E.; Raaben, M.; Wong, A. C.; Herbert, A. S.; Obernosterer,
G.; Mulherkar, N.; Kuehne, A. I.; Kranzusch, P. J.; Griffin, A. M.;
Ruthel, G.; Cin, P. D.; Dye, J. M.; Whelan, S. P.; Chandran, K.; Brummelkamp,
T. R.: Ebola virus entry requires the cholesterol transporter Niemann-Pick
C1. Nature 477: 340-343, 2011.

2. Cote, M.; Misasi, J.; Ren, T.; Bruchez, A.; Lee, K.; Filone, C.
M.; Hensley, L.; Li, Q.; Ory, D.; Chandran, K.; Cunningham, J.: Small
molecule inhibitors reveal Niemann-Pick C1 is essential for Ebola
virus infection. Nature 477: 344-348, 2011.

3. Huizing, M.; Didier, A.; Walenta, J.; Anikster, Y.; Gahl, W. A.;
Kramer, H.: Molecular cloning and characterization of human VPS18,
VPS11, VPS16, and VPS33. Gene 264: 241-247, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/7/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/25/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/10/2011
terry: 10/7/2011
mgross: 3/25/2004

610480	TITLE *610480 LEM DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; LEMD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By microarray analysis to identify genes upregulated in colorectal
carcinomas, followed by database analysis, Yuki et al. (2004) identified
LEMD1. Northern blot analysis detected a 0.7-kb LEMD1 transcript
expressed in testis only. RT-PCR revealed 6 alternatively spliced LEMD1
transcripts in testis. The longest deduced protein, LEMD1A, contains 181
amino acids and has an N-terminal LEM domain. Of the 6 LEMD1 variants,
LEMD1B, which encodes a deduced 29-amino acid protein lacking the LEM
domain, showed highest expression in testis. LEMD1F, which encodes a
67-amino acid protein containing the N-terminal LEM domain, was detected
in 17 of 18 colon cancer tissues examined. Epitope-tagged LEMD1F was
expressed in transfected COS-7 cells at the nuclear membrane and
colocalized with transfected BAF (BANF1; 603811).

GENE STRUCTURE

Yuki et al. (2004) determined that the LEMD1 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LEMD1
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP RH92566).

REFERENCE 1. Yuki, D.; Lin, Y.-M.; Fujii, Y.; Nakamura, Y.; Furukawa, Y.: Isolation
of LEM domain-containing 1, a novel testis-specific gene expressed
in colorectal cancers. Oncol. Reports 12: 275-280, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/11/2006

EDITED mgross: 10/11/2006

