600418	TITLE *600418 AMPHIPHYSIN; AMPH
;;AMPHIPHYSIN I
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lichte et al. (1992) isolated a novel synaptic vesicle-associated
protein, amphiphysin, by screening a chicken brain lambda-gt11 library
with antibodies raised against chicken brain synaptic proteins. An
acidic protein present also in mammalian nervous tissue, amphiphysin,
was shown by immunocytochemistry to be concentrated in nerve terminals.
See also amphiphysin-like (AMPHL; 601248).

GENE FUNCTION

David et al. (1994) found that the N- and C-terminal domains of the
amphiphysin protein are highly conserved between chicken and human.
Autoantibodies from patients with the stiff-man syndrome show a dominant
autoepitope located in the C-terminal region, which contains an SH3
domain.

Yamamoto et al. (1995) noted that the tissue distribution of AMPH and
its association with neurotransmitter vesicles make the gene a candidate
for involvement in such diverse heritable disorders as those of the
nervous system, certain endocrine tissues (such as the adrenal medulla,
pituitary gland or endocrine pancreas), or male fertility.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Pathogenic Role of Anti-Amphiphysin Antibodies

Stiff-man syndrome (184850) is a rare disease of the central nervous
system characterized by progressive rigidity of the body musculature
with superimposed painful spasms. An autoimmune origin of the disease
has been proposed. Approximately 60% of patients are positive for
autoantibodies directed against the GABA-synthesizing enzyme glutamic
acid decarboxylase (GAD; 605363). A few patients, all women affected by
breast cancer, were found to be negative for GAD autoantibodies but
positive for autoantibodies directed against a 128-kD synaptic protein.
De Camilli et al. (1993) found that this antigen is amphiphysin. Both
GAD and amphiphysin are nonintrinsic membrane proteins that are
concentrated in nerve terminals, where a pool of the 2 proteins is
associated with the cytoplasmic surface of synaptic vesicles.

Wessig et al. (2003) reported a 71-year-old woman with invasive ductal
carcinoma and a paraneoplastic stiff-person syndrome characterized by
stiffness in the right arm, stiff and unsteady gait, and increased
sweating. Anti-amphiphysin antibodies were detected in the patient's
serum and CSF, and the patient temporarily responded to plasmapheresis.
Postmortem studies detected antibodies in the central nervous system
parenchyma, suggesting a pathogenic role.

- Crystal Structure

Peter et al. (2004) solved the structure of the Drosophila amphiphysin
BAR domain. It is a crescent-shaped dimer that binds preferentially to
highly curved negatively charged membranes. With its amino-terminal
amphipathic helix and BAR domain, amphiphysin can drive membrane
curvature in vitro and in vivo. The structure is similar to that of
arfaptin-2 (601638), which Peter et al. (2004) found also binds and
tubulates membranes. From this, Peter et al. (2004) predicted that BAR
domains are in many protein families, including sorting nexins,
centaurins, and oligophrenins. The universal and minimal BAR domain is a
dimerization, membrane-binding, and curvature-sensing module.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of hybrid cell DNAs and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Yamamoto et al. (1995) mapped the AMPH gene to 7p14-p13.
The homologous locus Amph was mapped to the proximal region of mouse
chromosome 13 by Jenkins et al. (1995).

Yamamoto et al. (1995) excluded AMPH as a candidate gene for either RP9
(180104) or dominant cystoid macular dystrophy (MDDC; 153880) by showing
that AMPH maps to a different segment of the genetic map of chromosome
7, defined by microsatellite markers, than does either of the eye
disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

Di Paolo et al. (2002) generated Amph knockout mice and found that lack
of Amph caused a parallel loss of amphiphysin-2 (601248) selectively in
brain. Cell-free assembly of endocytic protein scaffolds was defective
in mutant brain extracts and there were defects in synaptic vesicle
recycling. These defects correlated with major learning deficits and
with increased mortality due to rare irreversible seizures, suggesting
that Amph has a critical role in higher brain functions.

REFERENCE 1. David, C.; Solimena, M.; De Camilli, P.: Autoimmunity in stiff-man
syndrome with breast cancer is targeted to the C-terminal region of
human amphiphysin, a protein similar to the yeast proteins, Rvs167
and Rvs161. FEBS Lett. 351: 73-79, 1994.

2. De Camilli, P.; Thomas, A.; Cofiell, R.; Folli, F.; Lichte, B.;
Piccolo, G.; Meinck, H.-M.; Austoni, M.; Fassetta, G.; Bottazzo, G.;
Bates, D.; Cartlidge, N.; Solimena, M.; Kilimann, M. W.: The synaptic
vesicle-associated protein amphiphysin is the 128-kD autoantigen of
stiff-man syndrome with breast cancer. J. Exp. Med. 178: 2219-2223,
1993.

3. Di Paolo, G.; Sankaranarayanan, S.; Wenk, M. R.; Daniell, L.; Perucco,
E.; Caldarone, B. J.; Flavell, R.; Picciotto, M. R.; Ryan, T. A.;
Cremona, O.; De Camilli, P.: Decreased synaptic vesicle recycling
efficiency and cognitive deficits in amphiphysin 1 knockout mice. Neuron 33:
789-804, 2002.

4. Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Yamamoto, R.; Kilimann, M. W.;
Copeland, N. G.: Amphiphysin (Amph) maps to the proximal region of
mouse chromosome 13. Genomics 28: 363-365, 1995.

5. Lichte, B.; Veh, R. W.; Meyer, H. E.; Kilimann, M. W.: Amphiphysin,
a novel protein associated with synaptic vesicles. EMBO J. 11: 2521-2530,
1992. Note: Erratum: EMBO J. 11 3809 only, 1992.

6. Peter, B. J.; Kent, H. M.; Mills, I. G.; Vallis, Y.; Butler, P.
J. G.; Evans, P. R.; McMahon, H. T.: BAR domains as sensors of membrane
curvature: the amphiphysin BAR structure. Science 303: 495-499,
2004.

7. Wessig, C.; Klein, R.; Schneider, M. F.; Toyka, K. V.; Naumann,
M.; Sommer, C.: Neuropathology and binding studies in anti-amphiphysin-associated
stiff-person syndrome. Neurology 61: 195-198, 2003.

8. Yamamoto, R.; Li, X.; Francke, U.; Kilimann, M. W.: Genetic mapping
of the human amphiphysin gene (AMPH) at 7p14-p13 excludes its involvement
in retinitis pigmentosa 9 or dominant cystoid macular dystrophy. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 970-972, 1995.

9. Yamamoto, R.; Li, X.; Winter, S.; Francke, U.; Kilimann, M. W.
: Primary structure of human amphiphysin, the dominant autoantigen
of paraneoplastic Stiff-Man syndrome, and mapping of its gene (AMPH)
to chromosome 7p13-p14. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 265-268, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/16/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/17/1995

EDITED carol: 04/04/2013
alopez: 2/2/2004
ckniffin: 8/8/2003
carol: 1/28/2003
tkritzer: 12/16/2002
carol: 10/25/2000
mark: 10/2/1997
jamie: 2/12/1997
mimadm: 11/3/1995
terry: 10/20/1995
mark: 8/25/1995
mark: 3/31/1995
carol: 2/18/1995

610499	TITLE *610499 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 6; RAPGEF6
;;RAS-ASSOCIATING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; RAGEF2;;
PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; PDZGEF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to RAGEF1 (RAPGEF2; 609530), followed
by screening a fetal brain cDNA library and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Gao et al. (2001) cloned RAPGEF6, which they called RAGEF2. The deduced
1,509-amino acid protein contains several of the domains present in
RAPGEF2, including cNMP-binding, REM, PDZ, and RA domains as well as the
GEF catalytic domain. Northern blot analysis detected a RAPGEF6
transcript of about 8 kb which was abundantly expressed in heart, brain,
placenta, lung, and liver, but barely detectable in skeletal muscle,
kidney, and pancreas.

Kuiperij et al. (2003) cloned 2 splice variants of RAPGEF6, which they
called PDZGEF2A and PDZGEF2B, from human umbilical cord and Jurkat
T-cell cDNA libraries. The deduced proteins contain 1,601 and 1,391
amino acids, respectively, and they differ after amino acid 1,249. Like
RAPGEF2, PDZGEF2A contains a C-terminal proline-rich and a PDZ-binding
motif, whereas PDZGEF2B lacks these motifs. Unlike RAPGEF2, both PDZGEF2
isoforms contain a second, less conserved, N-terminal RCBD (related
cyclic nucleotide-binding domain) domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of an approximately 9.0-kb RAPGEF6
transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Gao et al. (2001) found that human RAPGEF6 expressed in insect cells
showed GEF activity toward RAP1A (179520) and RAP2A (179540), but not
toward other RAS family members. RAPGEF6 colocalized with activated MRAS
(608435) in the plasma membrane of cotransfected COS-7 cells, leading to
an increase in the GTP-bound form of plasma membrane RAP1. Gao et al.
(2001) concluded that RAPGEF6 acts as the GEF for RAP1 and RAP2
downstream of MRAS in the plasma membrane. Kuiperij et al. (2003)
demonstrated that RAPGEF2 activated both RAP1 and RAP2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gao et al. (2001) and Kuiperij et al.
(2003) mapped the RAPGEF6 gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Gao, X.; Satoh, T.; Liao, Y.; Song, C.; Hu, C.-D.; Kariya, K.;
Kataoka, T.: Identification and characterization of RA-GEF-2, a Rap
guanine nucleotide exchange factor that serves as a downstream target
of M-Ras. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 42219-42225, 2001.

2. Kuiperij, H. B.; de Rooij, J.; Rehmann, H.; van Triest, M.; Wittinghofer,
A.; Bos, J. L.; Zwartkruis, F. J. T.: Characterisation of PDZ-GEFs,
a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors specific for Rap1
and Rap2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1593: 141-149, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/16/2006

EDITED carol: 10/25/2006
carol: 10/17/2006
carol: 10/16/2006

610398	TITLE *610398 SAP30-LIKE PROTEIN; SAP30L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display analysis to search for genes upregulated by
TGFB1 (190180) in differentiating intestinal epithelial cells, followed
by screening a human heart cDNA library, Lindfors et al. (2003) cloned
SAP30L. The deduced 183-amino acid protein contains 2 potential
N-glycosylation sites, 1 N-myristoylation site, and several
phosphorylation sites. Transient transfection studies showed that SAP30L
localized to the nucleus in small dense bodies that are not PML bodies.
Mutation of the SAP30L nuclear localization signal caused the protein to
also be expressed throughout the cytoplasm. SAP30L shares 70% identity
with SAP30 (603378) and 97% identity with mouse Sap30l. Northern blot
detected a 1.30-kb transcript in all human tissues examined, with
highest expression in testis, followed by heart, kidney, and placenta. A
6.5-kb transcript had high expression in brain and lung.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lindfors et al. (2003) determined that the SAP30L gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lindfors et al. (2003) mapped the SAP30L
gene to chromosome 5q33.2.

REFERENCE 1. Lindfors, K.; Viiri, K. M.; Niittynen, M.; Heinonen, T. Y. K.;
Maki, M.; Kainulainen, H.: TGF-beta induces expression of SAP30L,
a novel nuclear protein. BMC Genomics 4: 53, 2003. Note: Electronic
Article.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 9/12/2006

EDITED wwang: 09/12/2006

180490	TITLE *180490 RIBOPHORIN II; RPN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RPN2 gene encodes ribophorin II, which is involved in ribosome
binding. Ribophorin I (RPN1; 180470) and RPN2 are abundant, highly
conserved glycoproteins located exclusively in the membranes of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum (Crimaudo et al., 1987).

CLONING

Using probes derived from a human liver expression library, Crimaudo et
al. (1987) isolated and sequenced full-length human cDNA clones encoding
ribophorins I and II. The cDNA clones hybridized to mRNA species of 2.5
kb and encoded polypeptides of 68.5 and 69.3 kD, respectively. Sequence
comparisons and immunoblotting with specific antibodies showed both
proteins to be highly conserved throughout a variety of species.
However, no relationship between the 2 proteins could be deduced from
their primary sequences.

MAPPING

Using cDNAs in the study of a panel of somatic cell hybrids, Barton et
al. (1987) mapped RPN2 to chromosome 20. Loffler et al. (1991) mapped
the RPN2 gene to 20q12-q13.1 by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelleher et al. (1992) reported that mammalian oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorin I,
ribophorin II, and a 48-kD oligosaccharyltransferase protein (602202).

Among 44 women with breast cancer (114480), Honma et al. (2008) observed
a significant association (p = 0.0052) between increased expression of
RPN2 in cancer tissue and decreased clinical response to the
antimicrotubule chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA) targeting RPN2 significantly promoted docetaxel-dependent
apoptosis and cell growth inhibition of docetaxel-resistant human breast
cancer cells in vitro. In vivo atelocollagen delivery of RPN2 siRNA
significantly reduced drug-resistant tumor growth in mice given
docetaxel. Further studies indicated that RPN2 conferred drug resistance
via increased glycosylation of P-glycoproteins. Honma et al. (2008)
concluded that RPN2 siRNA introduction may hypersensitize cancer cell
responses to chemotherapeutic agents.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, D. E.; Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Francke, U.: The genes
for ribophorins I and II are on human chromosomes 3q and 20 and mouse
chromosomes 6 and 12, respectively. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
577 only, 1987.

2. Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Gausepohl, H.; Meyer, D. I.: Human
ribophorins I and II: the primary structure and membrane topology
of two highly conserved round endoplasmic reticulum-specific glycoproteins. EMBO
J. 6: 75-82, 1987.

3. Honma, K.; Iwao-Koizumi, K.; Takeshita, F.; Yamamoto, Y.; Yoshida,
T.; Nishio, K.; Nagahara, S.; Kato, K.; Ochiya, T.: RPN2 gene confers
docetaxel resistance in breast cancer. Nature Med. 14: 939-948,
2008. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 14: 1128 only, 2008.

4. Kelleher, D. J.; Kreibich, G.; Gilmore, R.: Oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorins
I and II and a 48 kd protein. Cell 69: 55-65, 1992.

5. Loffler, C.; Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Hansmann, I.: Mapping of the
ribophorin II (RPN II) gene to human chromosome 20q12-q13.1 by in-situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 87: 221-222, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/26/1987

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
wwang: 9/25/2008
ckniffin: 9/24/2008
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/2/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 6/20/1988
marie: 3/25/1988

601989	TITLE *601989 S100 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN A13; S100A13
DESCRIPTION Wicki et al. (1996) reported the characterization of a human gene they
symbolized S100A13, a calcium-binding protein belonging to the S100
protein family. S100 proteins are small EF-hand calcium-binding proteins
of variable lengths and sequence identities. At least 12 of 15 members
of the family are clustered on chromosome 1q21 (see S100A1; 176940);
S100A13 likewise colocalizes with S100A1 on the 1q21 cluster. The
predicted 98 amino acid S100A13 protein shows sequence homologies to
other S100 proteins between 50.5% (S100A5; 176991) and 59.3% (S100A12;
603112). Northern blot analysis showed high amounts of S100A13 mRNA in
adult skeletal muscle, heart, kidney, ovary, spleen, small intestine,
and pancreas and in fetal lung, heart, cochlea, liver, spleen, and
parathyroid tumor cells. Moderate levels were detected in all other
tissues examined, with the exception of placenta and leukocytes, which
had very low or undetectable levels. Wicki et al. (1996) also cloned the
mouse S100A13 gene. Mouse S100A13 is composed of 98 amino acids and
displays 86.7% homology compared to human S100A13.

REFERENCE 1. Wicki, R.; Schafer, B. W.; Erne, P.; Heizmann, C. W.: Characterization
of the human and mouse cDNAs coding for S100A13, a new member of the
S100 protein family. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 227: 594-599,
1996.

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 9/11/1997

EDITED alopez: 10/09/1998
joanna: 1/9/1998
terry: 9/11/1997

163729	TITLE +163729 NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE 3; NOS3
;;NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE, ENDOTHELIAL; ENOS
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION, PREGNANCY-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION RESISTANT TO CONVENTIONAL THERAPY, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nitric oxide (NO) accounts for the biologic activity of
endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF), discovered by Furchgott and
Zawadzki (1980) and Rapoport and Murad (1983). NO is synthesized in
endothelial cells from L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase (NOS). EDRF
is important in regulation of vasomotor tone and blood flow by
inhibiting smooth muscle contraction and platelet aggregation. Janssens
et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA encoding a human vascular NOS. The
translated human protein was 1,203 amino acids long with a predicted
molecular mass of 133 kD. They showed that the cDNA encodes a
calcium-regulated, constitutively expressed endothelial NOS, capable of
producing EDRF in blood vessels. Marsden et al. (1992) likewise cloned
and sequenced human endothelial NO synthase. Their cDNA clones predicted
a protein of 1,203 amino acids with about 60% identity with the rat
brain NO synthase isoform (163731). (Nitric oxide synthases have been
assigned to 2 classes: a constitutively expressed, calcium-regulated
class identified in brain, neutrophils, and endothelial cells, and a
calcium-independent class identified in endotoxin- or cytokine-induced
macrophages and endothelial cells (163730).)

GENE STRUCTURE

Marsden et al. (1993) isolated genomic clones encoding human endothelial
NO synthase and determined the structural organization of the gene. It
contains 26 exons spanning approximately 21 kb of genomic DNA and
encodes an mRNA of 4,052 nucleotides. Characterization of the
5-prime-flanking region indicated that the NOS3 gene is TATA-less and
exhibits proximal promoter elements consistent with a constitutively
expressed gene, namely, SP1 and GATA motifs.

MAPPING

By Southern blot hybridization of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids,
Marsden et al. (1993) assigned the NOS3 gene to chromosome 7 and
regionalized it to 7q35-q36 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By
PCR amplification applied to a panel of DNAs from human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, by Southern blot analysis, and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Robinson et al. (1994) localized the NOS3 gene to 7q36.
By analysis of interspecific backcross progeny, Gregg et al. (1995)
mapped the mouse homolog to chromosome 5.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Raman et al. (1998) reported the crystal structure of the heme domain of
endothelial NOS in tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-free and -bound forms at
1.95-angstrom and 1.9-angstrom resolution, respectively. In both
structures a zinc ion is tetrahedrally coordinated to pairs of
symmetry-related cysteine residues at the dimer interface. The conserved
Cys-(X)4-Cys motif and its strategic location establish a structural
role for the metal center in maintaining the integrity of the
BH4-binding site. The unexpected recognition of the substrate L-arginine
at the BH4 site indicates that this site is poised to stabilize a
positively charged pterin ring and suggests a model involving a cationic
pterin radical in the catalytic cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Fulton et al. (1999) demonstrated that AKT (164730) directly
phosphorylated eNOS and activated the enzyme leading to nitric oxide
production, whereas eNOS mutated at a putative AKT phosphorylation site
was resistant to phosphorylation and activation by AKT. Activated AKT
increased basal nitric oxide release from endothelial cells, and
activation-deficient AKT attenuated NO production stimulated by VEGF
(192290). Thus, Fulton et al. (1999) concluded the eNOS is an AKT
substrate linking signal transduction by AKT to the release of the
gaseous second messenger nitric oxide.

Dimmeler et al. (1999) stated that physiologically, the most important
stimulus for the continuous formation of nitric oxide is the viscous
drag (or shear stress) generated by the streaming blood on the
endothelial layer. PI3K (see 601232) and AKT are activated in
endothelial cells in response to shear stress. Dimmeler et al. (1999)
demonstrated that AKT mediates the activation of eNOS, leading to
increased nitric oxide production. Inhibition of the PI3K AKT pathway or
mutation of the AKT site on eNOS protein at serine-1177 attenuated the
serine phosphorylation and prevented the activation of eNOS. Mimicking
the phosphorylation of ser1177 directly enhanced enzyme activity and
altered the sensitivity of the enzyme to calcium, rendering its activity
maximal at subphysiologic concentrations of calcium. Thus,
phosphorylation of eNOS by AKT represented a novel calcium-independent
regulatory mechanism for activation of eNOS.

Napolitano et al. (2000) investigated the interactions between ET1
(131240) and the NO system in the feto-placental unit. They examined the
mRNA expression of ET1, inducible NOS (163730), and eNOS in human
cultured placental trophoblastic cells obtained from preeclamptic (PE)
and normotensive pregnancies. ET1 expression was increased in PE cells,
whereas iNOS, which represents the main source of NO synthesis, was
decreased; conversely, eNOS expression was increased. ET1 was able to
influence its own expression as well as NOS isoform expression in normal
and PE trophoblastic cultured cells. The findings suggested the
existence of a functional relationship between ET(s) and NOS isoforms
that could constitute the biologic mechanism leading to the reduced
placental blood flow and increased resistance to flow in the
feto-maternal circulation that are characteristic of the pathophysiology
of preeclampsia.

Autosomal dominant adult polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD; 173900) is
associated with altered endothelial-dependent vasodilation and decreased
vascular production of NO. Thus, eNOS could have a modifier effect in
ADPKD. To test this hypothesis, Persu et al. (2002) genotyped 173
unrelated European ADPKD patients for the glu298-to-asp (163729.0001),
intron 4 VNTR, and -786T-C (163729.0002) polymorphisms of ENOS and
looked for their influence on the age at end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
In 93 males, the glu298-to-asp polymorphism was associated with a lower
age at ESRD. This effect was confirmed in a subset of males linked to
PKD1 (601313) and reaching ESRD before age 45, and by a cumulative renal
survival analysis in PKD1-linked families. Further studies demonstrated
that NOS activity was decreased in renal artery samples from PKD males
harboring the asp298 allele, in association with posttranslational
modifications and partial cleavage of eNOS. No significant effect of the
other polymorphisms was found in males, and no polymorphism influenced
the age at ESRD in females. Persu et al. (2002) concluded that
glu298-to-asp is associated with a 5 year lower mean age at ESRD in a
subset of ADPKD males. They hypothesized that the effect could be due to
decreased NOS activity and a partial cleavage of eNOS, leading to a
further decrease in the vascular production of NO.

Nisoli et al. (2003) found that NO triggers mitochondrial biogenesis in
cells as diverse as brown adipocytes and 3T3-L1, U937, and HeLa cells.
This effect of NO was dependent on cGMP and was mediated by the
induction of PPARGC1 (604517), a master regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Moreover, Nisoli et al. (2003) found that mitochondrial
biogenesis induced by exposure to cold was markedly reduced in brown
adipose tissue of eNOS -/- mice, which had a reduced metabolic rate and
accelerated weight gain compared to wildtype mice. Thus, Nisoli et al.
(2003) concluded that a NO-cGMP-dependent pathway controls mitochondrial
biogenesis and body energy balance.

Simoncini et al. (2004) demonstrated that tibolone and its estrogenic
metabolites activate NO synthesis by recruiting functional estrogen
receptors, whereas the progestogenic/androgenic metabolite had no
effect. During prolonged exposures, tibolone and the estrogenic
compounds enhanced the expression of eNOS. In addition, tibolone was
able to induce rapid activation of eNOS, leading to rapid increases in
the release of NO. Different from estrogen, rapid activation of eNOS did
not rely on recruitment of PI3K but rather on MAPK-dependent cascades.

Robb et al. (2004) found that the 5-prime UTR of the NOS3AS (612205)
transcript was complementary to the portion of NOS3 mRNA derived from
exons 23 to 26. RT-PCR analysis showed that expression of NOS3 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human aortic vascular
smooth muscle cells (HAOVSMCs) was inversely proportional to that of
NOS3AS. Both the NOS3 and NOS3AS genes were transcriptionally active;
however, NOS3AS appeared to downregulate the steady-state levels of NOS3
mRNA and protein. RT-PCR showed that overexpression of the overlapping
region of NOS3AS had little impact on NOS3 mRNA levels in HUVECs;
however, Western blot analysis showed that NOS3 protein levels were
markedly reduced. NOS3AS also reduced the expression of a chimeric
transcript containing the NOS3-overlapping sequence fused to a reporter
gene. Inhibition of NOS3AS expression by RNA interference (RNAi) in
HAOVSMCs increased NOS3 expression, and inhibition of histone
deacetylase (see HDAC1; 601241) in HAOVSMCs increased expression of
NOS3AS mRNA prior to decrease in NOS3 mRNA expression. Robb et al.
(2004) concluded that NOS3AS participates in the posttranscriptional
regulation of NOS3.

Fish et al. (2007) found that NOS3AS was induced by hypoxia in cultured
human endothelial and smooth muscle cells and in aortas of hypoxic rats.
NOS3AS induction preceded the decrease in NOS3 steady-state mRNA in
endothelial cells, and knockdown of NOS3AS by RNAi indicated that NOS3AS
downregulated NOS3 expression during hypoxia. Hypoxia did not induce
transcription of NOS3AS, but instead stabilized NOS3AS transcripts,
predominantly the short NOS3AS variant, leading to elevated NOS3AS
levels. RT-PCR of fractionated cells showed that both NOS3AS pre-mRNA
and mature NOS3AS mRNA were enriched in the nucleus under basal
conditions. Under hypoxic conditions, the cytoplasmic levels of mature
NOS3AS mRNA increased more than 30-fold, whereas levels in the nucleus
increased only moderately. In contrast, the nuclear/cytoplasmic
distribution of NOS3 mRNA was not altered under hypoxic conditions, with
NOS3 mRNA levels decreasing in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. NOS3
associated with polyribosomes in normoxic cells, but its association
with polyribosomes was attenuated in hypoxic cells, concurrent with
association of the short NOS3AS variant with polyribosomes. Fish et al.
(2007) concluded that NOS3 expression is regulated by its overlapping
NOS3AS transcript in a hypoxia-dependent fashion.

Nisoli et al. (2005) reported that calorie restriction for either 3 or
12 months induced eNOS expression and 3-prime/5-prime-cyclic GMP in
various tissues of male mice. This was accompanied by mitochondrial
biogenesis, with increased oxygen consumption and ATP production, and an
enhanced expression of Sirt1 (604479). Nisoli et al. (2005) reported
these effects were strongly attenuated in eNOS null-mutant mice. Thus,
Nisoli et al. (2005) concluded that nitric oxide plays a fundamental
role in the processes induced by calorie restriction and may be involved
in the extension of life span in mammals.

Using human platelets, Ji et al. (2007) demonstrated that polymerization
of beta-actin (ACTB; 102630) regulated the activation state of NOS3, and
hence NO formation, by altering its binding to heat-shock protein-90
(HSP90, or HSPCA; 140571). NOS3 bound the globular, but not the
filamentous, form of beta-actin, and the affinity of NOS3 for globular
beta-actin was, in turn, increased by HSP90. Formation of this ternary
complex of NOS3, globular beta-actin, and HSP90 increased NOS activity
and cyclic GMP, an index of bioactive NO, and increased the rate of
HSP90 degradation, thus limiting NOS3 activation. Ji et al. (2007)
concluded that beta-actin regulates NO formation and signaling in
platelets.

Lim et al. (2008) demonstrated that blocking phosphorylation of the AKT
substrate eNOS inhibits tumor initiation and maintenance. Moreover, eNOS
enhances the nitrosylation and activation of endogenous wildtype Ras
proteins (see 190020), which are required throughout tumorigenesis. Lim
et al. (2008) suggested that activation of the PI3K-AKT-eNOS-(wildtype)
Ras pathway by oncogenic Ras in cancer cells is required to initiate and
maintain tumor growth.

Chen et al. (2010) showed that S-glutathionylation of eNOS reversibly
decreases NOS activity with an increase in superoxide generation
primarily from the reductase, in which 2 highly conserved cysteine
residues are identified as sites of S-glutathionylation and found to be
critical for redox-regulation of eNOS function. Chen et al. (2010)
showed that e-NOS S-glutathionylation in endothelial cells, with loss of
nitric oxide and gain of superoxide generation, is associated with
impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation. In hypertensive vessels,
eNOS S-glutathionylation is increased with impaired
endothelium-dependent vasodilation that is restored by thiol-specific
reducing agents, which reverse this S-glutathionylation. Chen et al.
(2010) concluded that S-glutathionylation of eNOS is a pivotal switch
providing redox regulation of cellular signaling, endothelial function,
and vascular tone.

Straub et al. (2012) reported a model for the regulation of NO signaling
by demonstrating that hemoglobin alpha, encoded by the HBA1 (141800) and
HBA2 (141850) genes, is expressed in human and mouse arterial
endothelial cells and enriched at the myoendothelial junction, where it
regulates the effects of NO on vascular reactivity. Notably, this
function is unique to hemoglobin alpha and is abrogated by its genetic
depletion. Mechanistically, endothelial hemoglobin alpha heme iron in
the Fe(3+) state permits NO signaling, and this signaling is shut off
when hemoglobin alpha is reduced to the Fe(2+) state by endothelial
CYB5R3 (613213). Genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of CYB5R3
increases NO bioactivity in small arteries. Straub et al. (2012)
concluded that their data revealed a mechanism by which the regulation
of the intracellular hemoglobin alpha oxidation state controls NOS
signaling in nonerythroid cells. The authors suggested that this model
may be relevant to heme-containing globins in a broad range of
NOS-containing somatic cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Japanese study of 100 patients with essential hypertension (145500)
and 123 patients with normal blood pressure, Nakayama et al. (1997)
found that the distribution of allele frequencies for the CA repeat in
the NOS3 gene was not significantly different between the 2 groups.
However, comparing the allele frequencies in the hypertensive group
without left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and the normotensive group,
the overall distributions were significantly different (p = 0.019). The
33-repeat allele was found more frequently in the hypertensive group
without LVH than in the normotensive group.

Bonnardeaux et al. (1995) found that the highly polymorphic (CA)n
repeats in intron 13 and 2 biallelic markers in intron 18 of the NOS3
gene are not associated with essential hypertension. Wang et al. (1996)
studied a marker closer to the 5-prime end of the NOS3 gene, the 27-bp
repeat in intron 4, in relation to coronary artery disease. They
identified 2 alleles: a common larger allele (allele frequency, 0.830)
and a smaller rare allele (0.170). The larger allele had 5 tandem 27-bp
repeats. The smaller allele had only 4 repeats that were apparently
missing the third repeat judging by minor a difference in sequence. The
distribution of the genotypes appeared to be in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium and the polymorphism was inherited in a simple mendelian
fashion. Wang et al. (1996) found from study of 549 subjects with and
153 without coronary artery disease that in current and ex-cigarette
smokers, but not nonsmokers, there was a significant excess of
homozygotes for the rare allele in patients with severely stenosed
arteries, compared with those with no mild stenosis. This genotype was
also associated with a history of myocardial infarction. The authors
noted that, since endothelial-dependent vasodilatation is mediated by
release of nitric oxide formed by constitutively expressed endothelial
nitric oxide synthase, the smoking-dependent excess coronary risk in
homozygotes is consistent with a predisposition to endothelial
dysfunction.

Coronary spasm plays an important role in the pathogenesis not only of
variant angina but also of ischemic heart disease in general. However,
the prevalence of coronary spasm appears to be higher in Japanese than
in Caucasians (Bertrand et al., 1982; Yasue and Kugiyama, 1990),
suggesting that genetic factors may be involved in its pathogenesis.
Endothelial-derived nitric oxide has been implicated in the control of
vascular tone. Kugiyama et al. (1997) and Motoyama et al. (1997) showed
that basal acetylcholine-stimulated and flow-dependent nitric oxide
activities are decreased in both coronary and brachial arteries of
patients with coronary spasm. Yoshimura et al. (1998) identified a
glu298-to-asp variant (E298D; 163729.0001) in exon 7 of the NOS3 gene
that was more frequent in patients with coronary spasm. In studies of an
elderly population in Australia, Liyou et al. (1998) could find no
association of the E298D variant with coronary artery disease.

Nakayama et al. (1999) reported that a -786T-C mutation (163729.0002) in
the promoter region of the eNOS gene reduced transcription of the gene
and was strongly associated with coronary spastic angina and myocardial
infarction. To elucidate the molecular mechanism for the reduced eNOS
gene transcription, Miyamoto et al. (2000) purified a protein that
specifically binds to the mutant allele in nuclear extracts from HeLa
cells. The purified protein was identical to replication protein A1
(RPA1; 179835), known as a single-stranded DNA-binding protein essential
for DNA repair, replication, and recombination. In human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, inhibition of RPA1 expression using antisense
oligonucleotides restored transcription driven by the mutated promoter
sequence, whereas overexpression of RPA1 further reduced it. Serum
nitrite/nitrate levels among individuals carrying the -786T-C mutation
were significantly lower than among those without the mutation. The
authors concluded that RPA1 apparently functions as a repressor protein
in the -786T-C mutation-related reduction of eNOS gene transcription
associated with the development of coronary artery disease.

Pregnancy-induced hypertension (see 189800) may be regarded as a
manifestation of endothelial cell dysfunction. Constitutive nitric oxide
production in endothelial cells increases during pregnancy and
contributes to vasodilatation and blunting of vasopressor response. In
women developing pregnancy-induced hypertension, NO generation is
inappropriately low, and administration of an NO donor improves flow in
the uterine artery in normal early pregnancy and in women at high risk
of developing disease. Yallampalli and Garfield (1993) and others had
observed that inhibition of NO synthesis in rats during pregnancy
produces hypertension, proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, and fetal growth
retardation. These considerations prompted Arngrimsson et al. (1997) to
study linkage to the NOS3 gene in affected sisters and in multiplex
families. A lod score of 3.36 was obtained for D7S505 when a
best-fitting model derived from genetic epidemiologic data was used, and
lod scores of 2.54 to 4.03 were obtained when various other genetic
models were used. The transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT), a
model-free estimate of linkage, showed strongest association and linkage
with a microsatellite within intron 13 of the NOS3 gene (P = 0.005).

Lewis et al. (1999) were unable to detect linkage of preeclampsia to the
NOS3 region on 7q. They studied 2, separately ascertained, affected
sister-pairs collections, from Amsterdam and Cambridge (U.K.), that
contained 104 sibships. In the Cambridge Centre, a total of 21 extended
pedigrees suitable for conventional parametric linkage studies were also
identified. The reason for the discrepancy with the results of
Arngrimsson et al. (1997) was not clear. Lewis et al. (1999) concluded
that although abnormalities in NO production have been observed in
preeclampsia, the case for the NOS3 gene or its product, eNOS, having a
primary role in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia remained unproved.

Tempfer et al. (2001) performed a prospective case-control study of 105
women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and 91 healthy controls.
Using PCR, they identified the different alleles of a 27-basepair tandem
repeat polymorphism in intron 4 of the NOS3 gene. The wildtype allele
was identified in 329 of 392 chromosomes (frequency 0.84). The
polymorphic A allele was present on 63 chromosomes (frequency 0.16). The
genotype frequencies were as follows: 68% (B/B), 31% (A/B), and 0.5%
(A/A). The distribution of genotype frequencies was significantly
different between the study and in control groups for allele A/B
heterozygotes (36.7 vs 23.8%, P = 0.03, odds ratio 1.6, 95% CI 1.1-3.8).
Only 1 person in the study group was A/A.

Tanus-Santos et al. (2001) studied the distribution of genetic variants
of 3 clinically relevant NOS3 polymorphisms in 305 ethnically
well-characterized DNA samples (100 Caucasians, 100 African Americans,
and 105 Asians). They found marked interethnic differences in the
distribution of NOS3 variants, in the estimated haplotype frequency, and
in the association between variants. The asp298 variant (163729.0001)
was more common in Caucasians (34.5%) than in African Americans (15.5%)
or Asians (8.6%) (p less than 0.0001). The -786C variant (163729.0002)
was also more common in Caucasians (42.0%) than in African Americans
(17.5%) or Asians (13.8%) (p less than 0.0001). The 4a VNTR in intron 4
was more common in African Americans (26.5%) than in Caucasians (16.0%)
or Asians (12.9%) (p less than 0.0001). The most common predicted
haplotype in the 3 groups combined only wildtype variants. Asians had
the highest frequency of this haplotype (77% in Asians vs 46% in the
other groups). In Caucasians, the asp298 and -786C variants were
associated, and this haplotype was predicted to have a frequency of 24%.

Endothelial nitric oxide synthase plays a key role in the regulation of
normal function of the vessel wall. Heltianu et al. (2002) found a
relatively high frequency of 2 polymorphic variants of NOS3 in males
with Fabry disease (301500) and suggested that in addition to mutations
in the alpha-galactosidase A gene, variation in NOS3 may be significant
in determining the phenotype.

Casas et al. (2004) performed a metaanalysis of 26 case-control studies
evaluating the association between the NOS3 polymorphisms E298D,
-786T-C, and the intron 4 VNTR and ischemic heart disease (myocardial
infarction or angiographic coronary artery occlusion), involving 9,867
cases and 13,161 controls. They found that homozygosity for asp298 or
the intron 4 A allele was associated with an increased risk of ischemic
heart disease (OR, 1.31 and 1.34, respectively), but no significant
association was found with the -786C allele. Casas et al. (2004)
suggested that common genetic variations in the NOS3 gene contribute to
atherosclerosis susceptibility.

In 110 dizygotic white twin pairs, Persu et al. (2005) identified NOS3
haplotypes based on 3 polymorphisms, E298D, the intron 4 VNTR, and
-786T-C, and the intron 13 CA repeat. Haplotype analysis revealed a
significant association between NOS3 haplotypes and daytime ambulatory
diastolic and systolic blood pressure, with the latter remaining
significant after adjustment for multiple testing (p = 0.032) and mainly
attributable to 4 haplotypes accounting for 11.9% of all represented
haplotypes.

The therapeutic application of NO in high-altitude (HA) disorders, for
the improvement of oxygenation and vasodilation, prompted Ahsan et al.
(2005) to investigate the NOS3 gene with respect to high-altitude
adaptation. They screened 131 HA monks, 136 HA controls, and 170
lowlanders for the NOS3 894G-T (E298D; 163729.0001) polymorphism and for
the 4B/4A polymorphisms. NO levels were estimated and correlated with
the polymorphisms. The 3 groups were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for
the polymorphisms. Wildtype alleles G and 4B were significantly
overrepresented in the HA groups as compared with the lowlanders (p =
0.006 and p = 0.02, respectively). NO levels were highest in HA monks,
followed by HA controls, and then lowlanders (p less than 0.0001).
Combinations of the GG and BB genotypes were distributed significantly
more frequently in the HA monks (p less than 0.0001) and HA controls (p
= 0.0005) than in lowlanders. Ahsan et al. (2005) concluded that the
genotype combination of NOS3 wildtype homozygotes (GG, BB) occurs more
frequently in high-altitude groups that in lowlanders and contributes to
higher NO levels associated with high-altitude adaptation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pharmacologic blockade of NO production with arginine analogs such as
L-nitroarginine or L-N-arginine methylester affects multiple isoforms of
nitric oxide synthase and so cannot distinguish their physiologic roles.
To study the role of endothelial NOS in vascular function, Huang et al.
(1995) disrupted the gene encoding endothelial NOS in mice by homologous
recombination. Homozygous mutant mice were found to be viable, fertile,
and indistinguishable from wildtype and heterozygous littermates in
appearance or routine behavior. Immunoreactive NOS3 protein was not
present, as shown by Western blot analysis of the brain, heart, lung,
and aorta. Endothelium-derived relaxing factor activity, as assayed by
acetylcholine-induced relaxation, was absent, and the NOS3 mutant mice
were hypertensive. Thus, the author concluded that NOS3 mediates basal
vasodilation. Responses to NOS blockade in the mutant mice suggested
that nonendothelial isoforms of NOS may be involved in maintaining blood
pressure. Huang et al. (1995) suggested that perhaps the
renin-angiotensin system and autonomic nervous system evolved to serve
primarily as a defense against hypotension, and diminution in their
activity is a poor buffer against hypertension. Alternatively, NOS3 may
be involved in establishing the baroreceptor set-point. The question of
whether subpopulations of humans suffering from hypertension have
defects in NOS3 expression awaits an answer from genetic analysis and
the development of more selective inhibitors of the NOS isoforms.

Snyder (1995) reviewed the significance of the findings of Huang et al.
(1995) in the NOS3 'knockout' mouse because so-called nNOS (NOS1;
163731) occurs in nerves that mediate penile erection and NOS inhibitors
block erection. It was thought that the null mutant nNOS mice would not
procreate. As it turned out, however, these animals do breed and appear
to be generally normal. However, they have dilated stomachs with a
constricted pyloric sphincter, and so provide a model for infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. The same mice are resistant to brain
damage caused by vascular strokes, confirming that nitric oxide is
crucial in mediating stroke damage. Further studies indicated that the
nNOS-negative mice are highly aggressive toward other males to the
extent that they will kill their wildtype littermates if left
unattended, and they display strikingly inappropriate and excessive
sexual behavior. Mice homozygous for a knockout in NOS2 (macrophage or
inducible NOS, iNOS) have markedly reduced defenses against
microorganisms such as Listeria and Leishmania and against the
proliferation of lymphoma tumor cells.

Champion et al. (1999) cited work indicating that NOS activity decreases
with age. To determine whether adenoviral-mediated overexpression of
NOS3 could enhance erectile responses, they administered a recombinant
adenovirus containing the NOS3 gene into the corpora cavernosum of the
aged rat. Adenoviral expression of the beta-galactosidase reporter gene
was observed in cavernosal tissue one day after the intracavernosal
administration of the beta-gal-marked adenovirus; one day after
administration of the construct containing NOS3, transgene expression
was confirmed by immunoblot staining of NOS3 protein, and cGMP levels
were increased. The increase in cavernosal pressure in response to
cavernosal nerve stimulation was enhanced in animals transfected with
NOS3, and erectile responses to acetylcholine and zaprinast were
enhanced. Champion et al. (1999) suggested that in vivo gene transfer of
NOS3, alone or in combination with a type V phosphodiesterase inhibitor,
may constitute a new therapeutic intervention for the treatment of
erectile dysfunction.

Steudel et al. (1998) investigated the effects of congenital deficiency
of NOS3 on the pulmonary vascular responses to hypoxia. The findings
suggested that congenital NOS3 deficiency in mice enhances hypoxic
pulmonary vascular remodeling and hypertension, and right ventricular
hypertrophy, and that NO production by NOS3 is vital to counterbalance
pulmonary vasoconstriction caused by chronic hypoxic stress.

To study the role of nitric oxide constitutively produced by NOS3 in the
regulation of blood pressure and vascular tone, Ohashi et al. (1998)
generated transgenic mice overexpressing bovine NOS3 in the vascular
wall using murine preproendothelin-1 (ET1) promoter. Blood pressure was
significantly lower in NOS3-overexpressing mice than in control
littermates. In the transgenic aorta, basal NO release and basal cGMP
levels were significantly increased. In contrast, relaxations of
transgenic aorta in response to acetylcholine and sodium nitroprusside
were significantly attenuated, and the reduced vascular reactivity was
associated with reduced response of cGMP elevation to these agents as
compared with control aortas. Thus, in addition to the essential role of
NOS3 in blood pressure regulation, tonic NO release by NOS3 in the
endothelium induces the reduced vascular reactivity to NO-mediated
vasodilatators, providing several insights into the pathogenesis of
nitrate tolerance.

In the heart, nitric oxide inhibits L-type calcium channels but
stimulates sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release, leading to variable
effects on myocardial contractility. Barouch et al. (2002) demonstrated
that spatial confinement of specific nitric oxide synthase isoforms
regulates this process. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (NOS3)
localizes to caveolae, where compartmentalization with beta-adrenergic
receptors and L-type calcium channels allows nitric oxide to inhibit
beta-adrenergic-induced inotropy. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS1;
163731), however, is targeted to cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum. NO
stimulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release via the ryanodine
receptor (RYR2; 180902) in vitro, suggests that NOS1 has an opposite
facilitative effect on contractility. Barouch et al. (2002) demonstrated
that Nos1-deficient mice have suppressed inotropic response, whereas
Nos3-deficient mice have enhanced contractility, owing to corresponding
changes in sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release. Both Nos1 -/- and
Nos3 -/- mice developed age-related hypertrophy, although only Nos3 -/-
mice were hypertensive. Nos1/3 -/- double knockout mice had suppressed
beta-adrenergic responses and an additive phenotype of marked
ventricular remodeling. Thus, NOS1 and NOS3 mediate independent, and in
some cases opposite, effects on cardiac structure and function.

Aicher et al. (2003) demonstrated that the impaired neovascularization
in mice lacking eNOS is related to a defect in progenitor cell
mobilization. Mice deficient in eNOS showed reduced vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF; 192240)-induced mobilization of endothelial
progenitor cells and increased mortality after myelosuppression.
Intravenous infusion of wildtype progenitor cells, but not bone marrow
transplantation, rescued the defective neovascularization of
Nos3-deficient mice in a model of hind-limb ischemia, suggesting that
progenitor mobilization from the bone marrow is impaired in Nos3-null
mice. Mechanistically, MMP9 (120361), required for stem cell
mobilization, was reduced in the bone marrow of Nos3-null mice. Aicher
et al. (2003) concluded that eNOS expressed by bone marrow stromal cells
influences recruitment of stem and progenitor cells. The authors
suggested that this may contribute to impaired regeneration processes in
ischemic heart disease patients, who are characterized by a reduced
systemic nitric oxide bioactivity.

Caveolin-3 (CAV3; 601253), a strong inhibitor of all NOS isoforms, is
expressed in sarcolemmal caveolae microdomains and binds to NOS3 in
cardiac myocytes and NOS1 in skeletal myocytes. Ohsawa et al. (2004)
characterized the biochemical and cardiac parameters of P104L
(601253.0001)-mutant Cav3 transgenic mice, a model of an autosomal
dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1C; 607801). Transgenic
mouse hearts demonstrated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, enhanced basal
contractility, decreased left ventricular end diastolic diameter, and
loss and cytoplasmic mislocalization of Cav3 protein. Cardiac muscle
showed activation of NOS3 catalytic activity without increased
expression of all NOS isoforms. Ohsawa et al. (2004) suggested that a
moderate increase in NOS3 activity associated with loss of Cav3 may
result in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Bivalacqua et al. (2004) studied the contribution of RhoA (AHRA;
165390)/Rho kinase (ROCK1; 601702) signaling to erectile dysfunction in
streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats. Rho kinase and eNOS colocalized in
the endothelium of corpus cavernosum, and RhoA and Rho kinase abundance
and Mypt1 (602021) phosphorylation were elevated in STZ diabetic rat
penis. In addition, eNOS protein expression, cavernosal constitutive NOS
activity, and cGMP levels were reduced in STZ diabetic rat penis.
Bivalacqua et al. (2004) introduced a dominant-negative RhoA mutant and
found that erectile responses in the STZ diabetic rats improved to
values similar to controls.

Longo et al. (2005) crossbred Nos3-null and wildtype mice to generate 2
types of heterozygous litters, one with a maternally derived mutation
that developed in a Nos3-deficient environment and the other with a
paternally derived mutation that developed in a uterine environment
similar to wildtype mice. In studies of the in vitro reactivity of
carotid and mesenteric artery segments of adult mice to vasoactive
agents, the maternally derived heterozygous mice had abnormal vascular
reactivity that was similar to that of homozygous knockout mice
completely lacking functional NOS3, whereas the paternally derived
heterozygous mice had normal vascular reactivity that was not different
from that of wildtype mice. Longo et al. (2005) stated that this was the
first direct evidence in support of a role for uterine environment in
determining vascular function in later life.

In a mouse model of sepsis, Connelly et al. (2005) observed a temporal
reduction in iNOS expression and activity in lipopolysaccharide-treated
Nos3-knockout mice as compared with wildtype mice, which was reflected
in a more stable hemodynamic profile in Nos3-null mice during
endotoxemia. In human umbilical vein cells, lipopolysaccharide led to
the activation of Nos3 through phosphoinositide 3-kinase (see 171833)-
and Akt/protein kinase B (164730)-dependent enzyme phosphorylation.
Connelly et al. (2005) concluded that NOS3 has a proinflammatory role in
the pathogenesis of sepsis, in which following initial NOS3 activation
the resultant NO acts as a costimulus for the expression of iNOS.

Liu et al. (2005) presented evidence suggesting a role for G
protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 (GRK2; 109635) in the regulation of NO
production and hepatic vascular dynamics in a rat model of liver
sinusoidal endothelial injury and portal hypertension induced by bile
duct ligation. Sinusoidal endothelial cells isolated from the affected
animals had increased levels of GRK2, reduced levels of phosphorylated
AKT and eNOS, and decreased levels of NO. Gene silencing of GRK2 using
siRNA in injured sinusoidal endothelial cells restored AKT activity and
resulted in increased NO production. Liu et al. (2005) also found that
heterozygous Grk2 mice had increased levels of phosphorylated Akt and
decreased portal hypertension in response to injury compared to wildtype
mice. Liu et al. (2005) proposed a mechanism in which upregulation of
GRK2 after endothelial cell injury directly inhibits phosphorylation of
AKT, leading to reduced activation of eNOS and decreased production of
NO, and resulting in portal hypertension.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION, PREGNANCY-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION RESISTANT TO CONVENTIONAL THERAPY, INCLUDED;;
ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
ISCHEMIC STROKE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
NOS3, GLU298ASP

Yoshimura et al. (1998) found a glu298-to-asp (E298D) variant (dbSNP
rs1799983) in exon 7 of the NOS3 gene. In a study of 113 patients with
coronary spasm, in whom the diagnosis of coronary spasm was made by
intracoronary injection of acetylcholine, and 100 control subjects, they
found a significant difference in the distribution of the variant; 21.2%
of the coronary spasm group and 9.0% of the control group (p = 0.014 for
dominant effect) showed the variant. In an elderly population in
Australia, Liyou et al. (1998) could demonstrate no difference in the
distribution of the E298D alleles in relation to the presence of
coronary artery disease.

Cai et al. (1999) genotyped 763 white Australians undergoing coronary
angiography for the eNOS glu298-to-asp mutation resulting from an 894G-T
transition. The frequencies of the GG, TG, and TT genotypes were not
significantly different in men or women with or without coronary artery
disease. The mutation was also not associated with myocardial infarction
(MI) in males or females, or with the number of significantly stenosed
vessels. The T allele frequency (32.5%) was much greater than that
reported for the Japanese population (7.8% in controls and 10% in MI
patients). Hingorani et al. (1999) investigated the relationship between
the glu298-to-asp variant in atherosclerotic coronary artery disease,
using 2 independent case-controlled studies. In the first study, cases
consisted of 298 unrelated patients with positive coronary angiograms
and controls were 138 unrelated healthy individuals ascertained through
a population health screen. In the second study, the cases were 249
patients with recent MI and a further 183 unrelated controls. There was
an excess of homozygotes for the asp298 variant among patients with
angiographic coronary artery disease, and among patients with recent MI
when compared with their respective controls (35.9% vs 10.2% in the
first study, and 18.1% vs 8.7% in the second study). In comparison to
glu298 homozygotes, homozygosity for asp298 was associated with an odds
ratio of 4.2 (95% confidence interval, 2.3 to 7.9) for angiographic
coronary artery disease and 2.5 (95% confidence interval, 1.3 to 4.2)
for MI.

Dahiyat et al. (1999) found a significant association of late-onset
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) and homozygosity for the glu allele in a
study of 122 early-onset and 317 late-onset Alzheimer cases compared to
392 controls. This was independent of apoE status. The authors remarked
on the interaction of beta-amyloid with endothelial cells. In contrast,
Higuchi et al. (2000) studied 411 Japanese patients with sporadic AD and
2 groups of controls: 350 Japanese controls and 52 Caucasian controls.
They found no difference in the glu298-to-asp polymorphism between AD
patients and controls, even when stratifying for age of onset and
presence of the APOE E4 allele. However, they observed that the glu
allele frequency was significantly higher in Japanese controls than in
Caucasian controls, suggesting that the association reported by Dahiyat
et al. (1999) may be a function of race. Akomolafe et al. (2006) found
that the glu298 allele was significantly associated with AD in a group
of over 200 African American patients, but not among a similar number of
Caucasians. A metaanalysis of 12 previously published similar studies
showed a small effect of the glu/glu genotype on AD risk across all
studies (OR of 1.15), but also showed significant heterogeneity.
Akomolafe et al. (2006) noted that the GG genotype (corresponding to
glu/glu) is prevalent in the general population (0.33 to 0.87),
suggesting that by itself the polymorphism plays only a modest role in
the development of AD and likely interacts with other factors.

In a study of 35 patients with histories of placental abruption and 170
control subjects, Yoshimura et al. (2001) found that the frequency of
glu298-to-asp homozygotes and heterozygotes was higher in the placental
abruption group than in the control group (40% vs 14%; p less than
0.001).

Kobashi et al. (2001) found in a study in Japan that the frequency of
heterozygotes and homozygotes for asp298 in the NOS3 gene was
significantly higher in patients with hypertension in pregnancy (0.23)
(see 189800) than in controls (0.12) (p less than 0.01). Multivariate
analysis showed that a family history of hypertension, the TT genotype
of the angiotensinogen gene (AGT; 106150.0001), the GA+AA NOS3 genotype,
and a prepregnancy body mass index of more than 24 were independent
potent risk factors, after adjustment for maternal age and parity. The
odds ratios of these factors were 2.7, 2.3, 2.2, and 2.1, respectively.
The results suggested that the asp298 of NOS3 is a potent, independent
risk factor for hypertension in pregnancy.

In a study of 150 'coloured' South African patients, 50 with normal
pregnancies, 50 with severe preeclampsia, and 50 with abruptio
placentae, Hillermann et al. (2005) found that the combined frequency of
the GT and TT NOS3 variant genotypes was significantly higher in the
abruptio placentae group than in the control group (p = 0.006). Among
preeclamptic patients who subsequently developed abruptio placentae, the
T allele emerged as a major risk factor for the development of abruptio
placentae (p less than 0.0001); the T variant did not seem to affect the
risk of preeclampsia itself, however.

Jachymova et al. (2001) found a significantly higher frequency of T
alleles (related to the E298D polymorphism) in hypertensives (see
145500) as compared to normotensives. Significant association was found
in patients showing resistance to conventional antihypertensive therapy.
In well-controlled hypertensives the tendency to a higher frequency of T
alleles was observed, but this did not reach statistical significance.
The presence of the T allele was thought to be predictive of the
patients' therapeutic response.

In a metaanalysis of 14 case-control studies evaluating the association
between E298D and ischemic heart disease (myocardial infarction or
angiographic coronary artery occlusion) involving 6,036 cases and 6,106
controls, Casas et al. (2004) found that homozygosity for asp298 was
associated with an increased risk of ischemic heart disease (OR, 1.31).

Berger et al. (2007) performed 2 large case-control studies involving
1,901 hospitalized stroke patients and 1,747 regional population
controls and found that E298D was significantly associated with ischemic
stroke (601367) independent of age, gender, hypertension, diabetes, and
hypercholesterolemia.

.0002
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
NOS3, -786T-C

Nakayama et al. (1999) searched for possible mutations in the
endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene in patients with coronary spasm.
They found evidence of 3 linked mutations in the 5-prime flanking region
of the eNOS gene, among them a -786T-C transition. The incidence of
these alleles was significantly greater in 174 patients with coronary
artery spasm studied than in 161 controls. Multiple logistic regression
analysis with forward stepwise selection using the environmental risk
factors and the eNOS gene variant revealed that the most predictive
independent risk factor for coronary spasm was the mutant allele. As
assessed by luciferase reporter gene assays, the -786T-C mutation
resulted in a significant reduction of eNOS gene promoter activity,
whereas neither of the other mutations had any effect.

REFERENCE 1. Ahsan, A.; Norboo, T.; Baig, M. A.; Pasha, M. A. Q.: Simultaneous
selection of the wild-type genotypes of the G894T and 4B/4A polymorphisms
of NOS3 associate with high-altitude adaptation. Ann. Hum. Genet. 69:
260-267, 2005.

2. Aicher, A.; Heeschen, C.; Mildner-Rihm, C.; Urbich, C.; Ihling,
C.; Technau-Ihling, K.; Zeiher, A. M.; Dimmeler, S.: Essential role
of endothelial nitric oxide synthase for mobilization of stem and
progenitor cells. Nature Med. 9: 1370-1376, 2003. Note: Erratum:
Nature Med. 10: 999 only, 2004.

3. Akomolafe, A.; Lunetta, K. L.; Erlich, P. M.; Cupples, L. A.; Baldwin,
C. T.; Huyck, M.; Green, R. C.; Farrer, L. A.: Genetic association
between endothelial nitric oxide synthase and Alzheimer disease. Clin.
Genet. 70: 49-56, 2006.

4. Arngrimsson, R.; Hayward, C.; Nadaud, S.; Baldursdottir, A.; Walker,
J. J.; Liston, W. A.; Bjarnadottir, R. I.; Brock, D. J. H.; Geirsson,
R. T.; Connor, J. M.; Soubrier, F.: Evidence for a familial pregnancy-induced
hypertension locus in the eNOS-gene region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61:
354-362, 1997.

5. Barouch, L. A.; Harrison, R. W.; Skaf, M. W.; Rosas, G. O.; Cappola,
T. P.; Kobeissi, Z. A.; Hobai, I. A.; Lemmon, C. A.; Burnett, A. L.;
O'Rourke, B.; Rodriguez, E. R.; Huang, P. L.; Lima, J. A. C.; Berkowitz,
D. E.; Hare, J. M.: Nitric oxide regulates the heart by spatial confinement
of nitric oxide synthase isoforms. Nature 416: 337-340, 2002.

6. Berger, K.; Stogbauer, F.; Stoll, M.; Wellmann, J.; Huge, A.; Cheng,
S.; Kessler, C.; John, U.; Assmann, G.; Ringelstein, E. B.; Funke,
H.: The glu298asp polymorphism in the nitric oxide synthase 3 gene
is associated with the risk of ischemic stroke in two large independent
case-control studies. Hum. Genet. 121: 169-178, 2007.

7. Bertrand, M. E.; LaBlanche, J. M.; Tilmant, P. Y.; Thieuleux, F.
A.; Delforge, M. R.; Carre, A. G.; Asseman, P.; Berzin, B.; Libersa,
C.; Laurent, J. M.: Frequency of provoked coronary arterial spasm
in 1089 consecutive patients undergoing coronary arteriography. Circulation 65:
1299-1306, 1982.

8. Bivalacqua, T. J.; Champion, H. C.; Usta, M. F.; Cellek, S.; Chitaley,
K.; Webb, R. C.; Lewis, R. L.; Mills, T. M.; Hellstrom, W. J. G.;
Kadowitz, P. J.: RhoA/Rho-kinase suppresses endothelial nitric oxide
synthase in the penis: a mechanism for diabetes-associated erectile
dysfunction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 9121-9126, 2004.

9. Bonnardeaux, A.; Nadaud, S.; Charru, A.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Corvol,
P.; Soubrier, F.: Lack of evidence for linkage of the endothelial
cell nitric oxide synthase gene to essential hypertension. Circulation 91:
96-102, 1995.

10. Cai, H.; Wilcken, D. E. L.; Wang, X. L.: The glu298-asp (894G-T)
mutation at exon 7 of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene and
coronary artery disease. J. Molec. Med. 77: 511-514, 1999.

11. Casas, J. P.; Bautista, L. E.; Humphries, S. E.; Hingorani, A.
D.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase genotype and ischemic heart
disease: meta-analysis of 26 studies involving 23028 subjects. Circulation 109:
1359-1365, 2004.

12. Champion, H. C.; Bivalacqua, T. J.; Hyman, A. L.; Ignarro, L.
J.; Hellstrom, W. J. G.; Kadowitz, P. J.: Gene transfer of endothelial
nitric oxide synthase to the penis augments erectile responses in
the aged rat. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11648-11652, 1999.

13. Chen, C.-A.; Wang, T.-Y.; Varadharaj, S.; Reyes, L. A.; Hemann,
C.; Talukder, M. A. H.; Chen, Y.-R.; Druhan, L. J.; Zweier, J. L.
: S-glutathionylation uncouples eNOS and regulates its cellular and
vascular function. Nature 468: 1115-1118, 2010.

14. Connelly, L.; Madhani, M.; Hobbs, A. J.: Resistance to endotoxic
shock in endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) knock-out mice:
a pro-inflammatory role for eNOS-derived NO in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
10040-10046, 2005.

15. Dahiyat, M.; Cumming, A.; Harrington, C.; Wischik, C.; Xuereb,
J.; Corrigan, F.; Breen, G.; Shaw, D.; St. Clair, D.: Association
between Alzheimer's disease and the NOS3 gene. Ann. Neurol. 46:
664-667, 1999.

16. Dimmeler, S.; Fleming, I.; Fisslthaler, B.; Hermann, C.; Busse,
R.; Zeiher, A. M.: Activation of nitric oxide synthase in endothelial
cells by Akt-dependent phosphorylation. Nature 399: 601-605, 1999.

17. Fish, J. E.; Matouk, C. C.; Yeboah, E.; Bevan, S. C.; Khan, M.;
Patil, K.; Ohh, M.; Marsden, P. A.: Hypoxia-inducible expression
of a natural cis-antisense transcript inhibits endothelial nitric-oxide
synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15652-15666, 2007.

18. Fulton, D.; Gratton, J.-P.; McCabe, T. J.; Fontana, J.; Fujio,
Y.; Walsh, K.; Franke, T. F.; Papapetropoulos, A.; Sessa, W. C.:
Regulation of endothelium-derived nitric oxide production by the protein
kinase Akt. Nature 399: 597-601, 1999. Note: Erratum: Nature 400:
792 only, 1999.

19. Furchgott, R. F.; Zawadzki, J. V.: The obligatory role of endothelial
cells in the relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by acetylcholine. Nature 288:
373-376, 1980.

20. Gregg, A. R.; Lee, C. G. L.; Herman, G. E.; O'Brien, W. E.: Endothelial
nitric oxide synthase (Nos3) maps to the proximal region of mouse
chromosome 5. Mammalian Genome 6: 152, 1995.

21. Heltianu, C.; Costache, G.; Azibi, K.; Poenaru, L.; Simionescu,
M.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms in Fabry's
disease. Clin. Genet. 61: 423-429, 2002.

22. Higuchi, S.; Ohta, S.; Matsushita, S.; Matsui, T.; Yuzuriha, T.;
Urakami, K.; Arai, H.: NOS3 polymorphism not associated with Alzheimer's
disease in Japanese. (Letter) Ann. Neurol. 48: 685 only, 2000.

23. Hillermann, R.; Carelse, K.; Gebhardt, G. S.: The glu29-to-asp
variant of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene is associated
with an increased risk for abruptio placentae in pre-eclampsia. J.
Hum. Genet. 50: 415-419, 2005.

24. Hingorani, A. D.; Liang, C. F.; Fatibene, J.; Lyon, A.; Monteith,
S.; Parsons, A.; Haydock, S.; Hopper, R. V.; Stephens, N. G.; O'Shaughnessy,
K. M.; Brown, M. J.: A common variant of the endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (glu298-asp) is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease
in the UK. Circulation 100: 1515-1520, 1999.

25. Huang, P. L.; Huang, Z.; Mashimo, H.; Bloch, K. D.; Moskowitz,
M. A.; Bevan, J. A.; Fishman, M. C.: Hypertension in mice lacking
the gene for endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Nature 377: 239-242,
1995.

26. Jachymova, M.; Horky, K.; Bultas, J.; Kozich, V.; Jindra, A.;
Peleska, J.; Martasek, P.: Association of the glu298-to-asp polymorphism
in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with essential hypertension
resistant to conventional therapy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284:
426-430, 2001.

27. Janssens, S. P.; Shimouchi, A.; Quertermous, T.; Bloch, D. B.;
Bloch, K. D.: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelium-derived
relaxing factor/nitric oxide synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 14519-14522,
1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 267: 22694 only, 1992.

28. Ji, Y.; Ferracci, G.; Warley, A.; Ward, M.; Leung, K.-Y.; Samsuddin,
S.; Leveque, C.; Queen, L.; Reebye, V.; Pal, P.; Gkaliagkousi, E.;
Seager, M.; Ferro, A.: Beta-actin regulates platelet nitric oxide
synthase 3 activity through interaction with heat shock protein 90. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 8839-8844, 2007.

29. Kobashi, G.; Yamada, H.; Ohta, K.; Kato, E.-H.; Ebina, Y.; Fujimoto,
S.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS3) variant and hypertension
in pregnancy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 103: 241-244, 2001.

30. Kugiyama, K.; Ohgushi, M.; Motoyama, T.; Sugiyama, S.; Ogawa,
H.; Yoshimura, M.; Inobe, Y.; Hirashima, O.; Kawano, H.; Soejima,
H.; Yasue, H.: Nitric oxide-mediated flow-dependent dilation is impaired
in coronary arteries in patients with coronary spastic angina. J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 30: 920-926, 1997.

31. Lewis, I.; Lachmeijer, G.; Downing, S.; Dekker, G.; Glazebrook,
C.; Clayton, D.; Morris, N. H.; O'Shaughnessy, K. M.: Failure to
detect linkage of preeclampsia to the region of the NOS3 locus on
chromosome 7q. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 310-313, 1999.

32. Lim, K.-H.; Ancrile, B. B.; Kashatus, D. F.; Counter, C. M.:
Tumour maintenance is mediated by eNOS. Nature 452: 646-649, 2008.

33. Liu, S.; Premont, R. T.; Kontos, C. D.; Zhu, S.; Rockey, D. C.
: A crucial role for GRK2 in regulation of endothelial cell nitric
oxide synthase function in portal hypertension. Nature Med. 11:
952-958, 2005.

34. Liyou, N.; Simons, L.; Friedlander, Y.; Simons, J.; McCallum,
J.; O'Shaughnessy, K.; Davis, D.; Johnson, A.: Coronary artery disease
is not associated with the E298D variant of the constitutive, endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 54: 528-529, 1998.

35. Longo, M.; Jain, V.; Vedernikov, Y. P.; Bukowski, R.; Garfield,
R. E.; Hankins, G. D.; Anderson, G. D.; Saade, G. R.: Fetal origins
of adult vascular dysfunction in mice lacking endothelial nitric oxide
synthase. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 288: R1114-R1121,
2005.

36. Marsden, P. A.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Scherer, S. W.; Stewart, R. J.;
Hall, A. V.; Shi, X.-M.; Tsui, L.-C.; Schappert, K. T.: Structure
and chromosomal localization of the human constitutive endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 17478-17488, 1993.

37. Marsden, P. A.; Schappert, K. T.; Chen, H. S.; Flowers, M.; Sundell,
C. L.; Wilcox, J. N.; Lamas, S.; Michel, T.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of human endothelial nitric oxide synthase. FEBS
Lett. 307: 287-293, 1992.

38. Miyamoto, Y.; Saito, Y.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Yoshimura,
T.; Yoshimura, M.; Harada, M.; Kajiyama, N.; Kishimoto, I.; Kuwahara,
K.; Hino, J.; Ogawa, E.; Hamanaka, I.; Kamitani, S.; Takahashi, N.;
Kawakami, R.; Kangawa, K.; Yasue, H.; Nakao, K.: Replication protein
A1 reduces transcription of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase
gene containing a -786T-C mutation associated with coronary spastic
angina. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2629-2637, 2000.

39. Motoyama, T.; Kawano, H.; Kugiyama, K.; Okumura, K.; Ohgushi,
M.; Yoshimura, M.; Hirashima, O.; Yasue, H.: Flow-mediated, endothelium-dependent
dilatation of the brachial arteries is impaired in patients with coronary
spastic angina. Am. Heart J. 133: 263-267, 1997.

40. Nakayama, M.; Yasue, H.; Yoshimura, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Kugiyama,
K.; Ogawa, H.; Motoyama, T.; Saito, Y.; Ogawa, Y.; Miyamoto, Y.; Nakao,
K.: T(-786)-C mutation in the 5-prime-flanking region of the endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm. Circulation 99:
2864-2870, 1999.

41. Nakayama, T.; Soma, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Izumi, Y.; Kanmatsuse,
K.; Esumi, M.: Association analysis of CA repeat polymorphism of
the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with essential hypertension
in Japanese. Clin. Genet. 51: 26-30, 1997.

42. Napolitano, M.; Miceli, F.; Calce, A.; Vacca, A.; Gulino, A.;
Apa, R.; Lanzone, A.: Expression and relationship between endothelin-1
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) and inducible/endothelial nitric
oxide synthase mRNA isoforms from normal and preeclamptic placentas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 2318-2323, 2000.

43. Nisoli, E.; Clementi, E.; Paolucci, C.; Cozzi, V.; Tonello, C.;
Sciorati, C.; Bracale, R.; Valerio, A.; Francolini, M.; Moncada, S.;
Carruba, M. O.: Mitochondrial biogenesis in mammals: the role of
endogenous nitric oxide. Science 299: 896-899, 2003.

44. Nisoli, E.; Tonello, C.; Cardile, A.; Cozzi, V.; Bracale, R.;
Tedesco, L.; Falcone, S.; Valerio, A.; Cantoni, O.; Clementi, E.;
Moncada, S.; Carruba, M. O.: Calorie restriction promotes mitochondrial
biogenesis by inducing the expression of eNOS. Science 310: 314-317,
2005.

45. Ohashi, Y.; Kawashima, S.; Hirata, K.; Yamashita, T.; Ishida,
T.; Inoue, N.; Sakoda, T.; Kurihara, H.; Yazaki, Y.; Yokoyama, M.
: Hypotension and reduced nitric oxide-elicited vasorelaxation in
transgenic mice overexpressing endothelial nitric oxide synthase. J.
Clin. Invest. 102: 2061-2071, 1998.

46. Ohsawa, Y.; Toko, H.; Katsura, M.; Morimoto, K.; Yamada, H.; Ichikawa,
Y.; Murakami, T.; Ohkuma, S.; Komuro, I.; Sunada, Y.: Overexpression
of P104L mutant caveolin-3 in mice develops hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
with enhanced contractility in association with increased endothelial
nitric oxide synthase activity. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 151-157,
2004.

47. Persu, A.; Stoenoiu, M. S.; Messiaen, T.; Davila, S.; Robino,
C.; El-Khattabi, O.; Mourad, M.; Horie, S.; Feron, O.; Balligand,
J.-L.; Wattiez, R.; Pirson, Y.; Chaveau, D.; Lens, X. M.; Devuyst,
O.: Modifier effect of ENOS in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 229-241, 2002.

48. Persu, A.; Vinck, W. J.; El Khattabi, O.; Janssen, R. G. J. H.;
Paulussen, A. D. C.; Devuyst, O.; Vlietinck, R.; Fagard, R. H.: Influence
of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene on conventional and
ambulatory blood pressure: sib-pair analysis and haplotype study. J.
Hypertens. 23: 759-765, 2005.

49. Raman, C. S.; Li, H.; Martasak, P.; Kral, V.; Masters, B. S. S.;
Poulos, T. L.: Crystal structure of constitutive endothelial nitric
oxide synthase: a paradigm for pterin function involving a novel metal
center. Cell 95: 939-950, 1998.

50. Rapoport, R. M.; Murad, F.: Agonist-induced endothelium-dependent
relaxation in rat thoracic aorta may be mediated through CGMP. Circ.
Res. 52: 352-357, 1983.

51. Robb, G. B.; Carson, A. R.; Tai, S. C.; Fish, J. E.; Singh, S.;
Yamada, T.; Scherer, S. W.; Nakabayashi, K.; Marsden, P. A.: Post-transcriptional
regulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase by an overlapping
antisense mRNA transcript. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 37982-37996, 2004.

52. Robinson, L. J.; Weremowicz, S.; Morton, C. C.; Michel, T.: Isolation
and chromosomal localization of the human endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (NOS3) gene. Genomics 19: 350-357, 1994.

53. Simoncini, T.; Mannella, P.; Fornari, L.; Caruso, A.; Varone,
G.; Garibaldi , S.; Genazzani, A. R.: Tibolone activates nitric oxide
synthesis in human endothelial cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
4594-4600, 2004.

54. Snyder, S. H.: No endothelial NO. Nature 377: 196-197, 1995.

55. Steudel, W.; Scherrer-Crosbie, M.; Bloch, K. D.; Weimann, J.;
Huang, P. L.; Jones, R. C.; Picard, M. H.; Zapol, W. M.: Sustained
pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy after chronic
hypoxia in mice with congenital deficiency of nitric oxide synthase
3. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 2468-2477, 1998.

56. Straub, A. C.; Lohman, A. W.; Billaud, M.; Johnstone, S. R.; Dwyer,
S. T.; Lee, M. Y.; Bortz, P. S.; Best, A. K.; Columbus, L.; Gaston,
B.; Isakson, B. E.: Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin alpha
regulates nitric oxide signalling. Nature 491: 473-477, 2012.

57. Tanus-Santos, J. E.; Desai, M.; Flockhart, D. A.: Effects of
ethnicity on the distribution of clinically relevant endothelial nitric
oxide variants. Pharmacogenetics 11: 719-725, 2001.

58. Tempfer, C.; Unfried, G.; Zeillinger, R.; Hefler, L.; Nagele,
F.; Huber, J. C.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphism
in women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage. Hum. Reprod. 16:
1644-1647, 2001.

59. Wang, X. L.; Sim, A. S.; Badenhop, R. F.; McCredie, R. M.; Wilcken,
D. E. L.: A smoking-dependent risk of coronary artery disease associated
with a polymorphism of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene. Nature
Med. 2: 41-45, 1996.

60. Yallampalli, C.; Garfield, R. E.: Inhibition of nitric oxide
synthesis in rats during pregnancy produces signs similar to those
of preeclampsia. Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 169: 1316-1320, 1993.

61. Yasue, H.; Kugiyama, K.: Coronary artery spasm: Japanese view. Coron.
Artery Dis. 1: 668-673, 1990.

62. Yoshimura, M.; Yasue, H.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Sumida,
H.; Sugiyama, S.; Kugiyama, K.; Ogawa, H.; Ogawa, Y.; Saito, Y.; Miyamoto,
Y.; Nakao, K.: A missense glu298asp variant in the endothelial nitric
oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm in the Japanese. Hum.
Genet. 103: 65-69, 1998.

63. Yoshimura, T.; Yoshimura, M.; Tabata, A.; Yasue, H.; Okamura,
H.: The missense glu298-to-asp variant of the endothelial nitric
oxide synthase gene is strongly associated with placental abruption. Hum.
Genet. 108: 181-183, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/22/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/6/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/16/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/25/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/7/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/7/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/19/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/10/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/6/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/25/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2000
Orest Hurko - updated: 12/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/16/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/24/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1992

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
carol: 4/4/2013
alopez: 12/17/2012
terry: 12/14/2012
alopez: 8/3/2012
carol: 6/7/2012
terry: 5/3/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
alopez: 3/31/2011
terry: 3/29/2011
wwang: 8/6/2010
wwang: 6/28/2010
terry: 6/22/2010
alopez: 1/13/2010
mgross: 5/15/2009
terry: 5/6/2009
joanna: 4/10/2009
alopez: 5/13/2008
terry: 4/16/2008
mgross: 1/25/2008
terry: 1/16/2008
wwang: 8/27/2007
terry: 8/21/2007
wwang: 9/1/2006
ckniffin: 8/25/2006
alopez: 3/28/2006
wwang: 3/9/2006
terry: 2/17/2006
carol: 12/7/2005
terry: 12/7/2005
wwang: 11/7/2005
alopez: 10/26/2005
terry: 10/25/2005
carol: 10/11/2005
ckniffin: 10/4/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
wwang: 8/25/2005
terry: 8/19/2005
wwang: 7/25/2005
terry: 7/19/2005
carol: 5/25/2005
joanna: 5/25/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 4/13/2005
mgross: 10/27/2004
carol: 7/6/2004
alopez: 11/7/2003
cwells: 11/5/2003
alopez: 10/29/2003
terry: 10/29/2003
alopez: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/21/2003
alopez: 1/15/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
cwells: 9/18/2002
alopez: 9/9/2002
carol: 6/17/2002
ckniffin: 6/14/2002
alopez: 4/8/2002
cwells: 4/5/2002
cwells: 3/21/2002
terry: 3/19/2002
carol: 1/4/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
mcapotos: 10/15/2001
mcapotos: 10/10/2001
terry: 10/5/2001
cwells: 9/14/2001
cwells: 8/30/2001
terry: 8/29/2001
mgross: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 4/16/2001
terry: 4/6/2001
mcapotos: 2/1/2001
mcapotos: 1/25/2001
alopez: 6/1/2000
terry: 5/29/2000
carol: 12/3/1999
terry: 12/2/1999
carol: 10/22/1999
terry: 10/21/1999
carol: 9/20/1999
alopez: 6/23/1999
mgross: 3/17/1999
carol: 3/10/1999
terry: 3/3/1999
carol: 2/16/1999
terry: 2/16/1999
carol: 2/4/1999
carol: 1/13/1999
terry: 12/18/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
carol: 8/24/1998
terry: 8/19/1998
carol: 6/30/1998
terry: 6/26/1998
terry: 9/30/1997
terry: 9/24/1997
terry: 4/24/1997
terry: 4/21/1997
terry: 2/6/1996
mark: 1/5/1996
terry: 1/3/1996
terry: 10/30/1995
mark: 9/20/1995
carol: 2/15/1994
carol: 9/21/1993
carol: 9/13/1993
carol: 1/11/1993

608933	TITLE *608933 ENDONUCLEASE VIII-LIKE 2; NEIL2
;;NEI2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NEIL2 belongs to a class of DNA glycosylases homologous to the bacterial
Fpg/Nei family. These glycosylases initiate the first step in base
excision repair by cleaving bases damaged by reactive oxygen species and
introducing a DNA strand break via the associated lyase reaction
(Bandaru et al., 2002)

CLONING

By searching a database for sequences similar to the Arabidopsis DNA
glycosylase Fpg, Bandaru et al. (2002) identified NEIL2. Bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins contain 2 structural domains: an N-terminal 2-layered
beta sandwich and a C-terminal 4-helix bundle, which includes a
helix-2-turns-helix (H2TH) motif and a zinc finger. The deduced
332-amino acid human NEIL2 protein has conserved residues in 6 highly
conserved regions that span both structural domains of the bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins, but it has an unusual CHCC zinc finger.

Using Northern blot analysis, Hazra et al. (2002) detected a 2.4-kb
NEIL2 transcript. Expression was highest in skeletal muscle and testis,
moderate in brain and heart, and low in all other tissues examined.
Analysis of NEIL2 expression in synchronized human diploid fibroblasts
indicated that, unlike expression of NEIL1 (608844), expression of NEIL2
is independent of the cell cycle. Epitope-tagged NEIL2 was expressed in
nuclei of transfected cells, although a small fraction was also observed
in the cytoplasm. The deduced NEIL2 protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 36.7 kD, but bacterially-expressed NEIL2 showed an apparent
molecular mass of 42 kD by SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

Hazra et al. (2002) characterized recombinant NEIL2 following expression
in E. coli. The enzyme showed DNA glycosylase/abasic lyase activity,
primarily for excising oxidative products of cytosine, with highest
activity for 5-hydroxyuracil. NEIL2 showed lower activity for
5,6-dihydrouracil and 5-hydroxycytosine, and negligible or undetectable
activity with 8-oxoguanine, thymine glycol, 2-hydroxyadenine,
hypoxanthine, and xanthine. Hazra et al. (2002) concluded that NEIL2 is
involved in global genome repair, mainly for removing oxidative products
of cytosine.

Dou et al. (2003) found that both NEIL2 and NEIL1 bound 5-hydroxyuracil
contained within bubble DNA, contrasting strongly with NTH1 (602656) and
OGG1 (601982), which did not produce stable complexes with either
single-strand DNA or a DNA bubble. NEIL2 had much higher activity for
excising 5-hydroxyuracil in bubble DNA than with duplex or single-strand
DNA. NEIL2 could also excise 8-oxoguanine when it was placed inside a
bubble.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bandaru et al. (2002) determined that the NEIL2 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bandaru et al. (2002) mapped the NEIL2
gene to chromosome 8p23.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bandaru, V.; Sunkara, S.; Wallace, S. S.; Bond, J. P.: A novel
human DNA glycosylase that removes oxidative DNA damage and is homologous
to Escherichia coli endonuclease VIII. DNA Repair 1: 517-529, 2002.

2. Dou, H.; Mitra, S.; Hazra, T. K.: Repair of oxidized bases in
DNA bubble structures by human DNA glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 49679-49684, 2003.

3. Hazra, T. K.; Kow, Y. W.; Hatahet, Z.; Imhoff, B.; Boldogh, I.;
Mokkapati, S. K.; Mitra, S.; Izumi, T.: Identification and characterization
of a novel human DNA glycosylase for repair of cytosine-derived lesions. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 30417-30420, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/21/2004

EDITED mgross: 09/21/2004

607043	TITLE *607043 TRAF3-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; TRAF3IP2
;;CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 5; C6ORF5;;
NUCLEAR FACTOR KAPPA-B ACTIVATOR 1; ACT1;;
CONNECTION TO I-KAPPA-B KINASE AND STRESS-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE;
CIKS;;
CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 4; C6ORF4;;
CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 6; C6ORF6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using mouse Nemo/Ikk-gamma (IKBKG; 300248) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen, Leonardi et al. (2000) cloned CIKS from a human liver cDNA
library. The deduced 574-amino acid protein contains a C-terminal
leucine zipper. Northern blot analysis of multiple human tissues
indicated ubiquitous expression of a 2.5-kb transcript.

Li et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA encoding ACT1 from a cDNA library
constructed from embryonic kidney cells induced to display constitutive
activation of nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011). The deduced
574-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 60 kD and
contains a helix-loop-helix domain and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain.
The helix-loop-helix domain shares 35% identity with the
helix-loop-helix domain of upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF1; 191523).
Northern blot analysis detected highest expression in thymus, kidney,
and placenta, moderate expression in heart, skeletal muscle, colon,
liver, lung, and small intestine, and low expression in brain, spleen,
and peripheral blood leukocytes.

By screening thymus, skeletal muscle, and fetal liver cDNA libraries,
Morelli et al. (2000) identified 3 isoforms of ACT1 that they designated
C6ORF4, C6ORF5, and C6ORF6. C6ORF4 encodes a deduced 575-amino acid
protein. C6ORF5 and C6ORF6 result from the skipping of exon 2 and are
differentiated by use of alternate polyadenylation signals, yielding
identical proteins of 566 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected
5.0- and 2.5-kb transcripts in all tissues examined, with a weak 3.8-kb
transcript in heart, skeletal muscle, and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Leonardi et al. (2000) verified the interaction between CIKS and
IKK-gamma by in vitro binding assays using recombinant proteins and by
coimmunoprecipitation of lysates of transfected HeLa cells or
untransfected Jurkat T-leukemic cells. IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664) and
IKK-beta (IKBKB; 603258) also coimmunoprecipitated with CIKS. Using
truncation mutants, the authors localized the binding domain to the N
terminus of CIKS. HeLa cells transfected with increasing amounts of CIKS
showed dose-dependent activation of an Ig kappa-B luciferase reporter
plasmid, and the activation could be blocked by cotransfection with
IKK-gamma. Cotransfection of CIKS with kinase-deficient mutants of NIK
(MAP3K14; 604655), MEKK1 (MAP3K1: 600982), IKK-alpha, and IKK-beta
indicated that CIKS activates NFKB exclusively through an IKK-dependent
mechanism. Overexpressed CIKS also potently activated SAPK/JNK (MAPK8;
601158). Analysis of the binding activity of truncation mutants showed
that the C terminus of CIK is involved in SAPK/JNK activation, whereas
the N terminus is necessary and sufficient for kappa-B reporter
activation.

Using gel shift assays, Li et al. (2000) confirmed constitutive
activation of NFKB with transfection of ACT1 into human embryonic kidney
cells. They also found constitutive activation of JNK and IKK.
Disruption of the N-terminal helix-loop-helix domain of ACT1 completely
abolished the interaction between ACT1 and the IKK complex as well as
the activation of NFKB.

By mutation analysis, Pacifico et al. (2003) identified a sequence in
the 5-prime flanking region of human CIKS that was essential for basal
promoter activity in a canine kidney cell line. RT-PCR, Northern, and
Western blot analyses showed that various proinflammatory cytokines
upregulated CIKS expression in HeLa cells.

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Qian et al. (2007) found that IL17
(603149) induced association of ACT1 with IL17RA (605461) in various
cell types. The ACT1-IL17RA interaction required the SEFIR domain of
IL17RA. Expression of Il17-dependent inflammation-related genes was
abolished in Act1-deficient mouse cells. Mice lacking Act1 had delayed
onset and lower severity of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, as
well as limited colitis. Qian et al. (2007) concluded that ACT1 is
essential for IL17-dependent signaling in autoimmune and inflammatory
disease.

GENE STRUCTURE

Morelli et al. (2000) determined that the ACT1 gene contains 10 exons
and spans more than 50 kb. They also identified C6UAS, which overlaps
exon 2 and is transcribed in the antisense orientation from the
complementary strand of C6ORF4. C6UAS has no apparent open reading
frame, but Morelli et al. (2000) provided experimental evidence that it
has a regulatory function and can behave as an antisense RNA in the
control of C6ORF4 translation.

Pacifico et al. (2003) mapped the CIKS transcription start site and
found that the 5-prime flanking region was TATA-less, but it had
initiator, GC, and CAAT boxes.

MAPPING

Morelli et al. (2000) identified ACT1 within an EST clone that maps to
chromosome 6q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ellinghaus et al. (2010) and Huffmeier et al. (2010) independently
identified association of a coding single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP),
dbSNP rs33980500 (607043.0001), in the TRAF3IP2 gene with psoriasis
susceptibility (PSORS13; 614070).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSORIASIS SUSCEPTIBILITY 13
TRAF3IP2, ASP19ASN (dbSNP rs33980500)

In a case-control genomewide association study of psoriasis
susceptibility (PSORS13; 614070), Ellinghaus et al. (2010) identified a
coding SNP, dbSNP rs33980500, in exon 2 of the TRAF3IP2 gene. A C-to-T
transition results in substitution of asn for asp at codon 19 (D19N).
This SNP was significantly associated with risk for psoriasis vulgaris
(P = 1.24 x 10(-16)) and psoriatic arthritis (P = 4.57 x 10(-12)).

In an independent case-control genomewide association study, Huffmeier
et al. (2010) found significant association of dbSNP rs33980500 with
psoriatic arthritis in a subset of cases and controls (P = 1.13 x
10(-20), OR = 1.95). Functional assays showed reducing binding of this
TRAF3IP2 variant to TRAF6 (602355), suggesting altered modulation of
immunoregulatory signals through altered TRAF interactions as a novel
and shared pathway for psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis vulgaris.
Huffmeier et al. (2010) referred to the amino acid change correlated
with this SNP as ASP10ASN.

REFERENCE 1. Ellinghaus, E.; Ellinghaus, D.; Stuart, P. E.; Nair, R. P.; Debrus,
S.; Raelson, J. V.; Belouchi, M.; Fournier, H.; Reinhard, C.; Ding,
J.; Li, Y.; Tejasvi, T.; and 21 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies a psoriasis susceptibility locus at TRAF3IP2. Nature
Genet. 42: 991-995, 2010.

2. Huffmeier, U.; Uebe, S.; Ekici, A. B.; Bowes, J.; Giardina, E.;
Korendowych, E.; Juneblad, K.; Apel, M.; McManus, R.; Ho, P.; Bruce,
I. N.; Ryan, A. W.; and 18 others: Common variants at TRAF3IP2
are associated with susceptibility to psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis. Nature
Genet. 42: 996-999, 2010.

3. Leonardi, A.; Chariot, A.; Claudio, E.; Cunningham, K.; Siebenlist,
U.: CIKS, a connection to I-kappa-B kinase and stress-activated protein
kinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10494-10499, 2000.

4. Li, X.; Commane, M.; Nie, H.; Hua, X.; Chatterjee-Kishore, M.;
Wald, D.; Haag, M.; Stark, G. R.: Act1, an NF-kappa-B-activating
protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10489-10493, 2000.

5. Morelli, C.; Magnanini, C.; Mungall, A. J.; Negrini, M.; Barbanti-Brodano,
G.: Cloning and characterization of two overlapping genes in a subregion
at 6q21 involved in replicative senescence and schizophrenia. Gene 252:
217-225, 2000.

6. Pacifico, F.; Barone, C.; Mellone, S.; Di Jeso, B.; Consiglio,
E.; Formisano, S.; Vito, P.; Leonardi, A.: Promoter identification
of CIKS, a novel NF-kappa-B activating gene, and regulation of its
expression. Gene 307: 99-109, 2003.

7. Qian, Y.; Liu, C.; Hartupee, J.; Altuntas, C. Z.; Gulen, M. F.;
Jane-wit, D.; Xiao, J.; Lu, Y.; Giltiay, N.; Liu, J.; Kordula, T.;
Zhang, Q.-W.; Vallance, B.; Swaidani, S.; Aronica, M.; Tuohy, V. K.;
Hamilton, T.; Li, X.: The adaptor Act1 is required for interleukin
17-dependent signaling associated with autoimmune and inflammatory
disease. Nature Immun. 8: 247-256, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/24/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/12/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/18/2002

EDITED alopez: 06/30/2011
terry: 6/24/2011
alopez: 12/19/2007
mgross: 11/12/2007
alopez: 8/7/2007
mgross: 6/19/2002
mgross: 6/18/2002

607929	TITLE *607929 CCM2 GENE; CCM2
;;MALCAVERNIN;;
CHROMOSOME 7 OPEN READING FRAME 22; C7ORF22;;
OSMOSENSING SCAFFOLD FOR MEKK3; OSM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CCM complex, which includes CCM1 (KRIT1; 604214), CCM2, and CCM3
(PDCD10; 609118), is associated with cytoskeletal elements, signal
transduction components, and cell junctions (Hogan et al., 2008).

CLONING

In a study of cerebral cavernous malformations type 2 (603284), Liquori
et al. (2003) performed mutational analysis on a positional candidate
gene, MGC4607 (CCM2), located in the critical linkage region in the UCSC
human genome assembly. The gene was chosen because its translation
product contains a putative PTP domain. The same domain had been found
in ICAP1-alpha (607153), a binding partner of the CCM1 product KRIT1
(604214), which is mutant in cerebral cavernous malformations type 1
(116860).

Liquori et al. (2003) named the novel protein encoded by the CCM2 gene
malcavernin. They suggested that it may be part of the complex pathway
of integrin signaling that, when perturbed, causes abnormal vascular
morphogenesis in the brain, leading to CCM formation. Liquori et al.
(2003) found, from Northern blot analysis of human tissues, using the
entire cDNA as a probe, that MCG4607 is most highly expressed in
skeletal muscle, heart, and liver, with minimal or no expression in the
colon and lung. MGC4607 is also expressed in the brain.

Using Western blot analysis, Uhlik et al. (2003) found that CCM2, which
they called OSM, was expressed in the majority of mouse and human cell
types tested. Northern blot and in situ hybridization of mouse tissues
showed highest Osm expression in nervous system and lymphoid tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liquori et al. (2003) determined that the CCM2 gene contains 10 exons
and spans 77.6 kb. It contains LINE and SINE elements, including Alu
sequences, within intron 1 and the 3-prime region distal to exon 10.

MAPPING

By linkage analysis, Craig et al. (1998) mapped the CCM2 gene to
chromosome 7p15-p13.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse T-cell cDNA library, Uhlik et al.
(2003) showed that a C-terminal fragment of mouse Osm interacted with
Mekk3 (MAP3K3; 602539), a p38 (MAPK14; 600289) activator that responds
to sorbitol-induced hyperosmotic conditions. Mekk3 and Osm colocalized
in the cytoplasmic compartment of cotransfected cells, and the Mekk3-Osm
complex was recruited to Rac1 (602048)- and cytoskeletal actin (see
102560)-containing membrane ruffles in response to sorbitol treatment.
Protein interaction assays showed that Osm interacted directly with the
Mekk3 substrate Mkk3 (MAP2K3; 602315), with actin, and with both GDP-
and GTP-loaded Rac1. Uhlik et al. (2003) concluded that the
RAC1-OSM-MEKK3-MKK3 complex is required for regulation of p38 activity
in response to osmotic shock.

Zawistowski et al. (2005) used coimmunoprecipitation, fluorescence
resonance energy transfer, and subcellular localization strategies to
show that KRIT1 interacted with CCM2. Analogous to the established
interactions of KRIT1/ITGB1 (135630) and KRIT1/ICAP1, the KRIT1/CCM2
association was dependent upon phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domain of
CCM2. A familial CCM2 L198R mutation (607929.0007) abrogated the
KRIT1/CCM2 interaction, suggesting that loss of this interaction may be
critical in CCM pathogenesis. CCM2 and ICAP1, when bound to KRIT1 via
their respective PTB domains, differentially influenced KRIT1
subcellular localization. The authors expanded upon the established
involvement of CCM2 in the p38 MAPK signaling module by demonstrating
that KRIT1 associated with CCM2 and MEKK3 in a ternary complex.
Zawistowski et al. (2005) proposed that the genetic heterogeneity
observed in familial CCM may reflect mutation of different molecular
members of a coordinated signaling complex.

By GST pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Voss et al. (2007)
demonstrated that CCM2 coprecipitated and colocalized with CCM3 (PDCD10;
609118). Yeast 2-hybrid analysis showed that CCM3 directly bound to
STK25 (602255) and the phosphatase domain of FAP1 (600267). CCM3 was
phosphorylated by STK25, whereas the C-terminal domain of FAP1
dephosphorylated CCM3. Further experiments showed that STK25 and CCM2
formed a protein complex. The findings linked CCM3 and STK25 with CCM2,
which is part of signaling pathways that are essential for vascular
development. Voss et al. (2007) hypothesized that CCM3 is part of the
KRIT1/CCM2 protein complex through its interaction with CCM2, and
therefore may participate in CCM1-dependent modulation of ITGB1
signaling.

Using RNA interference, Crose et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of
Ccm2 in mouse brain endothelial cells led to increased monolayer
permeability, decreased tubule formation, and reduced cell migration
following wounding. These effects were associated with elevated levels
of RhoA (165390), a small GTPase necessary for cytoskeletal turnover and
migration. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that both Ccm2 and
Mekk3 directly bound the RhoA ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 (605568). Domain
analysis revealed that the PTB domain of Ccm2 directly bound the HECT
domain of Smurf1, and the interaction targeted Smurf1 to Ccm2 complexes
localized primarily at the cell periphery. Coexpression of Ccm2 and
Smurf1 led to cell rounding, likely due to loss of RhoA. Crose et al.
(2009) concluded that CCM2 contributes to endothelial cell integrity by
regulating SMURF1-directed RHOA degradation

Kleaveland et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of CCM2 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) via small hairpin RNA had no
effect on cell size, proliferation, migration, or formation of branching
structures. However, branched cords formed by CCM2-knockdown HUVECs
often lacked visible lumens, suggesting a defect in endothelial tube
formation. Using mice and zebrafish lacking Ccm2 and/or Heg1 (614182)
and CCM2-knockdown HUVECs, Kleaveland et al. (2009) showed that
CCM2-HEG1 signaling regulated endothelial tube formation and endothelial
junction formation. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and pull-down
assays in transfected HEK293T cells suggested a model in which HEG1
coupled with CCM2 primarily through interaction with KRIT1 at
endothelial cell-cell junctions.

Borikova et al. (2010) showed that knockdown of Ccm1, Ccm2, or Ccm3 in
mouse embryonic endothelial cells induced RhoA overexpression and
persistent RhoA activity at the cell edge, as well as in the cytoplasm
and nucleus. RhoA activation was especially pronounced following Ccm1
knockdown. Knockdown of Ccm1, Ccm2, or Ccm3 inhibited formation of
vessel-like tubes and invasion of extracellular matrix. Knockdown or
inhibition of Rock2 countered these effects and was associated with
inhibition of RhoA-stimulated phosphorylation of myosin light chain-2
(MLC2; see 160781). Borikova et al. (2010) concluded that the CCM
protein complex regulates RhoA activation and cytoskeletal dynamics.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Liquori et al. (2003) screened a cohort of 37 probands with cerebral
cavernous malformations for KRIT1 mutations and found mutations of this
gene in 10. Among the panel of 27 probands without a KRIT1 mutation,
they detected 8 different mutations in MGC4607. One mutation, a 4-bp
deletion (607929.0004), was found in 2 separate families which, as
suggested by a further investigation into ethnic background, may be
distantly related.

Denier et al. (2004) likewise identified the MGC4607 gene as the CCM2
gene. They narrowed the CCM2 linkage interval from 22 cM to 7.5 cM. They
then hypothesized that large deletions might be involved in the
disorder, as already reported in other hamartomatous conditions such as
tuberous sclerosis (191100) and neurofibromatosis (162200). They
performed a high density microsatellite genotyping of this 7.5-cM
interval in search of putative null alleles in 30 unrelated families. In
this way, they identified, in 2 families, null alleles that were the
result of deletions within a 350-kb interval. Additional microsatellite
and single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping showed that these 2
distinct deletions overlapped and that both of them deleted the first
exon of MGC4607. In both families, 1 of the 2 MGC4607 transcripts was
not detected. They then identified 8 additional point mutations within
MGC4607 in 8 of the remaining families. One of them led to the
alteration of the initiation codon and 5 of them to a premature
termination, including 1 nonsense, 1 frameshift, and 3 splice-site
mutations. The findings in cerebral cavernous malformations strongly
suggest that MGC4607 has a role in vascular morphogenesis.

Liquori et al. (2007) commented that DNA sequence analysis of the genes
CCM1 (KRIT1), CCM2, and CCM3 (PDCD10) in a cohort of 63 CCM-affected
families showed that 40% of these lacked any identifiable mutation. The
data suggested either that another CCM gene exists or that a significant
fraction of CCM mutations are not found by routine DNA sequence
analysis. Potential mutations that would be undetected by sequence
analysis included mutations within regulatory regions not included in
routine sequencing, as well as larger genomic insertions, deletions, or
duplications. Liquori et al. (2007) used multiplex ligation-dependent
probe analysis to screen 25 probands who were negative for CCM1, -2, and
-3 mutations for potential deletions or duplications within these 3
genes. They identified 15 deletions: 1 in the CCM1 gene, none in the
CCM3 gene, and 14 in the CCM2 gene. In this cohort, mutation screening
that included sequence and deletion analyses gave disease-gene
frequencies of 40% for CCM1, 38% for CCM2, 6% for CCM3, and 16% with no
mutation detected. The data indicated that the prevalence of CCM2 is
much higher than previously predicted, nearly equal to CCM1, and that
large genomic deletions in the CCM2 gene represent a major component of
this disorder. A common 77.6-kb deletion spanning CCM2 exons 2 through
10 was identified, which was present in 13% of the entire CCM cohort
(607929.0008). Liquori et al. (2007) hypothesized that these deletions
occurred in a hypermutable region because of surrounding repetitive
sequence elements and may catalyze the formation of intragenic
deletions.

In 2 (14%) of 14 unrelated patients with sporadic CCM and multiple
lesions, Felbor et al. (2007) identified a respective deletion in the
CCM2 gene using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. One of
the deletions involved the entire coding region of the CCM2 gene.

Among 24 Italian families with CCM, Liquori et al. (2008) identified 4
deletions and 1 duplication in the CCM2 gene.

For each of the 3 CCM genes, Pagenstecher et al. (2009) showed complete
localized loss of either KRIT1, CCM2/malcavernin, or PDCD10 protein
expression depending on the respective inherited mutation. Cavernous but
not adjacent normal or reactive endothelial cells of known germline
mutation carriers displayed immunohistochemical negativity only for the
corresponding CCM protein, but stained positively for the 2 other
proteins. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated endothelial cell
mosaicism as neoangiogenic vessels within caverns from a CCM1 patient,
normal brain endothelium from a CCM2 patient, and capillary endothelial
cells of vessels in a revascularized thrombosed cavern from a CCM3
patient stained positively for KRIT1, CCM2/malcavernin, and PDCD10
respectively. Pagenstecher et al. (2009) suggested that complete lack of
CCM protein in affected endothelial cells from CCM germline mutation
carriers supports a 2-hit mechanism for CCM formation.

Through repeated cycles of amplification, subcloning, and sequencing of
multiple clones per amplicon, Akers et al. (2009) identified somatic
mutations that were otherwise invisible by direct sequencing of the bulk
amplicon. Biallelic germline and somatic mutations were identified in
CCM lesions from all 3 forms of inherited CCMs. The somatic mutations
were found only in a subset of the endothelial cells lining the
cavernous vessels and not in interstitial lesion cells. Although widely
expressed in the different cell types of the brain, the authors also
suggested a unique role for the CCM proteins in endothelial cell
biology. Akers et al. (2009) suggested that CCM lesion genesis may
require complete loss of function for 1 of the CCM genes.

Gallione et al. (2011) identified a founder mutation in the Ashkenazi
Jewish population that affects mRNA splicing of the CCM2 gene causing
cerebral cavernous malformations (607929.0010).

ANIMAL MODEL

Hogan et al. (2008) found that deletion of Ccm1 in zebrafish caused
dilation of embryonic vessels. Vascular dilation was associated with
progressive spreading of endothelial cells and thinning of vessel walls.
Determination of cell fate, cell number, and endothelial cell-cell
contacts appeared normal. Ccm1 mutants, Ccm2 mutants, and Ccm1/Ccm2
double mutants had indistinguishable vascular phenotypes, suggesting
conservation of function.

Boulday et al. (2011) noted that deletion of Ccm1, Ccm2, or Ccm3 in mice
is embryonic lethal. They generated mice with an endothelial-specific
Ccm2 deletion at postnatal day 1, which resulted in vascular lesions
mimicking human CCM lesions. Deletion of Ccm1 or Ccm3 at postnatal day 1
resulted in similar cerebellar and retinal lesions. Ccm2 lesion
development was restricted to the venous bed. Boulday et al. (2011)
concluded that the consequences of Ccm2 deletion depend on the
developmental timing of the ablation and are associated with a
developmental stage with intense angiogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 1-BP DEL, 23G

In a family in which 4 members had type 2 cerebral cavernous
malformations (603284), Liquori et al. (2003) found a 1-bp deletion in
exon 1 of the CCM2 gene (23delG), causing a frameshift at amino acid 23
and premature termination at amino acid 22.

.0002
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, GLN107TER

In a family in which 2 members had type 2 cerebral cavernous
malformations (603284), Liquori et al. (2003) found a 319C-T transition
in exon 4 of the CCM2 gene, resulting in the nonsense mutation gln107 to
ter (Q107X).

.0003
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, IVS5, G-A, -1

In a family in which 5 members had type 2 cerebral cavernous
malformations (603284), Liquori et al. (2003) found a splice junction
mutation (610-1G-A), involving the invariant G residue at the splice
acceptor site adjacent to exon 6.

.0004
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 4-BP DEL, NT169

In one family with 5 affected individuals and a second family with 4
affected individuals, Liquori et al. (2003) found that type 2 cerebral
cavernous malformations (603284) were associated with a 4-bp deletion in
exon 2 of the CCM2 gene (169-172delAGAC). The deletion caused a
frameshift at amino acid 57 with a premature stop at amino acid 58. Two
families were thought to be distantly related because they came from the
same ethnic background.

.0005
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, MET1VAL

In affected members of a family with cerebral cavernous malformations
(603284), Denier et al. (2004) found a mutation in the initiating ATG
codon changing nucleotide 1 from A to G. In this family, 2 sisters and
the daughter of 1 of them were affected.

.0006
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, IVS3, G-A, +1

In a family with cerebral cavernous malformations (603284), Denier et
al. (2004) identified a donor splice site mutation within intron 3,
nt288+1G-A, leading to a transcript in which exon 3 was deleted.

.0007
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, LEU198ARG

In a family with cerebral cavernous malformations (603284), Denier et
al. (2004) found that affected individuals had a leu198-to-arg (L198R)
mutation in exon 5 due to a T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 593. In
this family, a brother and sister were affected as well as a daughter
and son.

.0008
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 2-BP DEL, 1248AG

In a family with cerebral cavernous malformations (603284) in 3
successive generations, Denier et al. (2004) found deletion of 2
nucleotides, 1248_1249delAG in exon 10 of the CCM2 gene.

.0009
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 77.6-KB DEL

Among a cohort of 63 families with cerebral cavernous malformations
(603284), Liquori et al. (2007) identified a 77.6-kb deletion in the
CCM2 gene in 8 probands (13%). The deletion encompassed exons 2 through
10, with the proximal breakpoint within an AluSx repeat in intron 1 and
the distal breakpoint within an AluSg repeat distal to exon 10.
Haplotype analysis suggested that this deletion may have occurred
independently at least twice in their cohort, although the evidence was
not conclusive.

Liquori et al. (2008) reported 6 additional CCM families from the United
States with the 77.6-kb CCM2 deletion. Haplotype analysis, which
included the previously reported families with this deletion, indicated
a founder effect. This deletion was not present in 24 Italian families
with CCM, indicating that it is specific to a certain cohort of
patients.

.0010
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, IVS1, GC-TT, +5

In 7 apparently unrelated probands from 10 different kindreds of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent segregating CCM2 (603284), Gallione et al.
(2011) identified a 2-bp change in the CCM2 gene caused by deletion of a
GC pair and insertion of a TT pair near the splice donor site of exon 1
(30+5_6delinsTT). The 2-bp change segregated with affected status in the
study families. Transcripts arising from the normal and mutant alleles
were examined by RT-PCR from affected and unaffected Ashkenazi Jewish
cerebral cavernous malformation family members. A synthetic splicing
system using a chimeric exon was used to visualize the effects of the
change on splice donor site utilization. The 2-bp change, when tested in
this in vitro synthetic splicing system, altered splice donor site
utilization. RT-PCR revealed loss of the transcript allele that was in
phase with the mutation. Gallione et al. (2011) concluded that this 2-bp
change in CCM2 disruted proper splice donor utilization leading to a
degraded transcript. Resequencing of the genomic region proximal and
distal to the CCM2 gene mutation revealed a common SNP haplotype in
affected individuals that demonstrated that this mutation was due to a
founder in the Ashkenazi Jewish population.

REFERENCE 1. Akers, A. L.; Johnson, E.; Steinberg, G. K.; Zabramski, J. M.;
Marchuk, D. A.: Biallelic somatic and germline mutations in cerebral
cavernous malformations (CCMs): evidence for a two-hit mechanism of
CCM pathogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 919-930, 2009.

2. Borikova, A. L.; Dibble, C. F.; Sciaky, N.; Welch, C. M.; Abell,
A. N.; Bencharit, S.; Johnson, G. L.: Rho kinase inhibition rescues
the endothelial cell cerebral cavernous malformation phenotype. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 11760-11764, 2010.

3. Boulday, G.; Rudini, N.; Maddaluno, L.; Blecon, A.; Arnould, M.;
Gaudric, A.; Chapon, F.; Adams, R. H.; Dejana, E.; Tournier-Lasserve,
E.: Developmental timing of CCM2 loss influences cerebral cavernous
malformations in mice. J. Exp. Med. 208: 1835-1847, 2011.

4. Craig, H. D.; Gunel, M.; Cepeda, O.; Johnson, E. W.; Ptacek, L.;
Steinberg, G. K.; Ogilvy, C. S.; Berg, M. J.; Crawford, S. C.; Scott,
R. M.; Steichen-Gersdorf, E.; Sabroe, R.; Kennedy, C. T.; Mettler,
G.; Beis, M. J.; Fryer, A.; Awad, I. A.; Lifton, R. P.: Multilocus
linkage identifies two new loci for a mendelian form of stroke, cerebral
cavernous malformation, at 7p15-13 and 3q25.2-27. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7:
1851-1858, 1998.

5. Crose, L. E. S.; Hilder, T. L.; Sciaky, N.; Johnson, G. L.: Cerebral
cavernous malformation 2 protein promotes Smad ubiquitin regulatory
factor 1-mediated RhoA degradation in endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 284: 13301-13305, 2009.

6. Denier, C.; Goutagny, S.; Labauge, P.; Krivosic, V.; Arnoult, M.;
Cousin, A.; Benabid, A. L.; Comoy, J.; Frerebeau, P.; Gilbert, B.;
Houtteville, J. P.; Jan, M.; and 14 others: Mutations within the
MGC4607 gene cause cerebral cavernous malformations. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 74: 326-337, 2004.

7. Felbor, U.; Gaetzner, S.; Verlaan, D. J.; Vijzelaar, R.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Siegel, A. M.: Large germline deletions and duplication in
isolated cerebral cavernous malformation patients. Neurogenetics 8:
149-153, 2007.

8. Gallione, C. J.; Solatycki, A.; Awad, I. A.; Weber, J. L.; Marchuk,
D. A.: A founder mutation in the Ashkenazi Jewish population affecting
messenger RNA splicing of the CCM2 gene causes cerebral cavernous
malformations. Genet. Med. 13: 662-666, 2011.

9. Hogan, B. M.; Bussmann, J.; Wolburg, H.; Schulte-Merker, S.: ccm1
cell autonomously regulates endothelial cellular morphogenesis and
vascular tubulogenesis in zebrafish. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 2424-2432,
2008.

10. Kleaveland, B.; Zheng, X.; Liu, J. J.; Blum, Y.; Tung, J. J.;
Zou, Z.; Sweeney, S. M.; Chen, M.; Guo, L.; Lu, M.; Zhou, D.; Kitajewski,
J.; Affolter, M.; Ginsberg, M. H.; Kahn, M. L.: Regulation of cardiovascular
development and integrity by the heart of glass-cerebral cavernous
malformation protein pathway. Nature Med. 15: 169-176, 2009. Note:
Erratum: Nature Med. 15: 584 only, 2009.

11. Liquori, C. L.; Berg, M. J.; Siegel, A. M.; Huang, E.; Zawistowski,
J. S.; Stoffer, T.; Verlaan, D.; Balogun, F.; Hughes, L.; Leedom,
T. P.; Plummer, N. W.; Cannella, M.; Maglione, V.; Squitieri, F.;
Johnson, E. W.; Rouleau, G. A.; Ptacek, L.; Marchuk, D. A.: Mutations
in a gene encoding a novel protein containing a phosphotyrosine-binding
domain cause type 2 cerebral cavernous malformations. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 73: 1459-1464, 2003.

12. Liquori, C. L.; Berg, M. J.; Squitieri, F.; Leedom, T. P.; Ptacek,
L.; Johnson, E. W.; Marchuk, D. A.: Deletions in CCM2 are a common
cause of cervical cavernous malformations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
69-75, 2007.

13. Liquori, C. L.; Penco, S.; Gault, J.; Leedom, T. P.; Tassi, L.;
Esposito, T.; Awad, I. A.; Frati, L.; Johnson, E. W.; Squitieri, F.;
Marchuk, D. A.; Gianfrancesco, F.: Different spectra of genomic deletions
within the CCM genes between Italian and American CCM patient cohorts. Neurogenetics 9:
25-31, 2008.

14. Pagenstecher, A.; Stahl, S.; Sure, U.; Felbor, U.: A two-hit
mechanism causes cerebral cavernous malformations: complete inactivation
of CCM1, CCM2 or CCM3 in affected endothelial cells. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 911-918, 2009.

15. Uhlik, M. T.; Abell, A. N.; Johnson, N. L.; Sun, W.; Cuevas, B.
D.; Lobel-Rice, K. E.; Horne, E. A.; Dell'Acqua, M. L.; Johnson, G.
L.: Rac-MEKK3-MKK3 scaffolding for p38 MAPK activation during hyperosmotic
shock. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 1104-1110, 2003.

16. Voss, K.; Stahl, S.; Schleider, E.; Ullrich, S.; Nickel, J.; Mueller,
T. D.; Felbor, U.: CCM3 interacts with CCM2 indicating common pathogenesis
for cerebral cavernous malformations. Neurogenetics 8: 249-256,
2007.

17. Zawistowski, J. S.; Stalheim, L.; Uhlik, M. T.; Abell, A. N.;
Ancrile, B. B.; Johnson, G. L.; Marchuk, D. A.: CCM1 and CCM2 protein
interactions in cell signaling: implications for cerebral cavernous
malformations pathogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2521-2531, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/11/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/24/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/2/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/12/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/18/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/30/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/2003

EDITED mgross: 01/20/2012
terry: 1/11/2012
alopez: 8/24/2011
mgross: 8/19/2011
terry: 5/26/2011
mgross: 1/5/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
mgross: 11/2/2009
wwang: 8/26/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
mgross: 2/24/2009
terry: 2/23/2009
joanna: 2/2/2009
wwang: 1/23/2009
wwang: 4/15/2008
ckniffin: 3/18/2008
wwang: 12/3/2007
ckniffin: 11/27/2007
wwang: 5/11/2007
ckniffin: 5/4/2007
carol: 2/28/2007
alopez: 1/4/2007
terry: 1/2/2007
wwang: 4/12/2006
alopez: 2/5/2004
cwells: 1/30/2004
joanna: 1/15/2004
cwells: 12/22/2003

609097	TITLE *609097 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 24; FBXO24
;;FBX24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO24, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXO24 protein contains a central F
box and a C-terminal RCC1 (179710) fold.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO24 gene maps to chromosome 7q22
and the mouse Fbxo24 gene maps to chromosome 5G2.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/15/2004

602921	TITLE *602921 PERSEPHIN; PSPN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neurotrophic factors, including persephin, are important for the proper
development and maintenance of the nervous system. These factors promote
neuronal survival and can prevent the neuronal degeneration associated
with injury, toxin exposure, or neurodegenerative disease (summary by
Milbrandt et al., 1998).

CLONING

To identify genes related to the neurotrophic factors GDNF (600837) and
NRTN (602018), Milbrandt et al. (1998) carried out PCR using primers
based on regions that were similar in these 2 proteins. They isolated
human, mouse and rat genomic fragments encoding a protein that they
designated persephin, symbolized PSP. The predicted 156-amino acid human
protein contains a 21-residue signal peptide. On Western blots, mature
mouse PSP has a molecular mass of 10 to 12 kD. The human PSP protein
shares 80% sequence identity with rat and mouse PSP, and 38% and 30%
identity with NTRN and GDNF, respectively. Like other GDNF family
members, the PSP gene contains an intron interrupting the prodomain.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that rat PSP mRNA was expressed at low levels
and was inefficiently spliced, leading Milbrandt et al. (1998) to
suggest that regulation of transcript processing is an important means
of regulating PSP protein production.

GENE FUNCTION

Milbrandt et al. (1998) found that PSP resembled GDNF and NTRN in that
it exhibited neurotrophic activity on mesencephalic dopaminergic and
motor neurons. Like GDNF, PSP also had effects on kidney development, as
evidenced by its ability to promote ureteric bud branching. However, in
contrast to GDNF and NTRN, PSP did not support any of the peripheral
neurons examined. Milbrandt et al. (1998) suggested that PSP utilizes
different, or additional, receptor components than do other members of
the GDNF family.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping and somatic cell hybrid PCR, Chadwick et al.
(1998) mapped the PSPN gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Chadwick, B. P.; Helbling, L. A.; Angrist, M.; Chakravarti, A.;
Gusella, J. F.; Slaugenhaupt, S. A.: Assignment of persephin (PSPN),
a human neurotrophic factor, to chromosome 19p13.3 by radiation hybrid
mapping and somatic cell hybrid PCR. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 83:
236-237, 1998.

2. Milbrandt, J.; de Sauvage, F. J.; Fahrner, T. J.; Baloh, R. H.;
Leitner, M. L.; Tansey, M. G.; Lampe, P. A.; Heuckeroth, R. O.; Kotzbauer,
P. T.; Simburger, K. S.; Golden, J. P.; Davies, J. A.; and 15 others
: Persephin, a novel neurotrophic factor related to GDNF and neurturin. Neuron 20:
245-253, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/6/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/3/1998

EDITED carol: 05/31/2012
mgross: 4/7/1999
carol: 4/6/1999
alopez: 8/3/1998

608757	TITLE *608757 CLP1, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; CLP1
;;HEAB
HEAB/AF10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By cloning and sequencing a complex rearrangement involving chromosomes
10 and 11, Tanabe et al. (1996) obtained a partial genomic clone of
HEAB. By 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of several cDNA libraries, they
obtained a full-length cDNA. The 3-prime UTR contains 2 putative
polyadenylation sites. The deduced 425-amino acid protein is valine- and
leucine-rich and contains a domain sharing similarity with the
ATP/GTP-binding domain of ABC transporters. It also has a possible
tyrosine kinase phosphorylation site. Northern blot analysis detected a
major 2.0-kb transcript that was expressed ubiquitously, with highest
expression in testis and skeletal muscle. A 3.2-kb transcript was less
abundant in many tissues, with highest expression in peripheral blood
leukocytes and thymus.

De Vries et al. (2000) purified pre-mRNA cleavage factor IIm (CFIIm) of
the 3-prime end processing complex (see 604978) from HeLa cell nuclear
extracts and determined that it contains PCF11 (608876) and CLP1. By
searching databases and PCR of a HeLa cell cDNA library, they cloned
CLP1. The deduced protein contains highly conserved Walker A and B
motifs, which have been implicated in ATP/GTP binding.

GENE FUNCTION

De Vries et al. (2000) found that immunodepletion of CLP1 reduced
pre-mRNA cleavage activity, but not polyadenylation activity, in
purified HeLa cell CFIIm. CLP1 interacted with CFIm and
cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF; see 606027),
suggesting that it bridges these two 3-prime end processing factors
within the cleavage complex.

Paushkin et al. (2004) identified and characterized the human tRNA
splicing endonuclease (see SEN2; 608753). They found that human
endonuclease complexes are associated with pre-mRNA 3-prime end
processing factors, including CLP1. Small interfering RNA-mediated
depletion of SEN2 led to defects in maturation of both pre-tRNA and
pre-mRNA. These findings demonstrated a link between pre-tRNA splicing
and pre-mRNA 3-prime end formation, suggesting that the endonuclease
subunits function in multiple RNA processing events.

Weitzer and Martinez (2007) applied a chromatographic approach that
resulted in the identification of the human protein CLP1, a component of
both tRNA splicing and mRNA 3-prime-end formation machineries, as the
RNA kinase responsible for phosphorylation of the 5-prime end of siRNAs
necessary for their subsequent incorporation into the RISC complex
(RNA-induced silencing complex). Weitzer and Martinez (2007) reported
that the kinase CLP1 phosphorylates and licenses synthetic siRNAs to
become assembled into RISC for subsequent target RNA cleavage. More
importantly, Weitzer and Martinez (2007) demonstrated that the
physiologic role of CLP1 as the RNA kinase that phosphorylates the
5-prime end of the 3-prime exon during human tRNA splicing, allowing the
subsequent ligation of both exon halves by an unknown tRNA ligase.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Tanabe et al. (1996) mapped
the CLP1 gene to chromosome 11p12.

CYTOGENETICS

Tanabe et al. (1996) identified an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12) and other
complex chromosomal rearrangements in a 2-year old boy with acute
monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5). Cloning of the proximal 10p breakpoint
showed that the MLL gene (159555) at chromosome 11q23 was fused to the
3-prime portion of AF10 (MLLT10; 602409) at chromosome 10p12. Cloning of
the telomeric 10p junction revealed that the 5-prime portion of AF10 was
fused with the HEAB gene. The 5-prime AF10/HEAB fusion transcript was
out of frame.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hanada et al. (2013) generated kinase-dead Clp1 mice that showed a
progressive loss of spinal motor neurons associated with axonal
degeneration in the peripheral nerves and denervation of neuromuscular
junctions, resulting in impaired motor function, muscle weakness,
paralysis, and fatal respiratory failure. Transgenic rescue experiments
showed that Clp1 functions in motor neurons. Mechanistically, loss of
Clp1 activity results in accumulation of a novel set of small RNA
fragments, derived from aberrant processing of tyrosine pre-transfer
RNA. These tRNA fragments sensitize cells to oxidative stress-induced
p53 (191170) activation and p53-dependent cell death. Genetic
inactivation of p53 rescues Clp1 kinase-dead mice from the motor neuron
loss, muscle denervation, and respiratory failure. Hanada et al. (2013)
concluded that their experiments uncovered a mechanistic link between
tRNA processing, formation of a new RNA species, and progressive loss of
lower motor neurons regulated by p53.

REFERENCE 1. de Vries, H.; Ruegsegger, U.; Hubner, W.; Friedlein, A.; Langen,
H.; Keller, W.: Human pre-mRNA cleavage factor IIm contains homologs
of yeast proteins and bridges two other cleavage factors. EMBO J. 19:
5895-5904, 2000.

2. Hanada, T.; Weitzer, S.; Mair, B.; Bernreuther, C.; Wainger, B.
J.; Ichida, J.; Hanada, R.; Orthofer, M.; Cronin, S. J.; Komnenovic,
V.; Minis, A.; Sato, F.; and 12 others: CLP1 links tRNA metabolism
to progressive motor-neuron loss. Nature 495: 474-480, 2013.

3. Paushkin, S. V.; Patel, M.; Furia, B. S.; Peltz, S. W.; Trotta,
C. R.: Identification of a human endonuclease complex reveals a link
between tRNA splicing and pre-mRNA 3-prime end formation. Cell 117:
311-321, 2004.

4. Tanabe, S.; Bohlander, S. K.; Vignon, C. V.; Espinosa, R., III;
Zhao, N.; Strissel, P. L.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.: AF10
is split by MLL and HEAB, a human homolog to a putative Caenorhabditis
elegans ATP/GTP-binding protein in an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12). Blood 88:
3535-3545, 1996.

5. Weitzer, S.; Martinez, J.: The human RNA kinase hClp1 is active
on 3-prime transfer RNA exons and short interfering RNAs. Nature 447:
222-226, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 09/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/21/2004

EDITED alopez: 09/25/2013
alopez: 6/21/2007
terry: 6/15/2007
mgross: 8/27/2004
mgross: 8/26/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 6/21/2004

609591	TITLE *609591 RIC-LIKE PROTEIN WITHOUT CAAX MOTIF 1; RIT1
;;RAS-LIKE PROTEIN EXPRESSED IN MANY TISSUES; RIT;;
ROC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RIT belongs to the RAS (HRAS; 190020) subfamily of small GTPases (Hynds
et al., 2003).

CLONING

By PCR using degenerate primers based on the conserved G3 and G4 domains
of RAS, followed by screening a mouse retina cDNA library, Lee et al.
(1996) cloned mouse Rit. The deduced 219-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 25.6 kD. By EST database analysis, Lee et
al. (1996) identified human RIT. The deduced human protein contains 219
amino acids and shares 94% identity with mouse Rit. Human and mouse RIT
have 5 highly conserved domains characteristic of small G proteins, but
they lack the C-terminal CAAX prenylation motif found in several other
RAS-like proteins. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.2-kb transcript
in all mouse tissues examined. Epitope-tagged mouse Rit localized to the
plasma membrane of transfected cells.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to Drosophila Ric,
Wes et al. (1996) identified human RIT and RIN (609592). The core GTPase
domain of RIT shares 76% identity with that of RIN, and there is only 1
conservative substitution between the 2 human proteins and Drosophila
Ric within the effector G2 region. Northern blot analysis detected RIT
transcripts of 1.35, 2.9, and 3.9 kb in most tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1996) demonstrated that mouse Rit bound radiolabeled GTP.

Shao et al. (1999) demonstrated that recombinant human RIT and RIN bound
GTP and exhibited intrinsic GTPase activity. Conversion of gln79 to leu
in RIT resulted in complete loss of GTPase activity. The activity of RIT
and RIN was significantly different from that of the majority of
RAS-related GTPases, and the GTP dissociation rates were 5- to 10-fold
faster than most RAS-like GTPases. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis showed that
RIT and RIN interacted with the RAS-binding proteins RALGDS (601619),
RLF (180610), and AF6 (MLLT4; 159559), but not with RAF kinases (e.g.,
RAF1; 164760), RIN1 (605965), or the p110 subunit of PI3K (see 171834).
Shao et al. (1999) concluded that RIT and RIN regulate signaling
pathways and cellular processes distinct from those controlled by RAS.

By expression of RIT in a human neuroblastoma cell line, Hynds et al.
(2003) demonstrated that RIT increased neurite outgrowth and branching
through MEK (see MEK1; 176872)-dependent and MEK-independent signaling
mechanisms, respectively. Adenoviral expression of wildtype or
constitutively active RIT increased neurite initiation, elongation, and
branching on endogenous matrix or a purified laminin-1 substratum. This
outgrowth was morphologically distinct from that promoted by
constitutively active RAS or RAF. Constitutively active RIT increased
phosphorylation of ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948), but not
AKT (see AKT1; 164730). A MEK inhibitor blocked RIT-induced neurite
initiation, but not elongation or branching.

Shi and Andres (2005) found that stimulation of a rat pheochromocytoma
cell line by growth factors, including nerve growth factor (NGF;
162030), resulted in rapid and prolonged Rit activation. Ectopic
expression of active human RIT promoted neurite outgrowth and stimulated
activation of both Erk and p38 MAP kinase (MAPK14; 600289) signaling
pathways. RIT-induced differentiation depended upon both MAP kinase
cascades, since MEK inhibition blocked RIT-induced neurite outgrowth,
and p38 blockade inhibited neurite elongation and branching, but not
neurite initiation. Moreover, the ability of NGF to promote neuronal
differentiation was attenuated by Rit knockdown.

Heo et al. (2006) surveyed plasma membrane targeting mechanisms by
imaging the subcellular localization of 125 fluorescent
protein-conjugated Ras, Rab, Arf, and Rho proteins. Of 48 proteins that
were localized to the plasma membrane, 37 contained clusters of
positively charged amino acids. To test whether these polybasic clusters
bind negatively charged phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate lipids,
Heo et al. (2006) developed a chemical phosphatase activation method to
deplete plasma membrane phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate.
Unexpectedly, proteins with polybasic clusters dissociated from the
plasma membrane only when both phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate were depleted, arguing that
both lipid second messengers jointly regulate plasma membrane targeting.

MAPPING

Wes et al. (1996) stated that the RIT gene was mapped to chromosome 1 by
somatic cell hybrid analysis. The mouse Rit gene maps to chromosome 3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 17 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (NS8; 615355), Aoki et
al. (2013) identified heterozygous mutations in the RIT1 gene (see,
e.g., 609591.0001-609591.0004). The first mutations were found by exome
sequencing and subsequent mutations were identified from a larger cohort
of patients screened for the RIT1 gene. A total of 9 missense mutations
were found in 17 (9%) of 180 individuals suspected to have the disorder.
The phenotype was characterized by short stature, distinctive facial
features, and a high incidence of congenital heart defects and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A subset of patients showed intellectual
disabilities. All of the mutations occurred de novo, except in 1 patient
who inherited the mutation from a mother with a Noonan syndrome
phenotype. The mutations tended to cluster in the switch II region, and
in vitro functional expression studies of 3 of the mutations showed that
they resulted in a gain of function. Transfection of 2 of the mutations
into zebrafish embryos resulted in a variety of developmental defects,
including gastrulation defects, craniofacial abnormalities, pericardial
edema, and elongated yolk sac. A smaller percentage of mutant embryos
showed even more disorganized growth and abnormal cardiogenesis. The
findings were similar to those observed with mutations in other RAS
genes (see, e.g., PTPN11, 176876; SOS1, 182530; NRAS, 164790) causing
other forms of Noonan syndrome.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, ALA57GLY

In 4 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (NS8; 615355), Aoki et
al. (2013) identified a de novo heterozygous c.170C-G transversion in
exon 4 of the RIT1 gene, resulting in an ala57-to-gly (A57G)
substitution at a conserved residue. In vitro cellular expression
studies showed that the A57G mutation resulted in a gain of function.

.0002
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, GLU81GLY

In a patient with Noonan syndrome-8 (615355), Aoki et al. (2013)
identified a de novo heterozygous c.242A-G transition in exon 5 of the
RIT1 gene, resulting in a glu81-to-gly (E81G) substitution at a
conserved residue. In vitro cellular expression studies showed that the
E81G mutation resulted in a gain of function. Transfection of the E81G
mutation into zebrafish embryos resulted in a variety of developmental
defects, including gastrulation defects, craniofacial abnormalities,
pericardial edema, and elongated yolk sac. A smaller percentage of
mutant embryos showed even more disorganized growth and abnormal
cardiogenesis.

.0003
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, PHE82LEU

In 2 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (615355), Aoki et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous c.246T-G transversion in exon 5
of the RIT1 gene, resulting in a phe82-to-leu (F82L) substitution at a
conserved residue. The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing, was not present in several control databases. In vitro
cellular expression studies showed that the F82L mutation resulted in a
gain of function.

.0004
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, GLY95ALA

In 4 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (615355), Aoki et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous c.284G-C transversion in exon 5
of the RIT1 gene, resulting in a gly95-to-ala (G95A) substitution. The
mutation, which was initially found by exome sequencing, was not present
in several control databases. In vitro cellular expression studies
showed that the G95A mutation resulted in a gain of function.
Transfection of the G95A mutation into zebrafish embryos resulted in a
variety of developmental defects, including gastrulation defects,
craniofacial abnormalities, pericardial edema, and elongated yolk sac. A
smaller percentage of mutant embryos showed even more disorganized
growth and abnormal cardiogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Aoki, Y.; Niihori, T.; Banjo, T.; Okamoto, N.; Mizuno, S.; Kurosawa,
K.; Ogata, T.; Takada, F.; Yano, M.; Ando, T.; Hoshika, T.; Barnett,
C.; and 13 others: Gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan
syndrome, a RAS/MAPK pathway syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 173-180,
2013.

2. Heo, W. D.; Inoue, T.; Park, W. S.; Kim, M. L.; Park, B. O.; Wandless,
T. J.; Meyer, T.: PI(3,4,5)P(3) and PI(4,5)P(2) lipids target proteins
with polybasic clusters to the plasma membrane. Science 314: 1458-1461,
2006.

3. Hynds, D. L.; Spencer, M. L.; Andres, D. A.; Snow, D. M.: Rit
promotes MEK-independent neurite branching in human neuroblastoma
cells. J. Cell Sci. 116: 1925-1935, 2003.

4. Lee, C.-H. J.; Della, N. G.; Chew, C. E.; Zack, D. J.: Rin, a
neuron-specific and calmodulin-binding small G-protein, and Rit define
a novel subfamily of Ras proteins. J. Neurosci. 16: 6784-6794, 1996.

5. Shao, H.; Kadono-Okuda, K.; Finlin, B. S.; Andres, D. A.: Biochemical
characterization of the Ras-related GTPases Rit and Rin. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 371: 207-219, 1999.

6. Shi, G.-X.; Andres, D. A.: Rit contributes to nerve growth factor-induced
neuronal differentiation via activation of B-Raf-extracellular signal-regulated
kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 25: 830-846, 2005.

7. Wes, P. D.; Yu, M.; Montell, C.: RIC, a calmodulin-binding Ras-like
GTPase. EMBO J. 15: 5839-5848, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/6/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/20/2005

EDITED carol: 08/02/2013
ckniffin: 8/1/2013
alopez: 2/8/2007
terry: 2/6/2007
carol: 9/29/2005
mgross: 9/20/2005

186591	TITLE *186591 SYNTAXIN 4; STX4
;;STX4A;;
SYNTAXIN, PLACENTAL;;
p35-2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1994) described the nucleotide sequence of STX4A, a syntaxin
gene isolated from a placenta library. (The gene was previously
symbolized STX2.) It encodes a predicted 297-amino acid protein that is
89% identical to the amino acid sequence of rat Stx4a.

By immunohistochemical analysis of rat brain sections, Kennedy et al.
(2010) showed that Stx4 was expressed throughout brain. In rat
hippocampal neurons, Stx4 showed a punctate distribution in the
somatodendritic compartment, and Stx4 clusters often localized to
dendritic spines. Immunogold electron microscopy of CA1 rat hippocampus
revealed frequent Stx4 labeling near spine membranes at sites lateral to
postsynaptic densities, with occasional labeling of presynaptic
membranes. Biochemical fractionation of mouse brain revealed Stx4 in
synaptosome fractions, but not in synaptic vesicle fractions.

GENE FUNCTION

Mandon et al. (1996) stated that vesicle-associated membrane proteins
(VAMPs) or synaptobrevins (see 185880) are proposed to bind to cognate
vesicle-targeting receptors in target membranes, which include several
members of the syntaxin family. The molecular mechanisms responsible for
targeting of vesicles containing aquaporin-2 (AQP2; 107777) to the
apical plasma membrane of renal collecting duct cells may involve the
vesicle-targeting protein STX4. Among the known syntaxin isoforms, only
STX1 (STX1A; 186590) and STX4 bind VAMP2 (185881) with high affinity.
Thus, STX1 and STX4 could be considered candidates for a role in
targeting of the AQP2/VAMP2-containing vesicles to the apical plasma
membrane in collecting duct cells. In contrast to STX1, which is
expressed predominantly in the central nervous system, STX4 is expressed
in a variety of tissues including the kidney. Mandon et al. (1996) used
sequence data for rat Stx1a, Stx1b (601485), and Stx4 from Bennett et
al. (1993) to design PCR primers for RT-PCR analysis of rat tissues.
They detected Stx4 mRNA in the apical plasma membrane of collecting duct
principal cells. They also demonstrated in the rat kidney the presence
of a protein with the characteristics of Stx4 in the apical plasma
membrane of inner medullary-collecting duct cells.

To clarify the physiologic function of STXBP3 (608339) in
insulin-stimulated GLUT4 (SLC2A4; 138190) exocytosis, Kanda et al.
(2005) generated mouse embryos deficient in the Stx4-binding protein
Stxbp3 and developed Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes from their mesenchymal
fibroblasts. The insulin-induced appearance of Glut4 at the cell surface
was enhanced in Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes compared to +/+ cells. Wortmannin,
an inhibitor of PI3K, inhibited insulin-stimulated Glut4 externalization
in +/+ but not -/- adipocytes. Kanda et al. (2005) suggested that
disruption of the interaction between STX4 and STXBP3 in adipocytes
might result in enhancement of insulin-stimulated GLUT4 externalization.

Using RT-PCR, immunoblot analysis, and immunofluorescence microscopy,
Sander et al. (2008) demonstrated that human intestinal mast cells (MCs)
expressed SNAP23 (602534), STX1B, STX2 (132350), STX3 (STX3A; 600876),
STX4, and STX6 (603944), but not SNAP25 (600322). MCs also expressed
VAMP3 (603657), VAMP7 (300053), and VAMP8 (603177), but, in contrast
with rodent MCs, they expressed only low levels of VAMP2 (185881). VAMP7
and VAMP8 translocated to the plasma membrane and interacted with SNAP23
and STX4 upon activation. Inhibition of STX4, SNAP23, VAMP7, or VAMP8,
but not VAMP2 or VAMP3, resulted in markedly reduced high-affinity IgE
receptor-mediated histamine release. Sander et al. (2008) concluded that
human MCs express a specific pattern of SNAREs and that VAMP7 and VAMP8,
but not VAMP2, are required for rapid degranulation.

Using rat hippocampal neurons, Kennedy et al. (2010) showed that
exocytosis of recycling endosomes at dendritic spines occurred at
Stx4-enriched sites immediately lateral to postsynaptic densities.
Disruption of Stx4 either acutely or chronically blocked membrane fusion
and cargo delivery triggered by synaptic activation, and acute
inhibition of Stx4 abolished long-term potentiation. Kennedy et al.
(2010) concluded that STX4 is a central component of the SNARE machinery
that mediates rapid, activity-dependent fusion of recycling endosomes in
dendritic spines.

REFERENCE 1. Bennett, M. K.; Garcia-Arraras, J. E.; Elferink, L. A.; Peterson,
K.; Fleming, A. M.; Hazuka, C. D.; Scheller, R. H.: The syntaxin
family of vesicular transport receptors. Cell 74: 863-873, 1993.

2. Kanda, H.; Tamori, Y.; Shinoda, H.; Yoshikawa, M.; Sakaue, M.;
Udagawa, J.; Otani, H.; Tashiro, F.; Miyazaki, J.; Kasuga, M.: Adipocytes
from Munc18c-null mice show increased sensitivity to insulin-stimulated
GLUT4 externalization. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 291-301, 2005.

3. Kennedy, M. J.; Davison, I. G.; Robinson, C. G.; Ehlers, M. D.
: Syntaxin-4 defines a domain for activity-dependent exocytosis in
dendritic spines. Cell 141: 524-535, 2010.

4. Li, H.; Hodge, D. R.; Pei, G. K.; Seth, A.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of the human syntaxin-encoding gene. Gene 143: 303-304,
1994.

5. Mandon, B.; Chou, C.-L.; Nielsen, S.; Knepper, M. A.: Syntaxin-4
is localized to the apical plasma membrane of rat renal collecting
duct cells: possible role in aquaporin-2 trafficking. J. Clin. Invest. 98:
906-913, 1996.

6. Sander, L. E.; Frank, S. P. C.; Bolat, S.; Blank, U.; Galli, T.;
Bigalke, H.; Bischoff, S. C.; Lorentz, A.: Vesicle associated membrane
protein (VAMP)-7 and VAMP-8, but not VAMP-2 or VAMP-3, are required
for activation-induced degranulation of mature human mast cells. Europ.
J. Immun. 38: 855-863, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/9/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 10/25/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/20/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1992

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
mgross: 10/12/2009
mgross: 10/9/2009
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
psherman: 10/27/1998
mark: 10/25/1996
carol: 9/10/1992

600505	TITLE *600505 CASEIN KINASE I, ALPHA-1; CSNK1A1
;;CK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tapia et al. (1994) isolated a cDNA encoding human casein kinase I from
a fetal brain library using PCR primers based on the bovine sequence.
The cDNA was sequenced and shown to have a predicted amino acid sequence
identical to the bovine protein except that it contains 12 additional
amino acids at the carboxyl end.

GENE FUNCTION

Jia et al. (2004) showed that protein kinase A (PKA; see 188830) and
casein kinase I (CKI) regulate Smo (601500) cell surface accumulation
and activity in response to hedgehog (Hh; see 600725). Blocking PKA or
CKI activity in the Drosophila wing disc prevented Hh-induced Smo
accumulation and attenuated pathway activity, whereas increasing PKA
activity promoted Smo accumulation and pathway activation. Jia et al.
(2004) showed that PKA and CKI phosphorylate Smo at several sites, and
that phosphorylation-deficient forms of Smo fail to accumulate on the
cell surface and are unable to transduce the Hh signal. Conversely,
phosphorylation-mimicking Smo variants showed constitutive cell surface
expression and signaling activity. Furthermore, Jia et al. (2004) found
that the levels of Smo cell surface expression and activity correlated
with its levels of phosphorylation. Jia et al. (2004) concluded that Hh
induces progressive Smo phosphorylation by PKA and CKI, leading to
elevation of Smo cell surface levels and signaling activity.

Bidere et al. (2009) conducted parallel screens involving a mass
spectrometry analysis of CARMA1 (607210) binding partners and an RNA
interference screen for growth inhibition of the CBM-dependent
'activated B cell-like' (ABC) subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL; see 605027). Bidere et al. (2009) reported that both screens
identified CK1-alpha as a bifunctional regulator of NF-kappa-B (164011).
CK1-alpha dynamically associates with the CBM complex on T cell receptor
engagement to participate in cytokine production and lymphocyte
proliferation. However, CK1-alpha kinase activity has a contrasting role
by subsequently promoting the phosphorylation and inactivation of
CARMA1. CK1-alpha has thus a dual 'gating' function which first promotes
and then terminates receptor-induced NF-kappa-B. ABC DLBCL cells
required CK1-alpha for constitutive NF-kappa-B activity, indicating that
CK1-alpha functions as a conditionally essential malignancy gene.

Elyada et al. (2011) showed that casein kinase I-alpha, a component of
the beta-catenin (116806) destruction complex, is a critical regulator
of the Wnt signaling (see 164820) pathway. Inducing the ablation of
Csnk1a1 in the gut triggers massive Wnt activation, surprisingly without
causing tumorigenesis. CKI-alpha-deficient epithelium shows many of the
features of human colorectal tumors in addition to Wnt activation, in
particular the induction of the DNA damage response and cellular
senescence, both of which are thought to provide a barrier against
malignant transformation. The epithelial DNA damage response in mice is
accompanied by substantial activation of p53 (191170), suggesting that
the p53 pathway may counteract the protumorigenic effects of Wnt
hyperactivation. Notably, the transition from benign adenomas to
invasive colorectal cancer in humans is typically linked to p53
inactivation, underscoring the importance of p53 as a safeguard against
malignant progression; however, the mechanism of p53-mediated tumor
suppression is unknown. Elyada et al. (2011) showed that the maintenance
of intestinal homeostasis in CKI-alpha-deficient gut requires
p53-mediated growth control, because the combined ablation of Csnk1a1
and either p53 or its target gene p21 (116899) triggered high-grade
dysplasia with extensive proliferation. Unexpectedly, these ablations
also induced nonproliferating cells to invade the villous lamina propria
rapidly, producing invasive carcinomas throughout the small bowel.
Furthermore, in p53-deficient gut, loss of heterozygosity of the gene
encoding CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that
CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that CKI-alpha
functions as a tumor suppressor when p53 is inactivated. Elyada et al.
(2011) identified a set of genes (the p53-suppressed invasiveness
signature, PSIS) that is activated by the loss of both p53 and CKI-alpha
and which probably accounts for the brisk induction of invasiveness.
PSIS transcription and tumor invasion were suppressed by p21,
independently of cell cycle control. Restraining tissue invasion through
suppressing PSIS expression is thus a novel tumor suppressor function of
wildtype p53. PROX1 (601546), IFITM2 (605578), and IFITM3 (605579) are
all PSIS genes.

MAPPING

Tapia et al. (1994) identified YAC genomic clones containing the human
gene and used them to map CKI to chromosome 13q13. Fish et al. (1995)
mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 13q13.1-q14.1 by FISH. However,
Gross (2011) mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the CSNK1A1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC008717) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bidere, N.; Ngo, V. N.; Lee, J.; Collins, C.; Zheng, L.; Wan, F.;
Davis, R. E.; Lenz, G.; Anderson, D. E.; Arnoult, D.; Vazquez, A.;
Sakai, K.; Zhang, J.; Meng, Z.; Veenstra, T. D.; Staudt, L. M.; Lenardo,
M. J.: Casein kinase 1-alpha governs antigen-receptor-induced NF-kappa-B
activation and human lymphoma cell survival. Nature 458: 92-96,
2009.

2. Elyada, E.; Pribluda, A.; Goldstein, R. E.; Morgenstern, Y.; Brachya,
G.; Cojocaru, G.; Snir-Alkalay, I.; Burstain, I.; Haffner-Krausz,
R.; Jung, S.; Wiener, Z.; Alitalo, K.; Oren, M.; Pikarsky, E.; Ben-Neriah,
Y.: CKI-alpha ablation highlights a critical role for p53 in invasiveness
control. Nature 470: 409-413, 2011.

3. Fish, K. J.; Cegielska, A.; Getman, M. E.; Landes, G. M.; Virshup,
D. M.: Isolation and characterization of human casein kinase I-epsilon
(CKI), a novel member of the CKI gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
14875-14883, 1995.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/9/2011.

5. Jia, J.; Tong, C.; Wang, B.; Luo, L.; Jiang, J.: Hedgehog signalling
activity of Smoothened requires phosphorylation by protein kinase
A and casein kinase I. Nature 432: 1045-1050, 2004.

6. Tapia, C.; Featherstone, T.; Gomez, C.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Allende,
C. C.; Allende, J. E.: Cloning and chromosomal localization of the
gene coding for human protein kinase CK1. FEBS Lett. 349: 307-312,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/9/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2004

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/24/1995

EDITED carol: 07/06/2011
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
mgross: 2/9/2011
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 3/4/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
mgross: 9/9/2004
psherman: 10/22/1999
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 5/13/1996
joanna: 12/6/1995
mark: 4/25/1995
mark: 4/24/1995

604652	TITLE *604652 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 7-LIKE 1; TCF7L1
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 3, FORMERLY; TCF3, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TCF/LEF transcription factors, such as TCF7L1, are mediators of the Wnt
(see 164820) signaling pathway and are antagonized by the TGF-beta
(TGFB1; 190180) signaling pathway (Sagara and Katoh, 2000).

CLONING

The high mobility group (HMG) box is a DNA-binding domain. TCF7
(189908), also called TCF1, and LEF1 (153245), also called TCF1-alpha,
are human lymphoid transcription factors that contain a virtually
identical HMG box. By PCR of human genomic DNA using degenerate
oligonucleotides based on the HMG boxes of TCF7 and LEF1, Castrop et al.
(1992) identified the TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 (602228) genes, which they
called TCF3 and TCF4, respectively. TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 were not expressed
in cells of lymphoid lineage. The deduced amino acid sequences of the
HMG boxes of TCF7L1, TCF7L2, and TCF7 show striking homology. The
authors suggested the existence of a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG
box-containing transcription factors.

By searching databases for homologs of mouse Tcf3, followed by PCR of a
small intestine cDNA library and screening of a fetal lung cDNA library,
Sagara and Katoh (2000) cloned human TCF7L1, which they called TCF3. The
deduced 588-amino acid protein contains a beta-catenin (CTNNB1;
116806)-binding domain at its N terminus, followed by an HMG box, a
nuclear translocation signal, and 2 putative CTBP (see 602618)-binding
sites at its C terminus. TCF7L1 shares 58% amino acid identity with
TCF7L2, its closest homolog among human TCF proteins. Northern blot
analysis detected a 3.0-kb TCF7L1 transcript in human stomach and in
some human gastric cancer cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Northern blot analysis, Sagara and Katoh (2000) found that TCF7L1
was occasionally upregulated in primary gastric cancer compared with
normal gastric mucosa. Overexpression of TCF7L1 in MKN28 human gastric
cancer cell lines resulted in 8-fold resistance to mitomycin C compared
with controls. DTD (NQO1; 125860) mRNA was downregulated in MKN28 cell
lines overexpressing TCF7L1 and in primary gastric cancer with TCF7L1
upregulation. The DTD protein, which is implicated in mitomycin C
activation, was also downregulated in MKN28 cell lines overexpressing
TCF7L1. Sagara and Katoh (2000) concluded that mitomycin C resistance
induced by TCF7L1 overexpression in gastric cancer is likely due to DTD
downregulation.

Merrill et al. (2001) showed that Lef1 and Tcf3 controlled
differentiation of multipotent stem cells in mouse skin. Lef1 required
Wnt signaling and stabilized beta-catenin to express hair-specific
keratins and control hair differentiation. In contrast, Tcf3 acted
independently of its beta-catenin-interacting domain to suppress
features of epidermal differentiation, in which Tcf3 was normally shut
off, and promote features of the follicle outer root sheath and
multipotent stem cells.

By immunofluorescence analysis, Nguyen et al. (2006) found that
embryonic mouse skin progenitors expressed Tcf3. Using an inducible Tcf3
expression system in mice, they showed that postnatal Tcf3 reactivation
caused committed epidermal cells to induce genes associated with an
undifferentiated, Wnt-inhibited state, and that Tcf3 promoted a
transcriptional program shared by embryonic and postnatal stem cells.
Genes repressed by Tcf3 included transcriptional regulators of the
epidermal, sebaceous gland, and hair follicle differentiation programs,
and all 3 terminal differentiation pathways were suppressed by postnatal
Tcf3 induction. Nguyen et al. (2006) concluded that, in the absence of
Wnt signals, Tcf3 functions in skin stem cells to maintain an
undifferentiated state, and that through Wnt signaling, Tcf3 directs
these cells along the hair lineage.

To balance self-renewal and differentiation, embryonic stem (ES) cells
must control the levels of several transcription factors, including
NANOG (607937). Pereira et al. (2006) showed that Tcf3 limited the
steady-state levels of Nanog mRNA, protein, and promoter activity in
self-renewing mouse ES cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter
reporter assays showed that Tcf3 bound to a promoter regulatory region
of the Nanog gene and repressed its transcriptional activity. Repression
of Nanog required the groucho (see 600189) interaction domain of Tcf3.
Absence of Tcf3 delayed differentiation of ES cells in vitro by allowing
elevated Nanog levels to persist through 5 days of embryoid body
formation. Pereira et al. (2006) concluded that TCF3-mediated control of
NANOG expression allows ES cells to balance the creation of
lineage-committed and undifferentiated cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nguyen et al. (2009) found that knockout of Tcf3 or Tcf4 individually
had no overt effect on hair phenotype in mice, but Tcf3/Tcf4 double
knockout resulted in a severe skin and hair defects. Newborn
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin was thinner than normal and often lacked whiskers.
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin showed signs of apoptosis and, when grafted onto
nude mice, became shrunken, was unable to repair wounds, and was
progressively lost, showing an inability to maintain long-term
self-renewing populations of skin epithelia. Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin cells
grew poorly in culture and did not survive passaging. Microarray
analysis of mRNAs expressed by normal and Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin suggested
that Tcf3 and Tcf4 maintain skin epithelial stem cells through
Wnt-dependent and Wnt-independent signaling.

NOMENCLATURE

The TCF7L1 gene, although initially designated TCF3, should not be
confused with the TCF3 gene (147141), also known as E2A. TCF7L1 encodes
a TCF/LEF transcription factor involved in Wnt signaling, whereas TCF3
encodes the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors E12 and
E47.

REFERENCE 1. Castrop, J.; van Norren, K.; Clevers, H.: A gene family of HMG-box
transcription factors with homology to TCF-1. Nucleic Acids Res. 20:
611 only, 1992.

2. Merrill, B. J.; Gat, U.; DasGupta, R.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Lef1
regulate lineage differentiation of multipotent stem cells in skin. Genes
Dev. 15: 1688-1705, 2001.

3. Nguyen, H.; Merrill, B. J.; Polak, L.; Nikolova, M.; Rendl, M.;
Shaver, T. M.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Tcf4 are essential
for long-term homeostasis of skin epithelia. Nature Genet. 41: 1068-1075,
2009.

4. Nguyen, H.; Rendl, M.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 governs stem cell features
and represses cell fate determination in skin. Cell 127: 171-183,
2006.

5. Pereira, L.; Yi, F.; Merrill, B. J.: Repression of Nanog gene
transcription by Tcf3 limits embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 26: 7479-7491, 2006.

6. Sagara, N.; Katoh, M.: Mitomycin C resistance induced by TCF-3
overexpression in gastric cancer cell line MKN28 is associated with
DT-diaphorase down-regulation. Cancer Res. 60: 5959-5962, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/22/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/14/2009

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/6/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2010
terry: 1/22/2010
mgross: 9/14/2009
mgross: 3/10/2000
psherman: 3/6/2000

600960	TITLE *600960 SET TRANSLOCATION, MYELOID LEUKEMIA-ASSOCIATED; SET
;;INHIBITOR OF GZMA-ACTIVATED DNase; IGAAD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The translocation (6;9)(p23q34) is the hallmark of a specific subtype of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) characterized by a poor prognosis and a
young age of onset. It is classified in the French-American-British
(FAB) system mostly as M2/M4 and rarely as M1 or refractive anemia with
excess of blast cells (RAEB). On chromosome 9, breakpoints take place in
a specific intron, denoted icb-9, of a large gene named Cain (CAN;
114350). On chromosome 6, breakpoints occur in a single intron, icb-6,
of a gene named DEK (125264). In a patient with acute undifferentiated
leukemia and an apparently normal karyotype, von Lindern et al. (1992)
found a breakpoint in icb-9 of the CAN gene in a bone marrow sample but
detected no breakpoint in DEK. They isolated and characterized a novel
gene, named SET (suppressor of variegation, enhancer of zeste, and
Trithorax), that was fused to CAN in the leukemic cells of this patient.
A chimeric SET-CAN transcript whose sequence predicted a fusion protein
of 155 kD was detected. The SET gene encodes transcripts of 2.0 and 2.7
kb that result from the use of alternative polyadenylation sites. Both
transcripts contained the open reading frame for a putative protein with
a predicted molecular mass of 32 kD. The SET sequence showed homology
with the yeast nucleosome assembly protein NAP-I. The only common
sequence motif of SET and DEK proteins is an acidic region. SET has a
long acidic tail, of which a large part is present in the predicted
SET-CAN fusion protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Carlson et al. (1998) studied the role of SET in the regulation of renal
cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. The mRNA encoding SET was
expressed at much higher levels in transformed human and rodent cell
lines than in cultured renal epithelial and primary endothelial cells.
Consistent with a role for SET in cell proliferation, SET mRNA
expression was markedly reduced in cells rendered quiescent by serum
starvation, contact inhibition, or differentiation. Previous findings
during renal development were extended by demonstrating that SET protein
expression is also much greater in developing rat and human kidney than
in fully differentiated, mature kidney. Finally, high levels of SET mRNA
and SET protein expression were found in Wilms tumor but not in renal
cell carcinoma, adult polycystic kidney disease, or in transitional cell
carcinoma. The SET domain (Tschiersch et al., 1994) is found in proteins
that are involved in embryonic development (Tripoulas et al., 1996).

Granzyme A (GZMA; 140050) induces a caspase-independent cell death
pathway characterized by single-stranded DNA nicks and other features of
apoptosis. A GZMA-activated DNase (GAAD) is in an endoplasmic
reticulum-associated complex containing pp32 (600832) and the GZMA
substrates SET, HMG2 (163906), and APE1 (107748). Fan et al. (2003)
showed that GAAD is NM23H1 (156490), a nucleoside diphosphate kinase
implicated in suppression of tumor metastasis, and its specific
inhibitor (IGAAD) is SET. NM23H1 bound SET and was released from
inhibition by GZMA cleavage of SET. After GZMA loading or cytotoxic T
lymphocyte attack, SET and NM23H1 translocated to the nucleus and SET
was degraded, allowing NM23H1 to nick chromosomal DNA. GZMA-treated
cells with silenced NM23H1 expression were resistant to GZMA-mediated
DNA damage and cytolysis, while cells overexpressing NM23H1 were more
sensitive.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using the N-terminal 277 amino acids of SET
as bait, Minakuchi et al. (2001) identified SET-binding protein-1
(SETBP1; 611060). Deletion and mutagenesis analysis revealed that amino
acids 182 to 223 of SET interacted with amino acids 1238 to 1434 of
SETBP1. Immunoprecipitation analysis verified that SETBP1 interacted
with endogenous SET in a human osteosarcoma cell line.

Ischemia and seizure cause excessive neuronal excitation that is
associated with brain acidosis and neuronal cell death. Liu et al.
(2008) found that the neurotoxin kainic acid activated lysosomal
asparagine endopeptidase (AEP, or LGMN; 602620) in mouse brain and
triggered degradation of Set, followed by DNA nicking and neuronal cell
death. Pike-L (CENTG1; 605476) strongly bound Set in the nucleus and
protected Set from proteolytic cleavage by Aep in vitro and in vivo,
thereby diminishing DNA damage and neuronal cell death. Kainic acid or
stroke failed to provoke DNA nicking and neuronal cell death in
Aep-deficient mice.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, von Lindern et al. (1992)
assigned the SET gene to 9q34, centromeric of ABL (189980).

REFERENCE 1. Carlson, S. G.; Eng, E.; Kim, E.-G.; Perlman, E. J.; Copeland,
T. D.; Ballermann, B. J.: Expression of SET, an inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A, in renal development and Wilms' tumor. J. Am. Soc.
Nephrol. 9: 1873-1880, 1998.

2. Fan, Z.; Beresford, P. J.; Oh, D. Y.; Zhang, D.; Lieberman, J.
: Tumor suppressor NM23-H1 is a granzyme A-activated DNase during
CTL-mediated apoptosis, and the nucleosome assembly protein SET is
its inhibitor. Cell 112: 659-672, 2003. Note: Erratum: Cell 115:
241 only, 2003.

3. Liu, Z.; Jang, S.-W.; Liu, X.; Cheng, D.; Peng, J.; Yepes, M.;
Li, X.; Matthews, S.; Watts, C.; Asano, M.; Hara-Nishimura, I.; Luo,
H. R.; Ye, K.: Neuroprotective actions of PIKE-L by inhibition of
SET proteolytic degradation by asparagine endopeptidase. Molec. Cell 29:
665-678, 2008.

4. Minakuchi, M.; Kakazu, N.; Gorrin-Rivas, M. J.; Abe, T.; Copeland,
T. D.; Ueda, K.; Adachi, Y.: Identification and characterization
of SEB, a novel protein that binds to the acute undifferentiated leukemia-associated
protein SET. Europ. J. Biochem. 268: 1340-1351, 2001.

5. Tripoulas, N.; LaJeunesse, D.; Gildea, J.; Shearn, A.: The Drosophila
ash1 gene product, which is localized at specific sites on polytene
chromosomes, contains a SET domain and a PHD finger. Genetics 143:
913-928, 1996.

6. Tschiersch, B.; Hofmann, A.; Krauss, V.; Dorn, R.; Korge, G.; Reuter,
G.: The protein encoded by the Drosophila position-effect variegation
suppressor gene Su(var)3-9 combines domains of antagonistic regulators
of homeotic gene complexes. EMBO J. 13: 3822-3831, 1994.

7. von Lindern, M.; van Baal, S.; Wiegant, J.; Raap, A.; Hagemeijer,
A.; Grosveld, G.: 'can,' a putative oncogene associated with myeloid
leukemogenesis, may be activated by fusion of its 3-prime half to
different genes: characterization of the 'set' gene. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 12: 3346-3355, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/23/2007
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/14/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1995

EDITED mgross: 06/03/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
mgross: 5/23/2007
mgross: 6/20/2006
carol: 9/17/2003
mgross: 4/14/2003
mcapotos: 4/11/2001
terry: 4/9/2001
alopez: 5/17/1999
terry: 5/11/1999
dholmes: 7/22/1998
carol: 7/13/1998
terry: 7/8/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
mark: 12/18/1995

304040	TITLE *304040 GAP JUNCTION PROTEIN, BETA-1; GJB1
;;GAP JUNCTION PROTEIN, 32-KD;;
CONNEXIN 32; CX32;;
LIVER CONNEXIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Connexins are membrane-spanning proteins that assemble to form gap
junction channels that facilitate the transfer of ions and small
molecules between cells (Bergoffen et al., 1993). For a general
discussion of connexin proteins, see GJB2 (121011).

CLONING

Kumar and Gilula (1986) isolated the human CX32 gene from a human liver
cDNA library. By Northern blot analysis, Bergoffen et al. (1993) showed
CX32 expression in liver and peripheral nerve.

Sohl et al. (2003) stated that mouse and human CX32 share 99% amino acid
identity and differ at only 4 residues. They also share significant
similarity in the 5-prime UTR and promoter region. Northern blot
analysis detected a 1.6-kb CX32 transcript in both mouse and human. In
both species, expression was highest in liver and moderate in pancreas,
kidney, and brain. No expression was detected in skeletal muscle, lung,
and heart.

MAPPING

Willecke et al. (1990) used a rat cDNA probe in Southern analysis of a
panel of human-mouse somatic cell hybrids to map CX32 to Xp11-q13.
Through analysis of somatic cell hybrids by PCR and hybridization,
Fishman et al. (1991) assigned the GJA1 gene (121014) to chromosome 6
and the GJB1 gene to Xp11-q22. Structural comparisons of these genes
indicated that they probably arose from a common progenitor gene.
Because of a critical function, the connexins may have evolved early and
have remained relatively conserved despite their disparate locations.

Using a series of somatic cell hybrid mapping panels and a rat GJB1
probe, Corcos et al. (1992) mapped the CX32 gene to proximal Xq13.1, in
interval 8, as described by Lafreniere et al. (1991). By somatic cell
hybrids, Hsieh et al. (1991) mapped GJB1 to Xcen-q22 and mapped the
corresponding gene to the X chromosome in the mouse. Raimondi et al.
(1992) refined the assignment to Xq13 by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Bergoffen et al. (1993) found CX32 expression in myelinated peripheral
nerve at the nodes of Ranvier and Schmidt-Lanterman incisures. CX32 may
form intracellular gap junctions that connect to the folds of Schwann
cell cytoplasm, allowing the transfer of nutrients, ions, and molecules
to the innermost myelin layers.

Scherer et al. (1995) demonstrated that CX32 is normally found in the
paranodal myelin loops and Schmidt-Lanterman incisures of myelinating
Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system, as well as in
oligodendrocytes and their processes, but not in compact myelin of the
central nervous system.

Kumar and Gilula (1996) gave a general review of the gap junction
communication channel. Beta-1 connexin is widely expressed in many
tissues, including liver.

Bondurand et al. (2001) showed that the transcription modulator SOX10
(602229), in synergy with EGR2 (129010), strongly activates CX32
expression in vitro by directly binding to its promoter. In agreement
with this finding, SOX10 and EGR2 mutants identified in patients with
peripheral myelin defects failed to transactivate the CX32 promoter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By direct sequencing, Bergoffen et al. (1993) identified 7 different
mutations in the CX32 gene (see, e.g., 304040.0001-304040.0003) in
affected persons from 8 families with X-linked dominant
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX1; 302800).

Bone et al. (1995) described sequence analysis from 19 unrelated
patients with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, detecting 6 novel
mutations and 3 previously reported mutations (see, e.g.,
304040.0003-304040.0011). Analysis of the distribution of these
mutations as well as those previously reported suggested to the authors
that virtually all regions of connexin 32 are important in its function.

Ionasescu et al. (1996) studied 27 families with X-linked
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Mutations in the coding region of the
CX32 gene were found in 22 families. These mutations included 4 nonsense
mutations, 8 missense mutations, 2 medium-sized deletions, and 1
insertion. Most missense mutations showed a mild clinical phenotype (5
of 8), whereas all nonsense mutations, the larger of the 2 deletions,
and the insertion that produced frameshifts showed severe phenotypes. No
point mutations in the CX32 gene coding region were found in 5 CMTX1
families with mild clinical phenotype. In 3 of these families, positive
genetic linkage with the markers of the Xq13.1 region were found; the
genetic linkage of the remaining 2 families could not be evaluated
because of their small size.

Omori et al. (1996) studied 4 known mutations in the connexin-32 gene:
lys60 to phe, a mutation in a highly conserved cysteine residue; val139
to met (304040.0003), located in the transmembrane region; arg215 to
trp, located in the cytoplasmic tail; and ala220 to ter (304040.0005),
also located in the cytoplasmic tail. Since HeLa cells do not show
detectable levels of gap junction intercellular communication (GJIC) or
expression of any connexins, they tested the functional effects of
transfecting mutant genes in HeLa cultures. The first 3 mutations were
unable to restore GJIC in transfected HeLa cells (although their gene
products were detectable), in contrast to normal GJIC detected with the
last mutation. In addition, the dominant-negative effect was tested in
doubly transfected HeLa cells and the investigators found that low
expression of the mutant CX32 gene had a relatively significant effect
on diminishing GJIC. Omori et al. (1996) therefore concluded that
certain mutants form nonfunctional chimeric connexins with wildtype
connexins.

Nelis et al. (1997) described 5 new mutations in the CX32 gene. Janssen
et al. (1997) performed SSCP analysis of the CX32 gene in 121 patients
selected from the larger group of 443 patients on the basis of linkage
to Xq13.1, absence of the 17p12 duplication or deletion, and absence of
point mutations in PMP22 and P0. They found 5 new mutations and 3
mutations previously described in other unrelated families.

In 35 unrelated CMTX patients without the 17p11.2 duplication but with
median nerve conduction between 30 and 40 m/s, Rouger et al. (1997)
screened for a CX32 mutation. A total of 14 mutations were found, 5 of
which had not previously been reported. All but 1 of the mutations were
detected by SSCP. Mutations causing CMTX have been found mostly in exon
2 of the gene.

Latour et al. (1997) identified a total of 19 separate mutations in the
CX32 gene as the cause of CMTX in 21 French families.

Ainsworth et al. (1998) reported a family in which affected members with
CMTX had complete deletion of the GJB1 gene with complete absence of the
Cx32 gene product. The clinical phenotype in the affected individuals in
this kindred did not appear to differ greatly from the phenotype
observed in other individuals with missense, nonsense, or frameshift
mutations in the gene. This would appear to make a dominant-negative
effect of the mutation unlikely.

Ikegami et al. (1998) stated that more than 130 different mutations of
the GJB1 gene, including coding and noncoding regions, had been reported
in patients with X-linked CMT. In studies of 49 Japanese families with
CMT1 they found 5 mutations of the GJB1 gene; 4 of which had not
previously been reported.

Nelis et al. (1999) identified 163 distinct mutations in the coding
region of the CX32 gene in 268 unrelated patients with hereditary
peripheral neuropathy. Of these mutations, 125 were missense mutations,
1 a double missense mutation, 1 a missense mutation combined with a
1-amino acid deletion, 12 nonsense mutations, 17 frameshift mutations,
and 6 in-frame deletions and insertions. Further, in 1 case a complex
rearrangement in the coding region of CX32 was found. Most missense
mutations showed a mild clinical phenotype, whereas all nonsense
mutations and frameshift deletion/insertions showed severe phenotypes.
Forty-four percent of the codons were mutated in more than 1 patient. At
codon 22, 4 distinct mutations were identified in 20 unrelated patients.
In 2 X-linked families not showing mutations in the coding region of
CX32, mutations in the noncoding region were identified by Ionasescu et
al. (1996). In addition to the 163 mutations tabulated for the CX32 gene
in patients with hereditary peripheral neuropathy, Nelis et al. (1999)
identified 58 mutations in the MPZ gene (159440) and 27 mutations in the
PMP22 gene (601097).

GJB1 is expressed in both the peripheral and the central nervous system.
In consequence, it is not surprising that patients with CMTX1 and
specific GJB1 mutations have both peripheral neuropathy and a mild or
transient brain disorder (Paulson et al., 2002; Hanemann et al., 2003;
Takashima et al., 2003).

Kleopa et al. (2006) reported 2 novel mutations in the GJB1 gene that
segregated with CMTX1 in 2 unrelated families. In vitro expression
studies and immunohistochemistry showed that the mutant proteins were
retained within the Golgi apparatus and failed to reach the cell
membrane where gap junctions are normally formed.

Casasnovas et al. (2006) identified 34 GJB1 mutations, including 6 novel
mutations, in 59 patients from 34 CMT families of Spanish or Portuguese
descent. The extracellular loop domains were affected in 64.6% of
mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ARG142TRP

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Bergoffen et al. (1993) found a C-to-T transition in codon 142 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in substitution of tryptophan for arginine.

.0002
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, PRO172SER

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Bergoffen et al. (1993) found a G-to-A transition in codon 172 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in substitution of serine for proline.

.0003
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, VAL139MET

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Bergoffen et al. (1993) found a G-to-A transition in codon 139 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in a substitution of valine for methionine. The
identical mutation was found in an unrelated patient by Bone et al.
(1995).

.0004
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, TRP133ARG

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a T-to-C transition in codon 133 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in a substitution of arginine for tryptophan.

.0005
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ARG220TER

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Fairweather et al. (1994) found a C-to-T transition in codon 220 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in a stop signal in place of an arginine. The same
mutation was found in an unrelated Virginia family by Bone et al.
(1995).

.0006
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ILE30ASN

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a T-to-A transversion in codon 30 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in the substitution of asparagine for isoleucine.

.0007
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, LEU156ARG

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a T-to-G transversion in codon 156 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in the substitution of arginine for leucine.

.0008
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, TYR65CYS

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found an A-to-G transition in codon 65 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in a substitution of cysteine for tyrosine.

.0009
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, VAL13LEU

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a G-to-T transversion in codon 13 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in a substitution of leucine for valine.

.0010
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 1-BP DEL

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a deletion of thymidine residue in codon 137 of CX32,
resulting in a frameshift mutation which predicted a truncated 194-amino
acid protein with the last 58 amino acids starting at codon 137 altered
from wildtype.

.0011
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, VAL95MET

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a G-to-A transition in codon 95 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in the substitution of methionine for valine.

Montenegro et al. (2011) reported the use of exome sequencing to
identify the V95M mutation in affected members of a large family with
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and a questionable inheritance pattern.
Affected individuals had classic features of the disease, with onset
between ages 14 and 40 years of distal sensory impairment and muscle
weakness and atrophy affecting the upper and lower limbs. Nerve
conduction velocities were in the intermediate range.

.0012
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ASN205SER

Since CX32 is expressed not only in Schwann cells in the peripheral
nervous system but also in oligodendrocytes in the central nervous
system, Bahr et al. (1999) examined a CMTX1 (302800) family for evidence
of CNS involvement. The family had an asn205-to-ser mutation involving
the fourth transmembrane domain of CX32. The patients showed typical
clinical and electrophysiologic abnormalities in the peripheral nervous
system, but, in addition, visual, acoustic, and motor pathways of the
CNS were affected subclinically. This was indicated by pathologic
changes in visual evoked potentials, brainstem auditory evoked
potentials, and central motor evoked potentials. They suggested that
abnormal electrophysiologic findings in CNS pathway examinations should
raise the suspicion of CMTX and a search for mutations in the GJB1 gene.

.0013
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 367G-T

In a 71-year-old woman with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(302800), Tabaraud et al. (1999) identified a truncating mutation, GAG
to TAG at nucleotide 367, in the GJB1 gene. The mutation led to
termination by a glutamic acid in codon position 102 instead of codon
283 for the normal protein.

.0014
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, SER85CYS

Janssen et al. (1997) identified a C-to-G transversion in the GJB1 gene,
resulting in a ser85-to-cys (S85C) substitution, associated with
X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800).

Abrams et al. (2002) showed that expression of the S85C mutation
resulted in large, relatively nonselective, voltage-dependent currents
not seen in oocytes expressing wildtype Cx32. The findings suggested
that the S85C mutant has a much greater propensity to form conducting
hemichannels than does wildtype Cx32. The authors suggested that the
resulting increase in membrane permeability may prevent normal
functioning of the Schwann cells and peripheral nerves of patients
harboring this mutation.

.0015
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, -528T-G

Ionasescu et al. (1996) described a family with X-linked CMT (302800)
that harbored a T-to-G transversion at position -528 with respect to the
ATG start codon. Bondurand et al. (2001) used gelshift experiments to
show that the mutation impaired the binding of SOX10 (602229) to the
CX32 promoter region.

.0016
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, THR55ILE

In 2 sibs with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Panas et
al. (2001) identified a C-to-T transition at position 164 in exon 2 of
the GJB1 gene, resulting in a thr55-to-ile (T55I) substitution. In
addition to extremity weakness and atrophy and polyneuropathy, the
patients had episodes of severe weakness lasting from hours to days,
dysarthria, dysphagia, and bilateral hyperintensities of the
periventricular white matter on MRI. Panas et al. (2001) noted that
connexin-32 is expressed in Schwann cells, oligodendrocytes, and some
neuronal populations, which may explain the CNS involvement.

.0017
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 21-BP DUP

In a patient with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Kawakami et al. (2002) identified a 21-bp duplication from residues 55
to 61 in exon 2 of the GJB1 gene, resulting in a 7-amino acid insertion
in the first extracellular loop of the protein. The patient showed
clinical cerebellar abnormalities with a normal MRI and prolonged
central somatosensory conduction times. His clinically asymptomatic
mother carried the mutation. The authors referred to the report by Panas
et al. (2001) (see 304040.0016), and suggested that mutation in this
area of the GJB1 gene, specifically residue 55, may lead to CNS
manifestations.

.0018
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 3-BP DEL, 304GAG

Hanemann et al. (2003) reported a family in which 3 members were
affected with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800). Direct
sequencing of the GJB1 gene in 2 living patients identified a 3-bp
deletion (304delGAG), resulting in deletion of a glutamic acid at codon
102 (glu102). In addition to classic CMT clinical findings, all 3
patients had transient CNS symptoms correlating with transient and
reversible white matter lesions on MRI. CNS symptoms included
paraparesis, monoparesis, tetraparesis, dysarthria, aphasia, and cranial
nerve palsies.

.0019
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, -526G-C

In affected members of a large family with X-linked CMT (302800),
Houlden et al. (2004) identified a -526G-C transversion in a highly
conserved region of the nerve-specific P2 promoter of the GJB1 gene. The
mutation occurs within a SOX10 (602229) S2 binding site, similar to the
-528T-G mutation (304040.0015). Functional expression studies showed
that the -526G-C mutation impaired SOX10 binding, resulting in a 65%
decrease in transcriptional activation.

.0020
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, PHE235CYS

In a girl with a severe early-onset form of X-linked CMT (302800), Liang
et al. (2005) identified a 766T-G transversion in the GJB1 gene,
resulting in a phe235-to-cys (F235C) substitution in the carboxy tail
domain of the protein. The mutation was not identified in 50 control
chromosomes. The patient's asymptomatic mother also carried the
mutation, but Southern blot analysis showed preferential inactivation of
the mutant X-chromosome by a ratio of approximately 9 to 1. Functional
expression studies demonstrated that cells with the F235C mutant protein
had normal plasma membrane expression of the channel protein, but showed
a reduction of the resting membrane potential of more than 40 mV, with a
decrease in the threshold of activation. Cells expressing the mutant
protein also showed decreased viability compared to wildtype. Liang et
al. (2005) concluded that the propensity of the F235C hemichannels to be
open at resting membrane potential ('leaky channel') adversely affected
cell viability, thus resulting in a severe phenotype. Similar in vitro
findings had been reported for another GJB1 mutation (S85C;
304040.0014).

.0021
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
DEJERINE-SOTTAS NEUROPATHY, INCLUDED
GJB1, VAL136ALA

In Korean patients with X-linked CMT (302800), Choi et al. (2004)
identified a 407T-C transition in the GJB1 gene, resulting in a
val136-to-ala (V136A) substitution. (In the original publication, Choi
et al. (2004) erroneously designated the nucleotide change as 408T-C.)

In a Korean girl with Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (145900), Chung et al.
(2005) identified 2 mutations in 2 different genes: the V136A
substitution in the GJB1 gene and an R359W mutation in the EGR2 gene
(129010.0004). She inherited the EGR2 mutation from her father, who had
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-1D (607678). The GJB1 gene was de novo. The
father had pes cavus and developed difficulty walking at age 8 years,
but had a milder phenotype than the daughter, who had experienced gait
difficulties since infancy and facial weakness. She also had bilateral
hand muscle weakness and atrophy and had sensory impairment of both
upper and lower extremities. Chung et al. (2005) concluded that the more
severe phenotype in the daughter was caused by an additive effect of the
2 mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Abrams, C. K.; Bennett, M. V. L.; Verselis, V. K.; Bargiello, T.
A.: Voltage opens unopposed gap junction hemichannels formed by a
connexin 32 mutant associated with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 3980-3984, 2002.

2. Ainsworth, P. J.; Bolton, C. F.; Murphy, B. C.; Stuart, J. A.;
Hahn, A. F.: Genotype/phenotype correlation in affected individuals
of a family with a deletion of the entire coding sequence of the connexin
32 gene. Hum. Genet. 103: 242-244, 1998.

3. Bahr, M.; Andres, F.; Timmerman, V.; Nelis, M. E.; Van Broeckhoven,
C.; Dichgans, J.: Central visual, acoustic, and motor pathway involvement
in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth family with an asn205-to-ser mutation in
the connexin 32 gene. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat. 66: 202-206,
1999.

4. Bergoffen, J.; Scherer, S. S.; Wang, S.; Oronzi Scott, M.; Bone,
L. J.; Paul, D. L.; Chen, K.; Lensch, M. W.; Chance, P. F.; Fischbeck,
K. H.: Connexin mutations in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Science 262:
2039-2042, 1993.

5. Bondurand, N.; Girard, M.; Pingault, V.; Lemort, N.; Dubourg, O.;
Goossens, M.: Human connexin 32, a gap junction protein altered in
the X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, is directly regulated
by the transcription factor SOX10. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2783-2795,
2001.

6. Bone, L. J.; Dahl, N.; Lensch, M. W.; Chance, P. F.; Kelly, T.;
Le Guern, E.; Magi, S.; Parry, G.; Shapiro, H.; Wang, S.; Fischbeck,
K. H.: New connexin32 mutations associated with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease. Neurology 45: 1863-1866, 1995.

7. Casasnovas, C.; Banchs, I.; Corral, J.; Martinez-Matos, J. A.;
Volpini, V.: Clinical and molecular analysis of X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 1 in Spanish population. Clin. Genet. 70: 516-523,
2006. Note: Erratum: Clin. Genet. 73: 196 only, 2008.

8. Choi, B.-O.; Lee, M. S.; Shin, S. H.; Hwang, J. H.; Choi, K.-G.;
Kim, W.-K.; Sunwoo, I. N.; Kim, N. K.; Chung, K. W.: Mutational analysis
of PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, EGR2 and NEFL in Korean Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy
patients. (Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 24: 185-186, 2004. Note: Full Article
Online. Erratum: Hum. Mutat. 24: 350 only, 2004.

9. Chung, K. W.; Sunwoo, I. N.; Kim, S. M.; Park, K. D.; Kim, W.-K.;
Kim, T. S.; Koo, H.; Cho, M.; Lee, J.; Choi, B. O.: Two missense
mutations of EGR2 R359W and GJB1 V136A in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
family. Neurogenetics 6: 159-163, 2005.

10. Corcos, I. A.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Begy, C. R.; Loch-Caruso, R.;
Willard, H. F.; Glover, T. W.: Refined localization of human connexin
32 gene locus, GJB1, to Xq13.1. Genomics 13: 479-480, 1992.

11. Fairweather, N.; Bell, C.; Cochrane, S.; Chelly, J.; Wang, S.;
Mostacciuolo, M. L.; Monaco, A. P.; Haites, N. E.: Mutations in the
connexin 32 gene in X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(CMTX1). Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 29-34, 1994. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 1034 only, 1994.

12. Fishman, G. I.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Rosenthal, L.; Leinwand,
L. A.: The human connexin gene family of gap junction proteins: distinct
chromosomal locations but similar structure. Genomics 10: 250-256,
1991.

13. Hanemann, C. O.; Bergmann, C.; Senderek, J.; Zerres, K.; Sperfeld,
A.-D.: Transient, recurrent, white matter lesions in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease with novel connexin 32 mutation. Arch. Neurol. 60: 605-609,
2003.

14. Houlden, H.; Girard, M.; Cockerell, C.; Ingram, D.; Wood, N. W.;
Goossens, M.; Walker, R. W. H.; Reilly, M. M.: Connexin 32 promoter
P2 mutations: a mechanism of peripheral nerve dysfunction. Ann. Neurol. 56:
730-734, 2004.

15. Hsieh, C.-L.; Kumar, N. M.; Gilula, N. B.; Francke, U.: Distribution
of genes for gap junction membrane channel proteins on human and mouse
chromosomes. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 17: 191-200, 1991.

16. Ikegami, T.; Lin, C.; Kato, M.; Itoh, A.; Nonaka, I.; Kurimura,
M.; Hirayabashi, H.; Shinohara, Y.; Mochizuki, A.; Hayasaka, K.:
Four novel mutations of the connexin 32 gene in four Japanese families
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 80:
352-355, 1998.

17. Ionasescu, V.; Ionasescu, R.; Searby, C.: Correlation between
connexin32 gene mutations and clinical phenotype in X-linked dominant
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 63: 486-491,
1996.

18. Ionasescu, V. V.; Searby, C.; Ionasescu, R.; Neuhaus, I. M.; Werner,
R.: Mutations of the noncoding region of the connexin 32 gene in
X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Neurology 47:
541-544, 1996.

19. Janssen, E. A. M.; Kemp, S.; Hensels, G. W.; Sie, O. G.; de Die-Smulders,
C. E. M.; Hoogendijk, J. E.; de Visser, M.; Bolhuis, P. A.: Connexin32
gene mutations in X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX1). Hum.
Genet. 99: 501-505, 1997.

20. Kawakami, H.; Inoue, K.; Sakakihara, I.; Nakamura, S.: Novel
mutation in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease associated with CNS
impairment. Neurology 59: 923-926, 2002.

21. Kleopa, K. A.; Zamba-Papanicolaou, E.; Alevra, X.; Nicolaou, P.;
Georgiou, D.-M.; Hadjisavvas, A.; Kyriakides, T.; Christodoulou, K.
: Phenotypic and cellular expression of two novel connexin32 mutations
causing CMT1X. Neurology 66: 396-402, 2006.

22. Kumar, N. M.; Gilula, N. B.: Cloning and characterization of
human and rat liver cDNAs coding for a gap junction protein. J. Cell
Biol. 103: 767-776, 1986.

23. Kumar, N. M.; Gilula, N. B.: The gap junction communication channel. Cell 84:
381-388, 1996.

24. Lafreniere, R. G.; Brown, C. J.; Powers, V. E.; Carrel, L.; Davies,
K. E.; Barker, D. F.; Willard, H. F.: Physical mapping of 60 DNA
markers in the p21.1-q21.3 region of the human X chromosome. Genomics 11:
352-363, 1991.

25. Latour, P.; Levy, N.; Paret, M.; Chapon, F.; Chazot, G.; Clavelou,
P.; Couratier, P.; Dumas, R.; Ollagnon, E.; Pouget, J.; Setiey, A.;
Vallat, J. M.; Boucherat, M.; Fontes, M.; Vandenberghe, A.: Mutations
in the X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in the French
population. Neurogenetics 1: 117-123, 1997.

26. Liang, G. S. L.; de Miguel, M.; Gomez-Hernandez, J. M.; Glass,
J. D.; Scherer, S. S.; Mintz, M.; Barrio, L. C.; Fischbeck, K. H.
: Severe neuropathy with leaky connexin32 hemichannels. Ann. Neurol. 57:
749-754, 2005.

27. Montenegro, G.; Powell, E.; Huang, J.; Speziani, F.; Edwards,
Y. J. K.; Beecham, G.; Hulme, W.; Siskind, C.; Vance, J.; Shy, M.;
Zuchner, S.: Exome sequencing allows for rapid gene identification
in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth family. Ann. Neurol. 69: 464-470, 2011.

28. Nelis, E.; Haites, N.; Van Broeckhoven, C.: Mutations in the
peripheral myelin genes and associated genes in inherited peripheral
neuropathies. Hum. Mutat. 13: 11-28, 1999.

29. Nelis, E.; Simokovic, S.; Timmerman, V.; Lofgren, A.; Backhovens,
H.; De Jonghe, P.; Martin, J.-J.; Van Broeckhoven, C.: Mutation analysis
of the connexin 32 (Cx32) gene in Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type
1: identification of five new mutations. Hum. Mutat. 9: 47-52, 1997.

30. Omori, Y.; Mesnil, M.; Yamasaki, H.: Connexin 32 mutations from
X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease patients: functional defects
and dominant negative effects. Molec. Biol. Cell 7: 907-916, 1996.

31. Panas, M.; Kalfakis, N.; Karadimas, C.; Vassilopoulos, D.: Episodes
of generalized weakness in two sibs with the C164T mutation of the
connexin 32 gene. Neurology 57: 1906-1908, 2001.

32. Paulson, H. L.; Garbern, J. Y.; Hoban, T. F.; Krajewski, K. M.;
Lewis, R. A.; Fischbeck, K. H.; Grossman, R. I.; Lenkinski, R.; Kamholz,
J. A.; Shy, M. E.: Transient central nervous system white matter
abnormality in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Ann. Neurol. 52:
429-434, 2002.

33. Raimondi, E.; Gaudi, S.; Moralli, D.; De Carli, L.; Malcovati,
M.; Simonic, T.; Tenchini, M. L.: Assignment of the human connexin
32 gene (GJB1) to band Xq13. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 60: 210-211,
1992.

34. Rouger, H.; LeGuern, E.; Birouk, N.; Gouider, R.; Tardieu, S.;
Plassart, E.; Gugenheim, M.; Vallat, J.-M.; Louboutin, J.-P.; Bouche,
P.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with intermediate
motor nerve conduction velocities: characterization of 14 CX32 mutations
in 35 families. Hum. Mutat. 10: 443-452, 1997.

35. Scherer, S. S.; Deschenes, S. M.; Xu, Y.; Grinspan, J. B.; Fischbeck,
K. H.; Paul, D. L.: Connexin32 is a myelin-related protein in the
PNS and CNS. J. Neurosci. 15: 8281-8294, 1995.

36. Sohl, G.; Nielsen, P. A.; Eiberger, J.; Willecke, K.: Expression
profiles of the novel human connexin genes hCx30.2, hCx40.1, and hCx62
differ from their putative mouse orthologues. Cell Commun. Adhesion 10:
27-36, 2003.

37. Tabaraud, F.; Lagrange, E.; Sindou, P.; Vandenberghe, A.; Levy,
N.; Vallat, J. M.: Demyelinating X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease:
unusual electrophysiological findings. Muscle Nerve 22: 1442-1447,
1999.

38. Takashima, H.; Nakagawa, M.; Umehara, F.; Hirata, K.; Suehara,
M.; Mayumi, H.; Yoshishige, K.; Matsuyama, W.; Saito, M.; Jonosono,
M.; Arimura, K.; Osame, M.: Gap junction protein beta 1 (GJB1) mutations
and central nervous system symptoms in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease. Acta Neurol. Scand. 107: 31-37, 2003.

39. Willecke, K.; Jungbluth, S.; Dahl, E.; Hennemann, H.; Heynkes,
R.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: Six genes of the human connexin gene family
coding for gap junctional proteins are assigned to four different
human chromosomes. Europ. J. Cell Biol. 53: 275-280, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/13/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/27/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/7/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/10/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/30/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/23/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/28/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/12/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/10/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 8/31/1996
Orest Hurko - updated: 4/4/1996
Orest Hurko - updated: 11/16/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/18/1991

EDITED carol: 03/08/2013
terry: 9/14/2012
carol: 1/12/2012
carol: 12/5/2011
carol: 10/21/2011
ckniffin: 10/13/2011
wwang: 1/28/2011
mgross: 3/27/2008
ckniffin: 2/29/2008
terry: 12/17/2007
wwang: 5/29/2007
ckniffin: 5/7/2007
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 4/10/2006
joanna: 4/4/2006
wwang: 11/30/2005
ckniffin: 11/30/2005
wwang: 8/26/2005
ckniffin: 8/23/2005
ckniffin: 4/28/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
alopez: 7/16/2004
terry: 7/12/2004
carol: 4/30/2004
tkritzer: 6/9/2003
ckniffin: 5/28/2003
tkritzer: 1/8/2003
ckniffin: 1/3/2003
cwells: 6/12/2002
cwells: 6/10/2002
mgross: 4/25/2002
terry: 4/17/2002
carol: 12/8/1999
carol: 8/31/1999
psherman: 8/31/1999
jlewis: 6/9/1999
terry: 6/3/1999
mgross: 3/16/1999
carol: 1/14/1999
terry: 1/12/1999
carol: 1/5/1999
terry: 12/30/1998
carol: 11/2/1998
terry: 10/29/1998
carol: 10/12/1998
carol: 5/12/1998
terry: 5/5/1998
alopez: 1/12/1998
dholmes: 1/6/1998
mark: 9/1/1997
mark: 5/19/1997
terry: 5/19/1997
alopez: 4/30/1997
terry: 4/29/1997
terry: 2/26/1997
randy: 8/31/1996
terry: 8/29/1996
mark: 8/27/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/14/1996
mark: 4/4/1996
terry: 3/23/1996
mark: 3/9/1996
terry: 3/4/1996
carol: 12/20/1994
pfoster: 4/1/1994
mimadm: 2/27/1994
terry: 1/3/1994
carol: 10/27/1993

609699	TITLE *609699 MONOGLYCERIDE LIPASE; MGLL
;;MGL;;
MONOACYLGLYCEROL LIPASE; MAGL;;
HUK5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Monoglyceride lipase (MGLL; EC 3.1.1.23) functions together with
hormone-sensitive lipase (LIPE; 151750) to hydrolyze intracellular
triglyceride stores in adipocytes and other cells to fatty acids and
glycerol. MGLL may also complement lipoprotein lipase (LPL; 238600) in
completing hydrolysis of monoglycerides resulting from degradation of
lipoprotein triglycerides (Karlsson et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to a
lysophospholipase gene from ectromelia virus, Wall et al. (1997)
identified human MGLL, which they designated HUK5. The deduced 313-amino
acid protein shares 49.5% identity with the virus protein. Database
analysis indicated that MGLL is expressed in wide variety of tissues and
may be preferentially expressed in adipose.

By RT-PCR of adipocyte total RNA using primers based on mouse Mgl,
followed by screening an adipocyte cDNA library, Karlsson et al. (2001)
cloned human MGL. The deduced 303-amino acid protein shares 84% identity
with mouse Mgl. Mouse and human MGL both have an N-terminal his-gly
dipeptide, a characteristic of lipases, and a catalytic triad of ser122,
asp239, and his269. By EST database analysis, Karlsson et al. (2001)
identified mouse and human MGL transcripts containing 2 different
5-prime leader sequences. Northern blot analysis of human adipocyte
total RNA detected a 4.2-kb MGL transcript. MGL expression was also
detected in lung, liver, kidney, brain, and heart. Western blot analysis
of mouse tissues showed ubiquitous expression, but the pattern was
tissue specific with regard to both the size and number of Mgl proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Dinh et al. (2002) found that rat Mgl participates in inactivation of
2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), an endogenous cannabinoid monoglyceride.
Mgl was highly expressed in regions of rat brain that also expressed
cannabinoid receptors (see CNR1; 114610), and it appeared to assume a
presynaptic localization in hippocampus. Adenovirus-mediated transfer of
Mgl cDNA into rat cortical neurons increased Mgl expression and
attenuated 2-AG accumulation induced by N-methyl-D-aspartate/carbachol.

Nomura et al. (2010) found that KIAA1363 (NCEH1; 613234) and MAGL were
consistently elevated in aggressive human cancer cells relative to their
nonaggressive counterparts. The authors suggested that enrichment of
protumorigenic lipid signaling molecules in aggressive cancer cells
supports their malignant phenotype.

Nomura et al. (2011) demonstrated that a distinct pathway exists in
brain, where MAGL hydrolyzes the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol
to generate a major arachidonate precursor pool for neuroinflammatory
prostaglandins. MAGL-disrupted animals showed neuroprotection in a
parkinsonian mouse model. These animals were spared the hemorrhaging
caused by COX inhibitors in the gut, where prostaglandins are instead
regulated by cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2); see 611651). Nomura
et al. (2011) concluded that their findings identified MAGL as a
distinct metabolic node that couples endocannabinoid to prostaglandin
signaling networks in the nervous system.

GENE STRUCTURE

Karlsson et al. (2001) determined that the mouse and human MGLL genes
contain 7 exons. Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Analysis Consortium mapped the MGLL
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP SHGC-31856).

Karlsson et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Mgll gene to a region of
chromosome 6 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome 3q21.

REFERENCE 1. Dinh, T. P.; Carpenter, D.; Leslie, F. M.; Freund, T. F.; Katona,
I.; Sensi, S. L.; Kathuria, S.; Piomelli, D.: Brain monoglyceride
lipase participating in endocannabinoid inactivation. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 10819-10824, 2002. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 13961 only, 2002.

2. Karlsson, M.; Reue, K.; Xia, Y.-R.; Lusis, A. J.; Langin, D.; Tornqvist,
H.; Holm, C.: Exon-intron organization and chromosomal localization
of the mouse monoglyceride lipase gene. Gene 272: 11-18, 2001.

3. Nomura, D. K.; Long, J. Z.; Niessen, S.; Hoover, H. S.; Ng, S.-W.;
Cravatt, B. F.: Monoacylglycerol lipase regulates a fatty acid network
that promotes cancer pathogenesis. Cell 140: 49-61, 2010.

4. Nomura, D. K.; Morrison, B. E.; Blankman, J. L.; Long, J. Z.; Kinsey,
S. G.; Marcondes, M. C. G.; Ward, A. M.; Hahn, Y. K.; Lichtman, A.
H.; Conti, B.; Cravatt, B. F.: Endocannabinoid hydrolysis generates
brain prostaglandins that promote neuroinflammation. Science 334:
809-813, 2011.

5. Wall, E. M.; Cao, J.; Chen, N.; Buller, R. M. L.; Upton, C.: A
novel poxvirus gene and its human homolog are similar to an E. coli
lysophospholipase. Virus Res. 52: 157-167, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/27/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/4/2005

EDITED alopez: 12/01/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
mgross: 1/27/2010
terry: 1/27/2010
mgross: 11/4/2005

602525	TITLE *602525 PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE KINASE, ISOENZYME 2; PDK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDK2 belongs to the family of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) kinases (EC
2.7.11.2), which reversibly inactivate the mitochondrial PDH complex by
ATP-dependent serine phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of the
complex's E1 component (see 300502) (summary by Korotchkina and Patel,
2001).

CLONING

By screening a human liver cDNA library with rat Pdk2, Gudi et al.
(1995) cloned PDK2. The deduced 407-amino acid protein, with a
calculated molecular mass of 46.2 kD, has a putative mitochondrial
protein kinase catalytic domain with 5 characteristic subdomains. The
human and rat proteins share 96% identity. Northern blot analysis
detected variable expression of a 2.4-kb PDK2 transcript in all 8 human
tissues examined, with highest expression in heart, followed by skeletal
muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Gudi et al. (1995) noted that the products of the PDH reaction stimulate
the kinase activity of PDKs, whereas the substrates are inhibitory. ADP
also acts synergistically with pyruvate to inhibit PDK kinase activity.
Using kinase-depleted PDH complexes isolated from rat heart as
substrate, Gudi et al. (1995) found that recombinant human PDK1
(602524), PDK2, and PDK3 (602526) inactivated PDH in an ATP-dependent
manner. PDK3 showed the highest kinase activity, and PDK2 the lowest.
However, the products of the PDH reaction, NADH and acetyl-CoA,
increased the ability of PDK2 to inhibit PDH.

Baker et al. (2000) found that the E2 subunit of PDH (DLAT; 608770), and
the isolated second N-terminal lipoyl (L2) domain of E2, differentially
enhanced the rates at which recombinant human PDK2 and PDK3
phosphorylated E1. There was little direct activation of PDK2 by the
free L2 domain, but the E2 60mer, which forms the core structure of the
PDH complex, enhanced PDK2 activity by 10-fold. PDK3 was activated
17-fold by E2; the majority of this activation was facilitated by the
free L2 domain. PDK2 and PDK3 also differed in their inhibition by
pyruvate, ADP, dichloroacetic acid, and acetylated lipoyl groups,
activation by NADH and acetyl-CoA, and combined effect of mixed
inhibitors and activators.

Each of the 2 E1 alpha subunits of PDH contains 3 serines that are
phosphorylated by PDKs. Using recombinant enzymes expressed in E. coli
and double site mutants of human E1, Korotchkina and Patel (2001) found
that rat Pdk1, Pdk2, and Pdk4 (602527), and human PDK3, showed unique
specificity and activity toward each of these serines. Only Pdk1 had
detectable activity with site 3, which the authors called ser203. Each
kinase also showed unique activity in the presence or absence of E2 in
complex with its binding partner E3BP (PDHX; 608769), and unique
sensitivity to the redox and/or acetylation state of the lipoyl moieties
of E2, and the buffer system employed.

Boulatnikov and Popov (2003) found that rat Pdk1 and Pdk2 could form
homodimers when expressed singly, or heterodimers when expressed
together, in E. coli. The heterodimeric kinase was catalytically active,
with kinetic parameters, site specificity, and regulation clearly
distinct from those of homodimeric Pdk1 or Pdk2. The Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimers catalyzed phosphorylation of E1 site 3 serine, in addition
to sites 1 and 2 serines. Homodimers of Pdk1 or Pdk2 and the Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimer also readily bound the isolated E2 component of PDH as well
as the E2-E3BP subcomplex. Interactions were strengthened by the
presence of the lipoate prosthetic groups in E2.

The nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activator receptors (PPARs; see
PPARA, 170990) are critical regulators of fatty acid oxidation. Using
quantitative real-time PCR, Degenhardt et al. (2007) found that
expression of PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4, but not PDK1, was induced by
PPAR-beta/delta (PPARD; 600409) agonists. In mice, induction of
PPAR-beta/delta increased renal expression of Pdk2 and Pdk4, but not
Pdk1 or Pdk3. In both human and mouse cells, PDK4 showed strongest
induction by PPAR-beta/delta ligands. Ligands for other PPAR subtypes
showed weaker regulation of PDK gene expression. In silico analysis,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and Western blot analysis revealed that
PPAR-beta/delta bound regulatory elements in the PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4
genes, but not the PDK1 gene, and activated transcription in association
with its regulatory partners RXR-alpha (RXRA; 180245), PGC1-alpha
(PPARGC1A; 604517), and TRAP220 (MED1; 604311), and phosphorylated RNA
polymerase II (see POLR2A, 180660). Degenhardt et al. (2007) also found
that fibroblasts from Ppard-null mice showed reduced expression of Pdk2,
Pdk3, and Pdk4 compared with wildtype fibroblasts. Expression of Pdk4
was reduced 1200-fold. Degenhardt et al. (2007) concluded that PDK2,
PDK3, and PDK4 genes are primary PPAR targets and that PPAR-beta/delta
is a major regulator of PDK4 expression.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the PDK2 gene to chromosome 17q21.33 based on an
alignment of the PDK2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK055119) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Baker, J. C.; Yan, X.; Peng, T.; Kasten, S.; Roche, T. E.: Marked
differences between two isoforms of human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 15773-15781, 2000.

2. Boulatnikov, I.; Popov, K. M.: Formation of functional heterodimers
by isozymes 1 and 2 of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1645: 183-192, 2003.

3. Degenhardt, T.; Saramaki, A.; Malinen, M.; Rieck, M.; Vaisanen,
S.; Huotari, A.; Herzig, K.-H.; Muller, R.; Carlberg, C.: Three members
of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family are direct
targets of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor beta/delta. J.
Molec. Biol. 372: 341-355, 2007.

4. Gudi, R.; Bowker-Kinley, M. M.; Kedishvili, N. Y.; Zhao, Y.; Popov,
K. M.: Diversity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family
in humans. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 28989-28994, 1995. Note: Erratum:
J. Biol. Chem. 271: 1250 only, 1996.

5. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2013.

6. Korotchkina, L. G.; Patel, M. S.: Site specificity of four pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase isoenzymes toward the three phosphorylation sites
of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 37223-37229,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2013

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 4/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 08/20/2013
mgross: 8/9/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
alopez: 4/16/1998

300574	TITLE *300574 CHEMOKINE, CXC MOTIF, RECEPTOR 3; CXCR3
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 9; GPR9;;
CD183 ANTIGEN; CD183
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Chemokines mediate migration of immune cells into infected or inflamed
tissues to initiate effective immune responses. The chemokine receptor
CXCR3 is preferentially expressed by T helper-1 (Th1) cells and is
critically involved in their recruitment to inflamed tissue. Tissue
infiltration of T cells expressing high levels of CXCR3 depends on
interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570)-induced release of the CXCR3 ligands
CXCL9 (601704), CXCL10 (147310), or CXCL11 (604852). CXCR3 is also
expressed on nonlymphoid tissue-homing CD4 (186940)-positive/CD25
(IL2RA; 147730)-positive regulatory T (Treg) cells (summary by Erhardt
et al., 2011).

CLONING

A wide spectrum of intercellular signals is mediated by peptide ligands
interacting with specific cell surface receptors. Many peptide-binding
receptors belong to the G protein-coupled receptor family and exhibit
common structural features, including the presence of 7 transmembrane
domains and a number of conserved amino acid residues. Marchese et al.
(1995) used PCR and genomic DNA library screening to clone 2 novel human
genes, GPR9 and GPR10 (600895), and a rat gene, GPR14 (600896). Each of
these encodes a G protein-coupled receptor. The receptor encoded by GPR9
was found to share the highest identity with human IL8 receptor type B
(IL8RB; 146928) (38% overall and 53% in the transmembrane regions),
followed by IL8RA (146929) (36% overall and 51% in the transmembrane
domains).

By database analysis and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of total mRNA from
human microvascular endothelial cells and thymus, Lasagni et al. (2003)
cloned a novel CXCR3 splice variant that they termed CXCR3B. The
predicted CXCR3B protein contains 416 amino acids and has a longer N
terminus that differs from the original 368-amino acid CXCR3 protein,
CXCR3A, in the first 52 residues. Northern blot analysis detected CXCR3A
and CXCR3B transcripts of 1.6 and 1.8 kb, respectively, in heart,
kidney, liver, and skeletal muscle, with CXCR3A predominating. CXCR3A
was also present in placenta.

GENE FUNCTION

The superfamily of chemokines consists of an array of chemoattractant
proteins that has been divided into 4 branches (C, CC, CXC, and CXXC) on
the basis of the relative position of the cysteine residues in the
mature protein. Structural variants of chemokines are associated with
differences in their ability to regulate the trafficking of immune cells
during hematopoiesis and inflammatory responses. Chemokines exert their
attractant properties after binding to distinct membrane receptors.
Because a single chemokine receptor binds several chemokines, it is
often difficult to evaluate the activity of these structures in
lymphocyte homing. For instance, interferon (IFN)-inducible protein-10
(IP10, or CXCL10; 147310) and IFN-gamma-induced monokine-2 (MIG, or
CXCL9; 601704), CXC chemokines that are induced by IFN-gamma, bind the
CXCR3 receptor and are shown to be specifically chemotactic for
activated lymphocytes (Loetscher et al., 1996).

Although FACS analysis demonstrated that 40% of resting T lymphocytes
expressed CXCR3, Loetscher et al. (1998) found that these cells did not
have detectable CXCR3 transcripts and did not respond to CXCL9 or
CXCL10. However, exposure to IL2 (147680) with or without mitogen for 2
weeks resulted in expression of CXCR3 on more than 95% of T lymphocytes.

Using Northern blot analysis, Bonecchi et al. (1998) showed that
polarized Th1 cells preferentially express CXCR3 and CCR5 (601373). In
contrast, Th2 cells preferentially express CCR4 (604836) and, at least
in a subpopulation of Th2 cells, CCR3 (601268).

Trentin et al. (1999) investigated the expression and function of CXCR3
on normal and malignant B cells from 65 patients with chronic
lymphoproliferative disorders. Although CXCR3 was lacking in CD5(+) and
CD5(-) B cells from healthy subjects, it was expressed on leukemic B
lymphocytes from all (31/31) patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). The presence of CXCR3 was heterogeneous in other B-cell
disorders, being expressed in 2 of 7 patients with mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL), 4 of 12 patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL), and 11 of 15
patients with other subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs). Chemotaxis
assay showed that normal B cells from healthy subjects did not migrate
in response to IP10 and MIG. In contrast, a definite migration in
response to IP10 and MIG was observed in all malignant B cells from
patients with CLL, but not in patients with HCL or MCL. Neoplastic B
cells from other NHLs showed a heterogeneous pattern. The migration
elicited by IP10 and MIG was inhibited by blocking CXCR3. No effect of
IP10 and MIG chemokines was observed on the cytosolic calcium
concentration in malignant B cells. The data demonstrated that CXCR3 is
expressed on malignant B cells from chronic lymphoproliferative
disorders, particularly in patients with CLL, and represents a fully
functional receptor involved in chemotaxis of malignant B lymphocytes.

Using bronchoalveolar lavage and flow cytometry, Campbell et al. (2001)
determined that T lymphocytes homing to the lung in both normal and
asthmatic subjects express CCR5 and CXCR3 but not CCR9 (604738), which
is found on T cells homing to intestinal mucosal sites, or CLA (see
SELPLG; 600738), which is found on skin-homing T cells.

Frigerio et al. (2002) demonstrated that in response to inflammation,
beta cells secrete the chemokine CXC ligand-10 (CXCL10; 147310) and CXC
ligand-9 (CXCL9; 601704), which specifically attract T-effector cells
via CXCR3. In mice deficient for this receptor, the onset of type 1
diabetes (222100) is substantially delayed. Thus, Frigerio et al. (2002)
concluded that in the absence of known etiologic agents, CXCR3
represents a novel target for therapeutic interference early in type 1
diabetes.

Using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Booth et al. (2002)
showed that IP10 (CXCL10) interacted with the N terminus of CXCR3 via a
hydrophobic cleft formed by the N-loop and 40s-loop region of IP10,
similar to the interaction surface of other chemokines, such as IL8
(146930). An additional region of interaction was found that consisted
of a hydrophobic cleft formed by the N terminus and the 30s loop of
IP10.

Lasagni et al. (2003) found that both CXCR3A and CXCR3B bound CXCL9,
CXCL10, and CXCL11 (604852), but only CXCR3B bound CXCL4 (PF4; 173460),
following expression in a microvascular endothelial cell line.
Overexpression of CXCR3A induced an increase in endothelial cell
survival, whereas overexpression of CXCR3B upregulated apoptotic
pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of primary microvascular
endothelial cells, whose growth in inhibited by CXCL4, CXCL9, CXCL10,
and CXCL11, demonstrated expression of CXCR3B, but not CXCR3A.
CXCR3B-specific monoclonal antibodies reacted with neoplastic tissue
endothelial cells, providing evidence that CXCR3B is expressed in vivo
and may account for the angiostatic effects of CXC chemokines.

Although chemokine signaling is often promiscuous, signaling events
between members of the distinct chemokine classes (CXC, CC, CX3C, and C)
are almost never observed. Dijkstra et al. (2004) showed that human
CCL21 (602737), in the absence of its primary receptor, CCR7 (600242),
is a functional ligand for CXCR3, inducing chemotaxis in adult
microglial cells, but not in kidney epithelial cells. CCL21-induced
chemotaxis could be inhibited by the CXCR3 ligand, CXCL10, whereas
CXCL10 had no effect on CX3CL1 (601880) chemotactic activity.
Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated that CXCR3 was expressed
predominantly in microglial cytoplasm. Dijkstra et al. (2004) concluded
that CCL21 signaling through CXCR3 depends on the cellular background in
which CXCR3 is expressed.

Using microarray analysis, Feferman et al. (2005) found increased
expression of Cxl10 and its receptor, Cxcr3, in lymph node cells of rats
with experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (MG; 254200). Real-time
RT-PCR, FACS, and immunohistochemistry analyses confirmed these findings
and revealed upregulated expression of another Cxcr3 chemoattractant,
Cxcl9, and of Tnf (191160) and Il1b (147720), which act synergistically
with Ifng (147570) to induce Cxcl10, in both lymph node cells and muscle
of myasthenic rats. Upregulation of these genes was reduced after
mucosal tolerance induction with an AChR (see CHRNA1; 100725) fragment.
Using RT-PCR, flow cytometric, and fluorescence microscopy analyses,
Feferman et al. (2005) found increased expression of CXL10 and CXCR3 in
thymus and muscle of MG patients compared with age-matched controls,
validating their findings in the rat model of MG. They concluded that
CXCL10/CXCR3 signaling is associated with MG pathogenesis and proposed
that CXCL10 and CXCR3 may serve as novel drug targets to treat MG.

Oo et al. (2010) found that 18% of T cells in inflamed areas of diseased
human livers expressed the Treg marker FOXP3 (300292). Flow cytometric
analysis showed that inflamed liver Tregs expressed higher levels of
CCR4 and CXCR3 compared with blood Tregs. Adhesion assays showed that
Tregs used CXCR3 and alpha-4 (ITGA4; 192975)/beta-1 (ITGB1; 135630) to
bind and transmigrate, whereas CCR4 played no role. The CCR4 ligands
CCL17 (601520) and CCL22 (602957) were absent from healthy liver, but
they were expressed by dendritic cells in inflamed liver, and these
dendritic cells were associated with CD8 T cells and CCR4-positive Tregs
in the parenchyma and septal areas. Ex vivo, liver-derived Tregs
migrated to CCR4 ligands secreted by dendritic cells. Oo et al. (2010)
proposed that CXCR3 mediates recruitment of Tregs via hepatic sinusoidal
endothelium and that dendritic cells secrete CCR4 ligands that recruit
Tregs to sites of inflammation in patients with chronic hepatitis.

By binding analyses, Struyf et al. (2011) found that human CXCL4L1
(PF4V1; 173461), a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis, had lower affinity
for heparin and chondroitin sulfate-E than did CXCL4 and that CXCL10 and
CXCL4L1 could displace each other on human microvascular endothelial
cells. CXCL4L1 bound to both CXCR3A and CXCR3B. Antibodies to CXCR3
blocked CXCL4L1 antiangiogenic activity, and human CXCL4L1 activity was
reduced in mice treated with anti-human CXCR3 or in mice lacking Cxcr3,
as assessed by tumor growth and vascularization of Lewis lung carcinoma.
Like CXCL4, CXCL4L1 attracted activated T, natural killer, and dendritic
cells, but preincubation with CXCL10 and CXCL11, pertussis toxin, or
anti-CXCR3 reduced or neutralized this activity. Struyf et al. (2011)
concluded that CXCR3A and CXCR3B are involved in the chemotactic and
vascular effects of CXCL4L1.

Endo et al. (2011) examined expression of cell surface markers to
identify functionally distinct subpopulations of mouse memory Th2 cells.
FACS analysis demonstrated 4 Th2 subpopulations based on high or low
expression levels of Cd62l (SELL; 153240) and Cxcr3. All 4
subpopulations produced comparable levels of Il4 (147780) and Il13
(147683), but Th2 cells expressing low levels of both Cd62l and Cxcr3
(Cd62l-lo/Cxcr3-lo cells) selectively produced Il5 (147850). Il5
production in Cd62l-lo/Cxcr3-lo cells was accompanied by histone H3-K4
methylation, a marker for the permissive conformation of chromatin, at
the IL5 promoter. DNA microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR showed
that Cd44 (107269)-positive memory Th2 cells expressing Il5 had lower
levels of Eomes (604615) and Tbx21 (604895) and higher levels of Rora
(600825) and Pparg (601487) than memory Th2 cells lacking Il5
expression. RNA silencing demonstrated that Eomes downregulation was
required for Il5 expression and that Eomes had no effect on H3-K4
methylation at the Il5 promoter. Instead Eomes suppressed Gata3 (131320)
transcriptional activity by inhibiting Gata3 binding to the Il5
promoter. Depletion of Cd62l-lo/Cxcr3-lo cells ameliorated memory Th2
cell-dependent airway inflammation in mice. Endo et al. (2011) concluded
that IL5 production preferentially occurs in the CD62L-lo/CXCR3-lo
subpopulation regulated by EOMES expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Marchese et al. (1995) determined that GPR10 and GPR14 are intronless
within their coding regions, while GPR9 contains at least 1 intron.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Marchese et al. (1995) mapped the
GPR9 gene to 8p12-p11.2 and the GPR10 gene to 10q25.3-q26. Using FISH,
PCR, and Southern blot analysis, Loetscher et al. (1998) determined that
CXCR3 is a single-copy gene that maps to chromosome Xq13. The
International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium confirmed that the
CXCR3 gene maps to the X chromosome (TMAP RH47042).

ANIMAL MODEL

Liu et al. (2006) noted that mice lacking the Cxcr3 ligand Cxcl10
exhibit enhanced susceptibility to experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model for certain aspects of multiple
sclerosis (MS; 126200). They found that EAE in mice lacking Cxcr3 was
characterized by exaggerated severity, aggravated blood-brain barrier
disruption, and increased tissue damage, accompanied by reduced
production of Ifng and impaired expression of inducible nitric oxide
synthase (NOS2A; 163730), compared with wildtype mice with EAE. However,
immunohistochemical, microscopic, and flow cytometric analyses
demonstrated a lack of quantitative and qualitative differences in
leukocytes infiltrating the central nervous system between Cxcr3 -/- and
wildtype mice with EAE. Liu et al. (2006) concluded that Cxcl10 is the
most relevant Cxcr3 ligand in EAE, and that Cxcr3 does not govern
leukocyte trafficking in EAE, but modulates Ifng production and
downstream events affecting disease severity.

Using a mouse model of immune-mediated liver injury induced by
concanavalin A (ConA), Erhardt et al. (2011) demonstrated enhanced
intrahepatic expression of the Cxcr3 ligands Cxcl9, Cxcl10, and Cxcl11
following induction of ConA hepatitis. Cxcr3 -/- mice developed more
severe liver injury with higher plasma transaminase activities and a
more pronounced Th1/Th17 response compared with wildtype mice after ConA
treatment. In addition, Cxcr3 -/- mice did not establish tolerance upon
ConA restimulation, although Tregs from Cxcr3 -/- mice were still
immunosuppressive in an in vitro suppression assay. However, there was
no accumulation of Cxcr3-positive/Tbet (TBX21; 604895)-positive Tregs
producing Il10 (124092) in liver of Cxcr3 -/- mice, as there was in
wildtype mice. Conversion to Tregs was dependent on a Th1 response, as
Ifng-deficient mice failed to produce Cxcr3-positive/Tbet-positive
Tregs. Cd25-positive/Foxp3-positive Tregs failed to protect against
ConA-induced hepatitis, whereas Cxcr3-positive/Tbet-positive Tregs
protected Cxcr3 -/- mice and allowed recovery from injury. Erhardt et
al. (2011) concluded that CXCR3-positive/TBET-positive/IL10-positive
Tregs are generated in liver in an IFNG-dependent manner, then
disseminate into the organism and migrate to liver, where they limit
immune-mediated damage.

Wuest and Carr (2008) found that corneal infection with herpes simplex
virus-1 (HSV1) resulted in elevated viral titers in the nervous system
of Cxcl10 -/- mice, which correlated with defects in leukocyte
recruitment to the brainstem. Similar levels of HSV1 were recovered from
Cxcl10 -/- or wildtype mice lacking natural killer (NK) cells or
virus-specific Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells. Cxcr3 -/- mice also
had poor recruitment of NK cells, but not Cd8-positive cells. Wuest and
Carr (2008) concluded that antigen-specific CD8-positive T cells,
recruited through CXCL10, are critical in the antiviral response at the
brainstem.

REFERENCE 1. Bonecchi, R.; Bianchi, G.; Bordignon, P. P.; D'Ambrosio, D.; Lang,
R.; Borsatti, A.; Sozzani, S.; Allavena, P.; Gray, P. A.; Mantovani,
A.; Sinigaglia, F.: Differential expression of chemokine receptors
and chemotactic responsiveness of type 1 T helper cells (Th1s) and
Th2s. J. Exp. Med. 187: 129-134, 1998.

2. Booth, V.; Keizer, D. W.; Kamphuis, M. B.; Clark-Lewis, I.; Sykes,
B. D.: The CXCR3 binding chemokine IP-10/CXCL10: structure and receptor
interactions. Biochemistry 41: 10418-10425, 2002.

3. Campbell, J. J.; Brightling, C. E.; Symon, F. A.; Qin, S.; Murphy,
K. E.; Hodge, M.; Andrew, D. P.; Wu, L.; Butcher, E. C.; Wardlaw,
A. J.: Expression of chemokine receptors by lung T cells from normal
and asthmatic subjects. J. Immun. 166: 2842-2848, 2001.

4. Dijkstra, I. M.; Hulshof, S.; van der Valk, P.; Boddeke, H. W.
G. M.; Biber, K.: Cutting edge: activity of human adult microglia
in response to CC chemokine ligand 21. J. Immun. 172: 2744-2747,
2004.

5. Endo, Y.; Iwamura, C.; Kuwahara, M.; Suzuki, A.; Sugaya, K.; Tumes,
D. J.; Tokoyoda, K.; Hosokawa, H.; Yamashita, M.; Nakayama, T.: Eomesodermin
controls interleukin-5 production in memory T helper 2 cells through
inhibition of activity of the transcription factor GATA3. Immunity 35:
733-745, 2011.

6. Erhardt, A.; Wegscheid, C.; Claass, B.; Carambia, A.; Herkel, J.;
Mittrucker, H.-W.; Panzer, U.; Tiegs, G.: CXCR3 deficiency exacerbates
liver disease and abrogates tolerance in a mouse model of immune-mediated
hepatitis. J. Immun. 186: 5284-5293, 2011.

7. Feferman, T.; Maiti, P. K.; Berrih-Aknin, S.; Bismuth, J.; Bidault,
J.; Fuchs, S.; Souroujon, M. C.: Overexpression of IFN-induced protein
10 and its receptor CXCR3 in myasthenia gravis. J. Immun. 174: 5324-5331,
2005.

8. Frigerio, S.; Junt, T.; Lu, B.; Gerard, C.; Zumsteg, U.; Hollander,
G. A.; Piali, L.: Beta cells are responsible for CXCR3-mediated T-cell
infiltration in insulitis. Nature Med. 8: 1414-1420, 2002.

9. Lasagni, L.; Francalanci, M.; Annunziato, F.; Lazzeri, E.; Giannini,
S.; Cosmi, L.; Sagrinati, C.; Mazzinghi, B.; Orlando, C.; Maggi, E.;
Marra, F.; Romagnani, S.; Serio, M.; Romagnani, P.: A alternatively
spliced variant of CXCR3 mediates the inhibition of endothelial cell
growth induced by IP-10, Mig, and I-TAC, and acts as a functional
receptor for platelet factor 4. J. Exp. Med. 197: 1537-1549, 2003.

10. Liu, L.; Huang, D.; Matsui, M.; He, T. T.; Hu, T.; DeMartino,
J.; Lu, B.; Gerard, C.; Ransohoff, R. M.: Severe disease, unaltered
leukocyte migration, and reduced IFN-gamma production in CXCR3-/-
mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Immun. 176:
4399-4409, 2006.

11. Loetscher, M.; Gerber, B.; Loetscher, P.; Jones, S. A.; Piali,
L.; Clark-Lewis, I.; Baggiolini, M.; Moser, B.: Chemokine receptor
specific for IP10 and mig: structure, function, and expression in
activated T-lymphocytes. J.  Exp. Med. 184: 963-969, 1996.

12. Loetscher, M.; Loetscher, P.; Brass, N.; Meese, E.; Moser, B.
: Lymphocyte-specific chemokine receptor CXCR3: regulation, chemokine
binding and gene localization. Europ. J. Immun. 28: 3696-3705, 1998.

13. Marchese, A.; Heiber, M.; Nguyen, T.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Saldivia,
V. R.; Cheng, R.; Murphy, P. M.; Tsui, L.-C.; Shi, X.; Gregor, P.;
George, S. R.; O'Dowd, B. F.; Docherty, J. M.: Cloning and chromosomal
mapping of the three novel genes, GPR9, GPR10, and GPR14, encoding
receptors related to interleukin 8, neuropeptide Y, and somatostatin
receptors. Genomics 29: 335-344, 1995.

14. Oo, Y. H.; Weston, C. J.; Lalor, P. F.; Curbishley, S. M.; Withers,
D. R.; Reynolds, G. M.; Shetty, S.; Harki, J.; Shaw, J. C.; Eksteen,
B.; Hubscher, S. G.; Walker, L. S. K.; Adams, D. H.: Distinct roles
for CCR4 and CXCR3 in the recruitment and positioning of regulatory
T cells in the inflamed human liver. J. Immun. 184: 2886-2898, 2010.

15. Struyf, S.; Salogni, L.; Burdick, M. D.; Vandercappellen, J.;
Gouwy, M.; Noppen, S.; Proost, P.; Opdenakker, G.; Parmentier, M.;
Gerard, C.; Sozzani, S.; Strieter, R. M.; Van Damme, J.: Angiostatic
and chemotactic activities of the CXC chemokine CXCL4L1 (platelet
factor-4 variant) are mediated by CXCR3. Blood 117: 480-488, 2011.

16. Trentin, L.; Agostini, C.; Facco, M.; Piazza, F.; Perin, A.; Siviero,
M.; Gurrieri, C.; Galvan, S.; Adami, F.; Zambello, R.; Semenzato,
G.: The chemokine receptor CXCR3 is expressed on malignant B cells
and mediates chemotaxis. J. Clin. Invest. 104: 115-121, 1999.

17. Wuest, T. R.; Carr, D. J. J.: Dysregulation of CXCR3 signaling
due to CXCL10 deficiency impairs the antiviral response to Herpes
simplex virus 1 infection. J. Immun. 181: 7985-7993, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 01/08/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/1/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/3/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/2/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/2006

EDITED mgross: 01/08/2013
mgross: 5/3/2012
terry: 5/1/2012
mgross: 4/3/2012
terry: 4/2/2012
mgross: 11/3/2011
terry: 10/31/2011
mgross: 10/27/2010
terry: 10/26/2010
mgross: 4/6/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
mgross: 9/28/2006
terry: 9/11/2006
mgross: 3/14/2006
mgross: 2/13/2006

611009	TITLE *611009 MEX3, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF, D; MEX3D
;;RING FINGER- AND KH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; RKHD1;;
TINO;;
KIAA2031
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 3-hybrid screening of a placenta cDNA library using an AU-rich
element (ARE) of BCL2 (151430) as bait, Donnini et al. (2004) obtained a
partial cDNA encoding RKHD1, which they called TINO. The predicted
490-amino acid partial protein has 2 N-terminal ribonucleoprotein K
(HNRNPK; 600712) homology (KH) domains and a C-terminal RING domain, and
it shares similarity with C. elegans Mex3. Donnini et al. (2004) also
identified a partial cDNA, KIAA2031, that may represent a TINO splice
variant. RACE and database analyses suggested that the full-length TINO
protein contains 651 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected a
3.1-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with highest expression in
placenta. A 6.5-kb transcript was also present in heart and skeletal
muscle. Immunofluorescence analysis of HeLa cells localized endogenous
TINO predominantly in the nucleus and perinuclear region.

C. elegans Mex3 is a regulator of translation that specifies posterior
blastomere identity in the early embryo and contributes to the
maintenance of germline totipotency. By database analysis and RT-PCR,
Buchet-Poyau et al. (2007) cloned a family of 4 human genes homologous
to C. elegans Mex3, including RKHD1, which they called MEX3D. Like the
other human MEX3 proteins, the deduced 651-amino acid MEX3D protein has
an N-terminal nuclear export signal (NES), 2 KH domains, and a
C-terminal RING finger domain. The KH domains are present in C. elegans
Mex3, but not the RING domain. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of
MEX3D in human tissues and cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 3-hybrid and gel-shift assays, Donnini et al. (2004) showed
that TINO interacted with an ARE of BCL2 in vitro and in vivo. Upon
binding, TINO destabilized a chimeric reporter construct containing the
BCL2 ARE, revealing a negative regulatory action on BCL2 expression at
the posttranscriptional level.

GENE STRUCTURE

Donnini et al. (2004) determined that the RKHD1 gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Donnini et al. (2004) mapped the MEX3D
gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Buchet-Poyau, K.; Courchet, J.; Le Hir, H.; Seraphin, B.; Scoazec,
J.-Y.; Duret, L.; Domon-Dell, C.; Freund, J.-N.; Billaud, M.: Identification
and characterization of human Mex-3 proteins, a novel family of evolutionarily
conserved RNA-binding proteins differentially localized to processing
bodies. Nucleic Acids Res. 35: 1289-1300, 2007.

2. Donnini, M.; Lapucci, A.; Papucci, L.; Witort, E.; Jacquier, A.;
Brewer, G.; Nicolin, A.; Capaccioli, S.; Schiavone, N.: Identification
of TINO: a new evolutionarily conserved BCL-2 AU-rich element RNA-binding
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 20154-20166, 2004.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/9/2007

EDITED alopez: 04/03/2009
mgross: 5/9/2007

182205	TITLE *182205 SEX HORMONE-BINDING GLOBULIN; SHBG
;;ANDROGEN-BINDING PROTEIN; ABP;;
TESTOSTERONE-BINDING BETA-GLOBULIN; TEBG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a previously characterized liver cDNA as a probe, Gershagen et al.
(1989) isolated a liver-secreted plasma glycoprotein that binds sex
steroids. Screening of a human testis cDNA library resulted in the
isolation of 2 distinct cDNA forms. One was identical to the previously
characterized liver SHBG cDNA, thus suggesting that human SHBG and the
androgen-binding protein (ABP) produced by Sertoli cells are encoded by
the same gene. The second cDNA differed from the first by having exon 1
exchanged with a completely different sequence and exon 7 deleted.
Primer extension experiments showed that the alternatively spliced
transcript corresponding to the second cDNA is present in both liver and
testis. From the primary structure of the putative SHBG-gene-related
protein, Gershagen et al. (1989) deduced that the protein is very
different from SHBG and probably without steroid-binding activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

By Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA, Gershagen et al. (1989) found
evidence indicating that only 1 SHBG is present in the human haploid
genome. The gene has 8 exons.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Berube et al. (1990) localized the SHBG gene
to chromosome 17p13-p12. By the study of intersubspecies backcrosses,
Joseph et al. (1991) found that Shbg is located on mouse chromosome 11
in close linkage to several neurologic mutations, one of which, Tr, is
associated with male sterility. The fact that ABP-SHBG is found
throughout the rat brain suggested that these mutations may represent a
defect in Shbg.

GENE FUNCTION

Testosterone in plasma is present in both bound and unbound form; only
the unbound hormone is biologically active and available to tissues.
About 66% of testosterone is bound to testosterone-binding beta-globulin
(TEBG), 31% to albumin, and 1.5% to transcortin; 2% is unbound. The
regulatory function of TEBG is said to be well illustrated by female
hirsutism; although many hirsute women have normal levels of total
plasma testosterone, nearly all have depressed levels of TEBG, resulting
in increased levels of unbound testosterone (Wenn et al., 1977; Raj et
al., 1978).

In mice expressing an 11-kb human SHBG transgene and in HepG2
hepatoblastoma cells, Selva et al. (2007) demonstrated that the
monosaccharides glucose and fructose reduced human SHBG production by
hepatocytes, irrespective of the presence of insulin, by downregulation
of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4A (HNF4A; 600281) and replacement of HNF4A
by COUP-TFI (NR2F1; 132890) at a cis-element within the human SHBG
promoter, coincident with repression of its transcriptional activity.
Dose-dependent reduction of HNF4A in HepG2 cells occurred in concert
with parallel increases in cellular palmitate levels and could be
mimicked by treatment with palmitoyl-CoA; inhibition of lipogenesis
prevented monosaccharide-induced downregulation of HNF4A and reduced
SHBG expression in HepG2 cells. Selva et al. (2007) concluded that
monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis reduces hepatic HNF4A levels, which
in turn attenuates SHBG expression, and noted that this provides a
biologic explanation for the sensitivity of SHBG as a biomarker of the
metabolic syndrome.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1977) developed an ingenious method for detection
of genetic variation in plasma proteins, namely, electrophoretic
screening after treatment with radioactive ligands such as vitamins,
hormones, metal ions and drugs. This is essentially a method of
'staining' the protein comparable to the methods using dyes. With this
approach they identified polymorphism of testosterone-binding
beta-globulin, as well as a possible silent allele. By polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE), Luckock and Cavalli-Sforza (1983) identified
4 electrophoretic variants, which they suggested result from
combinations of 3 alleles, designated N ('normal'), S ('slow'), and O
('absent'). The first 2 are codominant and the third recessive. The
frequencies of the 3 alleles in white Americans were, respectively,
0.68, 0.11, 0.21; in black Americans, 0.65, 0.14, 0.22; in Japanese
Americans, 0.59, 0.09, 0.32. Phenotype frequencies and segregation from
various crosses supported simple mendelian inheritance of an autosomal
gene.

By investigating neuraminidase-treated serum samples using isoelectric
focusing (IEF) followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membranes and
immunostaining, van Baelen et al. (1992) distinguished 3 patterns
consistent with the expression of a biallelic autosomal system. They
published data on allele frequencies in many populations and found
frequencies of the common allele (SHBG*1) varying from 0.848 in Chinese
to 0.985 in Balinese; monomorphism was found only in Australian
Aborigines, all 47 of whom were SHBG*1 homozygotes. Van Baelen et al.
(1992) found no significant difference for allele frequencies among
hirsute Belgian women. They also presented evidence that the subunit
produced by the SHBG*2 allele has a higher molecular mass than the one
produced by the SHBG*1 allele and that the 3 SHBG genotypes have
identical binding characteristics for 5-alpha-dihydrotestosterone.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Power et al. (1992) demonstrated in a Belgian patient homozygous for a
variant isoelectric focusing pattern that a point mutation was present
in exon 8, creating an additional site for N-linked glycosylation.
Expression studies showed that steroid binding was not affected. Hardy
et al. (1995) found the same mutation in Mexican subjects who were
heterozygous for the variant IEF phenotype. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) was used to localize the mutation in these
subjects and to purify the variant allele for DNA sequence analysis. A
GAC-to-AAC transition in codon 327 caused an asp-to-asn substitution in
the protein (D327N). The site of the mutation does not lie within the
predicted steroid-binding site of the molecule. The finding in these
widely separated populations suggested that the SHBG gene is biallelic
worldwide. The polymorphism was not associated with any pathologic
condition.

Xita et al. (2003) investigated the possible association of the
functional (TAAAA)n polymorphism in the promoter of the SHBG gene
(Hogeveen et al., 2001) with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; 184700)
and SHBG levels. They studied 185 women with PCOS and 324 normal
controls. Genotyping revealed 6 (TAAAA)n alleles containing 6 to 11
repeats. The distribution of these alleles was different in the 2
groups. Women with PCOS had a significantly greater frequency of longer
(TAAAA)n alleles (more than 8 repeats) than normal women who had shorter
alleles (fewer than 8 repeats) in higher frequency (P = 0.001). In the
PCOS group, carriers of the longer allele genotypes had lower SHBG
levels than those with shorter alleles. The authors concluded that SHBG
may be a susceptibility gene for PCOS and may provide the genetic link
for the developmental origin hypothesis for PCOS that was proposed on
the basis of experimental observations in prenatally androgenized sheep
and primates (Abbott et al., 2002).

In a population of 303 women referred for hirsutism, Cousin et al.
(2004) investigated the relationship between the D327N mutation in SHBG
exon 8, the pentanucleotide repeat polymorphism (TAAAA)n in the SHBG
5-prime untranslated region, and SHBG levels. The D327N mutant allele
was associated with higher SHBG levels than was the wildtype.
Multivariate analysis showed that BMI, PCOS status, and D327N
polymorphism influenced plasma SHBG concentrations, each of these
parameters contributing independently of the others. A strong
disequilibrium linkage was found between the D327N variant allele and an
allele with 8 TAAAA repeats (P less than 0.0001). The authors suggested
that this linkage disequilibrium could mask the effect of the TAAAA
repeat polymorphism on SHBG concentration in vivo. Nevertheless, SHBG
levels in patients who were homozygous for 6 repeats were significantly
(P = 0.043) higher than in 9-repeat homozygous patients and lay between
the two for 8-repeat homozygous patients. Results supported the notion
that polymorphism within the coding sequence and, potentially, in the
regulatory sequence of the SHBG gene is associated with circulating SHBG
levels and may represent part of the genetic background of sex steroid
hormone activity in humans.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the SHBG
gene and type 2 diabetes, see 125853.

- SHBG Circulating Level Quantitative Trait Locus

Eriksson et al. (2006) studied whether either of 2 polymorphisms in the
SHBG gene promoter, a (TAAAA)n microsatellite and the SNP dbSNP
rs1799941, are associated with serum levels of SHBG (613498), sex
steroids, or bone mineral density (BMD) in men. In both cohorts,
(TAAAA)n and dbSNP rs1799941 genotypes were associated with serum levels
of SHBG (P less than 0.001), dihydrotestosterone (P less than 0.05), and
5-alpha-androstane-3-alpha,17-beta-diol glucuronides (P less than 0.05).
In the elderly men, they were also associated with testosterone and BMD
at all hip bone sites. Eriksson et al. (2006) concluded that
polymorphisms in the SHBG promoter predict serum levels of SHBG,
androgens, and glucuronidated androgen metabolites, and hip BMD in men.

In the NCI-Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium using 874 SNPs
in 37 candidate genes in the sex steroid hormone pathway, Ahn et al.
(2009) identified a G-A variant (dbSNP rs1799941) located 67 bp upstream
from the transcription start site of the SHBG gene associated with
increased mean circulating levels of SHBG in 4,720 Caucasian men (p =
4.52 x 10(-21); 26.9% increase in AA homozygotes versus wildtype
homozygotes). The relationship between dbSNP rs1799941 was consistent
across the 5 cohorts in the study, age, BMI, and case-control status.
Additionally, dbSNP rs1799941 was also strongly associated with
increased mean circulating levels of testosterone in 4,678 Caucasian men
(p = 7.54 x 10(-15); 14.3% increase in AA homozygotes versus wildtype
homozygotes). Since clearance and bioavailability of testosterone are
related to SHBG levels, Ahn et al. (2009) used regression analysis to
show that also tended to predict SHBG adjusted-testosterone levels (p =
1.33 x 10(-3)).

HISTORY

Gross and Horton (1971) presented evidence indicating 'dominant'
segregation of the trait and low testosterone-binding protein, and
suggested Y-linkage. Hecht and Kimberling (1971) pointed out that since
the Y chromosome represents only about 2% of the human male haploid
genome, Bayesian correction of the estimate of Y-linkage reduces the
value to 1 in 3.

REFERENCE 1. Abbott, D. H.; Dumesic, D. A.; Franks, S.: Developmental origin
of polycystic ovary syndrome--a hypothesis. J. Endocr. 174: 1-5,
2002.

2. Ahn, J.; Schumacher, F. R.; Berndt, S. I.; Pfeiffer, R.; Albanes,
D.; Andriole, G. L.; Ardanaz, E.; Boeing, H.; Bueno-de-Mesquita, B.;
Chanock, S. J.; Clavel-Chapelon, F.; Diver, W. R.: and 25 others:
Quantitative trait loci predicting circulating sex steroid hormones
in men from the NCI-Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 3749-3757, 2009.

3. Berube, D.; Seralini, G. E.; Gagne, R.; Hammond, G. L.: Localization
of the human sex hormone-binding globulin gene (SHBG) to the short
arm of chromosome 17 (17p12-p13). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 54: 65-67,
1990.

4. Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.; Daiger, S. P.; Rummel, D. P.: Detection
of genetic variation with radioactive ligands. I. Electrophoretic
screening of plasma proteins with a selected panel of compounds. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 29: 581-592, 1977.

5. Cousin, P.; Calemard-Michel, L.; Lejeune, H.; Raverot, G.; Yessaad,
N.; Emptoz-Bonneton, A.; Morel, Y.; Pugeat, M.: Influence of SHBG
gene pentanucleotide TAAAA repeat and D327N polymorphism on serum
sex hormone-binding globulin concentration in hirsute women. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 89: 917-924, 2004.

6. Eriksson, A. L.; Lorentzon, M.; Mellstrom, D.; Vandenput, L.; Swanson,
C.; Andersson, N.; Hammond, G. L.; Jakobsson, J.; Rane, A.; Orwoll,
E. S.; Ljunggren, O.; Johnell, O.; Labrie, F.; Windahl, S. H.; Ohlsson,
C.: SHBG gene promoter polymorphisms in men are associated with serum
sex hormone-binding globulin, androgen and androgen metabolite levels,
and hip bone mineral density. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 5029-5037,
2006.

7. Gershagen, S.; Lundwall, A.; Fernlund, P.: Characterization of
the human sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) gene and demonstration
of two transcripts in both liver and testis. Nucleic Acids Res. 17:
9245-9258, 1989.

8. Gross, H.; Horton, R.: Low testosterone binding protein: possibly
Y-linked trait. Lancet 297: 346-347, 1971. Note: Originally Volume
I.

9. Hardy, D. O.; Carino, C.; Catterall, J. F.; Larrea, F.: Molecular
characterization of a genetic variant of the steroid hormone-binding
globulin gene in heterozygous subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 80:
1253-1256, 1995.

10. Hecht, F.; Kimberling, W. J.: Testosterone-binding protein probably
not Y-linked. (Letter) Lancet 297: 1300 only, 1971. Note: Originally
Volume I.

11. Hogeveen, K. N.; Talikka, M.; Hammond, G. L.: Human sex hormone-binding
globulin promoter activity is influenced by a (TAAAA)n repeat element
within an Alu sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 36383-36390, 2001.

12. Joseph, D. R.; Adamson, M. C.; Kozak, C. A.: Genetic mapping
of the gene for androgen-binding protein/sex hormone-binding globulin
to mouse chromosome 11. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 56: 122-124, 1991.

13. Luckock, A.; Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.: Detection of genetic variation
with radioactive ligands. V. Genetic variants of testosterone-binding
globulin in human serum. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35: 49-57, 1983.

14. Power, S. G.A.; Bocchinfuso, W. P.; Pallesen, M.; Warmels-Rodenhiser,
S.; Van Baelen, H.; Hammond, G. L.: Molecular analyses of a human
sex hormone-binding globulin variant: evidence for an additional carbohydrate
chain. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 75: 1066-1070, 1992.

15. Raj, S. G.; Thompson, I. E.; Berger, M. J.; Talert, L. M.; Taymor,
M. L.: Diagnostic value of androgen measurements in polycystic ovary
syndrome. Obstet. Gynec. 52: 169-171, 1978.

16. Selva, D. M.; Hogeveen, K. N.; Innis, S. M.; Hammond, G. L.:
Monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis regulates the human hepatic sex
hormone-binding globulin gene. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 3979-3987,
2007.

17. van Baelen, H.; Convents, R.; Cailleau, J.; Heyns, W.: Genetic
variation of human sex hormone-binding globulin: evidence for a worldwide
bi-allelic gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 75: 135-139, 1992.

18. Wenn, R. V.; Kamberi, I. A.; Vossough, P.; Kariminejad, M. H.;
Torabee, E.; Ayoughi, F.; Keyvanjah, M.; Sarberi, N.: Human testosterone-oestradiol
binding globulin in health and disease. Acta Endocr. 84: 850-859,
1977.

19. Xita, N.; Tsatsoulis, A.; Chatzikyriakidou, A.; Georgiou, I.:
Association of the (TAAAA)n repeat polymorphism in the sex hormone-binding
globulin (SHBG) gene with polycystic ovary syndrome and relation to
SHBG serum levels. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 5976-5980, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/16/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/2/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/31/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/2/1990

EDITED wwang: 07/23/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
carol: 9/16/2009
terry: 2/9/2009
wwang: 5/16/2008
alopez: 10/2/2007
alopez: 4/13/2005
alopez: 3/31/2005
carol: 5/14/2004
alopez: 5/24/1999
mark: 6/9/1995
carol: 9/1/1992
carol: 8/31/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/16/1991
carol: 1/23/1991

609178	TITLE *609178 MIS12, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; MIS12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Mis12, followed by PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Goshima et al. (2003) cloned MIS12. The deduced
205-amino acid protein contains 2 conserved blocks in its N-terminal 100
amino acids, followed by a coiled-coil region of about 50 amino acids.
Endogenous HeLa cell MIS12 had an apparent molecular mass of about 25
kD. Immunolocalization showed MIS12 colocalized at kinetochores with
CENPA (117139) and CENPC (117141), and its position during the cell
cycle was that of a typical kinetochore protein. The level of MIS12 did
not fluctuate during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells, Goshima et al. (2003)
demonstrated that reduced MIS12 resulted in misaligned metaphase
chromosomes, abnormally extended metaphase spindle length, lagging
anaphase chromosomes, and interphase micronuclei without mitotic delay.
Spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 (601467) temporally localized at
kinetochores at early mitotic stages after MIS12 RNAi. Kinetochore
localization of MIS12 was unaffected by CENPA RNAi.

Following MIS12 overexpression in HeLa cells, Obuse et al. (2004)
immunoprecipitated MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex that
contained PMF1 (609176), DC8 (609174), C20ORF172 (609175), and HP1-alpha
(CBX5; 604478). ZWINT (609177) also associated with the complex at
kinetochores during mitosis. Immunoprecipitation of transfected cells
indicated that MIS12 could form stable complexes with C20ORF172 and DC8.
Much weaker interaction was detected between MIS12 and ZWINT. Exclusion
chromatography revealed 3 peaks containing MIS12 and C20ORF172, but only
the middle peak, which had a mass of 669 kD, contained HP1-alpha. MIS12
knockdown by RNAi abolished the kinetochore association of ZWINT, DC8,
and C20ORF172.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MIS12
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-36031).

REFERENCE 1. Goshima, G.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Yoda, K.; Yanagida, M.: Human centromere
chromatin protein hMis12, essential for equal segregation, is independent
of CENP-A loading pathway. J. Cell Biol. 160: 25-39, 2003.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2005
mgross: 1/27/2005

608536	TITLE *608536 GTP-BINDING PROTEIN 3; GTPBP3
;;MSS1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; MSS1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mss1 is a yeast mitochondrial GTP-binding protein that functionally
interacts with 15S rRNA. By searching an EST database for sequences
similar to Mss1, followed by RT-PCR using hepatoma cell line total RNA
and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Li and Guan (2002) cloned 5 variants of
GTPBP3, an Mss1 homolog. The variants are generated by alternative
splicing and through the use of alternate polyadenylation signals. Two
variants differ only in their 3-prime UTRs and encode an identical
492-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 52.0 kD. Two
other variants encode an identical 471-amino acid protein, and another
variant encodes a 524-amino acid protein. GTPBP3 contains a typical
mitochondria targeting presequence, 2 GTP-binding domains, a p21 RAS
(see 190020)-like domain, and an SRC (190090) homology-3 (SH3) domain.
GTPBP3 shows extensive conservation of amino acid sequences with Mss1
homologs from several diverse species, including bacteria, yeast, and
nematode. Mouse and human GTPBP3 share 81% amino acid identity. Northern
blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of 2.6- and 1.9-kb
transcripts. Expression was highest in skeletal muscle, kidney, liver,
and heart, moderate in whole brain, thymus, spleen, and small intestine,
and low in colon, lung, and leukocytes. GTPBP3 was also expressed in all
individual brain regions examined. The larger transcript was more
abundant in most tissues. GTPBP3 colocalized with a mitochondrial marker
in transfected osteosarcoma cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Yeast cells carrying mutant alleles of Mss1 coupled with a 15S rRNA
mutation that corresponds to the 1555A-G mutation of human 12S rRNA
(561000.0001) fail to synthesize subunit 1 of cytochrome oxidase (see
516030) and manifest a respiratory-deficient phenotype. Li and Guan
(2002) found that overexpression of GTPBP3 complemented the respiration
defect of yeast carrying the Mss1 and 15S rRNA mutations. They suggested
that, like yeast Mss1, GTPBP3 may influence the phenotypic expression of
the 1555A-G mutation in 12S rRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li and Guan (2002) determined that the GTPBP3 gene contains 9 exons and
spans more than 6 kb. There are 2 putative polyadenylation signals.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Li and Guan (2002) mapped the GTPBP3 gene
to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Li, X.; Guan, M.-X.: A human mitochondrial GTP binding protein
related to tRNA modification may modulate phenotypic expression of
the deafness-associated mitochondrial 12S rRNA mutation. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 22: 7701-7711, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/17/2004

EDITED mgross: 03/17/2004

601212	TITLE *601212 PROTEIN-TYROSINE KINASE 2, BETA; PTK2B
;;PROLINE-RICH TYROSINE KINASE 2; PYK2;;
FOCAL ADHESION KINASE 2; FAK2;;
CELL ADHESION KINASE, BETA; CAKB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Focal adhesion kinases are cytoplasmic protein-tyrosine kinases
associated with focal adhesions and whose activity is induced by ligand
binding to various receptors including those for integrin, growth
factors, etc. FAKs are known to target paxillin (602505) and are
substrates for Src family kinases (see 190090) (Calalb et al., 1995).
Herzog et al. (1996) identified a gene for another focal adhesion kinase
by low-stringency screening of a hippocampus cDNA library. They
symbolized the gene FAK2. The FAK2 cDNA encodes a predicted 1,009-amino
acid protein with 42% identity to FAK1 (600758). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.5-kb mRNA in brain, kidney, spleen, and lymphocytes.

Protein-tyrosine kinases in the central nervous system are activated in
response to a variety of neurotrophic factors that control neuronal
differentiation and survival via cell surface receptors. Also, protein
phosphorylation is involved in membrane excitability and the function of
ion channels. Lev et al. (1995) discovered a nonreceptor type protein
kinase that is highly expressed in adult rat brain. The kinase, which
they symbolized PYK2 (proline-rich tyrosine kinase-2), was cloned from a
rat spinal cord cDNA library using degenerate PCR primers corresponding
to conserved tyrosine kinase motifs of PYK1 (see Manser et al., 1993).
Lev et al. (1995) cloned the human homolog from a human fetal brain cDNA
library using the rat sequence as a probe. The predicted protein of
1,009 amino acids has 61% sequence identity to the FAK1 protein (PTK2;
600758).

GENE FUNCTION

Lev et al. (1995) showed that the PYK2 protein undergoes rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation in response to various stimuli that elevate
intracellular calcium concentration, such as addition of bradykinin, a
neuropeptide hormone that binds to a G protein-coupled receptor and in
turn stimulates phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis. PYK2 is also tyrosine
phosphorylated following activation of the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (see 100690), by membrane depolarization, and by treatment of
cells with a calcium ionophore. Protein kinase C (176960) activation
also induces PYK2 phosphorylation. Activation of PYK2 leads to the
modulation of ion channel function and activation of the MAP kinase
signaling pathway. Lev et al. (1995) proposed that PYK2 may represent an
important signaling intermediate between neuropeptide activated
receptors or neurotransmitters that increase calcium flux and the
downstream signals that regulate neuronal activity. PYK2 may also
provide a mechanism for a variety of short- and long-term
calcium-dependent signaling events in the nervous system.

Matsuya et al. (1998) found specific interaction between the C-terminal
region of PYK2 and HIC5 (TGFB1I1; 602353). Both proteins were
tyrosine-phosphorylated in parallel in rat fibroblasts exposed to
hypertonic osmotic stress or stimulated with lysophosphatidic acid.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes acute and chronic infection of the liver
and is also a risk factor for hepatic cancer. The virus has only 4 open
reading frames, 3 of which encode the capsid, envelope, and polymerase
proteins. The fourth encodes HBX, a poorly expressed protein required
for viral replication (Ganem, 2001). Bouchard et al. (2001) showed that
HBX induces release of calcium into the cytoplasm, presumably from
mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum. HBX expression thereby induces
activation of PYK2, which activates SRC and HBV DNA replication.
Inhibition of PYK2 or calcium signaling mediated by mitochondrial
calcium channels could block HBV DNA replication, and enhancement of
cytoplasmic calcium was able to substitute for HBX in stimulating HBV
DNA replication.

In a kidney proximal epithelial cell line (OKP) incubated in acid media,
Li et al. (2004) observed an increase in PYK2 phosphorylation and
PYK2/SRC binding. Transfection of OKP cells with dominant-negative PYK2
or small interfering PYK2 duplex RNA blocked acid activation of
sodium/hydrogen exchanger-3 (NHE3, or SLC9A3; 182307), whereas neither
had an effect on glucocorticoid activation of NHE3. Dominant-negative
PYK2 also blocked acid activation of SRC kinase, which is required for
acid regulation of NHE3. Li et al. (2004) concluded that PYK2 is
directly activated by acidic pH and that PYK2 activation is required for
acid activation of SRC kinase and NHE3. Partially purified PYK2 was
activated by acid in a cell-free system, leading Li et al. (2004) to
suggest that PYK2 may serve as the pH sensor that initiates the
acid-regulated signaling cascade involved in NHE3 regulation.

MAPPING

Herzog et al. (1996) assigned the FAK2 gene to chromosome 8 by PCR
analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized it to 8p22-p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Buckbinder et al. (2007) found that Pyk2-null mice were normal in
appearance and body weight, but they had increased bone mass and
improved bone microstructure. Mouse bone marrow cultures showed that
Pyk2 deficiency enhanced differentiation and activity of osteoprogenitor
cells, as did expression of PYK2-specific short hairpin RNA or dominant
interfering proteins in human mesenchymal stem cells. Daily
administration of a small molecule Pyk2 inhibitor increased bone
formation and protected against bone loss in ovariectomized rats, an
established preclinical model of postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Using Pyk2 -/- mice, Kamen et al. (2011) showed that Pyk2 was required
for integrin-mediated degranulation responses in polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs), but not in adhesion-induced cell spreading or
activation of superoxide production. Pyk2-deficient PMNs also displayed
reduced migration on fibrinogen (see 134820)-coated surfaces and reduced
paxillin and Vav (VAV1; 164875) phosphorylation after integrin ligation.
Clearance of Staphylococcus aureus skin abscesses was poor in Pyk2 -/-
mice. The response to soluble agonists, however, was normal. Kamen et
al. (2011) concluded that PYK2 is involved in regulating
adhesion-mediated release of PMN granule contents.

REFERENCE 1. Bouchard, M. J.; Wang, L.-H.; Schneider, R. J.: Calcium signaling
by HBx protein in hepatitis B virus DNA replication. Science 294:
2376-2378, 2001.

2. Buckbinder, L.; Crawford, D. T.; Qi, H.; Ke, H. Z.; Olson, L. M.;
Long, K. R.; Bonnette, P. C.; Baumann, A. P.; Hambor, J. E.; Grasser,
W. A., III; Pan, L. C.; Owen, T. A.; and 11 others: Proline-rich
tyrosine kinase 2 regulates osteoprogenitor cells and bone formation,
and offers an anabolic treatment approach for osteoporosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 10619-10624, 2007.

3. Calalb, M. B.; Polte, T. R.; Hanks, S. K.: Tyrosine phosphorylation
of focal adhesion kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates
kinase activity: a role for Src family kinases. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15:
954-963, 1995.

4. Ganem, D.: The X files--one step closer to closure. Science 294:
2299-2300, 2001.

5. Herzog, H.; Nicholl, J.; Hort, Y. J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Shine,
J.: Molecular cloning and assignment of FAK2, a novel human focal
adhesion kinase, to 8p11.2-p22 by nonisotopic in situ hybridization. Genomics 32:
484-486, 1996.

6. Kamen, L. A.; Schlessinger, J.; Lowell, C. A.: Pyk2 is required
for neutrophil degranulation and host defense responses to bacterial
infection. J. Immun. 186: 1656-1665, 2011.

7. Lev, S.; Moreno, H.; Martinez, R.; Canoll, P.; Peles, E.; Musacchio,
J. M.; Plowman, G. D.; Rudy, B.; Schlessinger, J.: Protein tyrosine
kinase PYK2 involved in Ca(2+)-induced regulation of ion channel and
MAP kinase functions. Nature 376: 737-745, 1995.

8. Li, S.; Sato, S.; Yang, X.; Preisig, P. A.; Alpern, R. J.: Pyk2
activation is integral to acid stimulation of sodium/hydrogen exchanger
3. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1782-1789, 2004.

9. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Tan, L.; Lim, L.: A non-receptor
tyrosine kinase that inhibits the GTPase activity of p21(cdc42). Nature 363:
364-367, 1993.

10. Matsuya, M.; Sasaki, H.; Aoto, H.; Mitaka, T.; Nagura, K.; Ohba,
T.; Ishino, M.; Takahashi, S.; Suzuki, R.; Sasaki, T.: Cell adhesion
kinase beta forms a complex with a new member, Hic-5, of proteins
localized at focal adhesions. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1003-1014, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/18/2002

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/18/1996

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2012
mgross: 3/20/2012
terry: 3/15/2012
mgross: 8/8/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
carol: 1/19/2005
terry: 1/14/2005
mgross: 2/5/2004
carol: 4/3/2002
mgross: 1/18/2002
alopez: 1/12/1999
alopez: 4/8/1998
mark: 4/18/1996
terry: 4/18/1996
mark: 4/18/1996

176873	TITLE *176873 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 11B; CDK11B
;;CELL DIVISION CYCLE 2-LIKE 1; CDC2L1;;
PROTEIN KINASE p58; PK58; p58;;
CDC-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE p58;;
PITSLRE B;;
CDK11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bunnell et al. (1990) identified a human cell division control
(CDC)-related protein kinase, p58, that is structurally and functionally
related to p34(cdc2) (CDC2; 116940). Abnormal expression of the p58
protein kinase in eukaryotic cells had effects suggesting that it is a
negative regulator of normal cell cycle progression. The gene is well
conserved evolutionarily. Its expression is regulated during murine
embryogenesis, and its activity is coordinately regulated with that of
p34(cdc2) during the cell cycle.

Lahti et al. (1994) characterized the genomic region surrounding CDC2L1
and found that a related gene, CDC2L2 (116951), was located within 100
kb. They referred to CDC2L1 as PITSLRE B, based on the amino acid
sequence of the region corresponding to the conserved CDC2 PSTAIRE box.

Xiang et al. (1994) isolated multiple, alternatively spliced CDC2L1 and
CDC2L2 mRNAs. The CDC2L1 transcripts encode protein isoforms ranging in
size from 58 to 110 kD. The isoforms vary in the length and sequence of
their N-terminal regions; the protein kinase catalytic and C-terminal
domains are identical. All contain a 30-residue acid blob domain
comprised primarily of glutamic acid. The larger protein species
contained a putative bipartite nuclear localization signal. Western blot
analysis revealed that the 58-kD isoform was present only in cells
undergoing apoptosis. Xiang et al. (1994) analyzed the expression
pattern of the CDC2L1 mRNAs.

The CDC2L1 and CDC2L2 genes encode almost identical protein kinases of
110 kD that contain at their C termini the open reading frame of a
smaller isoform of 58 kD. Cornelis et al. (2000) found that 2 PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms, p110 and p58, are translated from a single
transcript by initiation at alternative in-frame AUG codons. p110 is
produced by classic cap-dependent translation, whereas p58 results from
internal initiation of translation controlled by an internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) with unique properties. The IRES element is localized
to the mRNA coding region, and its activity is cell cycle regulated,
permitting translation of p58 in G2/M.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that both CDC2L2 and CDC2L1 can produce a
third isoform, p46, by caspase-dependent proteolysis of either the p110
or p58 isoforms. By immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell
lines, they detected p110 in both nucleoplasm and nuclear speckles.
Western blot analysis showed robust expression of p110 in several human
cell lines and in activated human peripheral blood cells. Only activated
blood cells expressed p58 and p46. Size exclusion chromatography of HeLa
cells revealed that p110 fractionated with protein complexes of about
170 kD to over 1 MDa.

GENE FUNCTION

Lahti et al. (1994) demonstrated that 1 allele of the entire gene CDC2L
complex was either deleted or translocated in 18 of 20 neuroblastoma
(256700) cell lines investigated. They suggested that the CDC2L gene
complex may harbor 1 or more tumor suppressor genes affected by
chromosome 1p36 modifications in neuroblastoma.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that p110 CDK11 associated with
the alpha and beta isoforms of cyclin L1 (CCNL1; 613384) and L2 (CCNL2;
613482) in a high molecular mass complex that showed splicing activity.
The p58 and p46 CDK11 isoforms interacted more weakly with the cyclin L
alpha isoforms. In vivo splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin
L1-alpha, L1-beta, L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased
intron-splicing activity and altered alternative splice-site selection
in a cyclin L1 and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner. In
contrast with p110 CDK11, p58 and p46 CDK11 reduced splicing activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Eipers et al. (1992) detailed the complete structure of the CDC2L1 gene
including its putative promoter region, transcriptional start sites,
exonic sequences, and intron/exon boundary sequences. The gene is 10 kb
and contains 12 exons and 11 introns.

Gururajan et al. (1998) determined the structure of the 140-kb CDC2L
genomic region. This region consists of 2 identical genomic segments
arranged in a tail-to-tail configuration. Each segment contains a CDC2L
gene linked to an MMP gene. See MMP21 (603320). In each case, the most
widely expressed products of the CDC2L gene are derived from a genomic
region that is composed of 20 exons and spans approximately 20 kb. The
authors reported that only 15 amino acids of the 773-786 residues that
encode the multiple CDC2L isoforms are unique to either CDC2L1 or
CDC2L2.

MAPPING

Eipers et al. (1991) assigned the expressed p58 gene to 1p36 by somatic
cell hybrid analysis, in situ hybridization, and nested PCR
amplification of microdissected chromosomes. The authors stated that
this gene, tentatively symbolized PK58, may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of tumors that have deletion in the region of 1p36.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lahti et al. (1994) mapped the
CDC2L1 gene to 1p36.3.

White et al. (1995) showed that CDC2L1 is located outside the consensus
region of allelic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) associated with
neuroblastomas, namely, 1p36.3-p36.2, and is therefore not the
neuroblastoma suppressor gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bunnell, B.; Heath, L. S.; Adams, D. E.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V.
J.: Elevated expression of a p58 protein kinase leads to changes
in the CHO cell cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 7467-7471, 1990.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 2612 only, 1991.

2. Cornelis, S.; Bruynooghe, Y.; Denecker, G.; Van Huffel, S.; Tinton,
S.; Beyaert, R.: Identification and characterization of a novel cell
cycle-regulated internal ribosome entry site. Molec. Cell 5: 597-605,
2000.

3. Eipers, P. G.; Barnoski, B. L.; Han, J.; Carroll, A. J.; Kidd,
V. J.: Localization of the expressed human p58 protein kinase chromosomal
gene to chromosome 1p36 and a highly related sequence to chromosome
15. Genomics 11: 621-629, 1991.

4. Eipers, P. G.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V. J.: Structure and expression
of the human p58(clk-1) protein kinase chromosomal gene. Genomics 13:
613-621, 1992.

5. Gururajan, R.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Gruber, I.;
Ambros, P. F.; Kidd, V. J.: Duplication of a genomic region containing
the Cdc2L1-2 and MMP21-22 genes on human chromosome 1p36.3 and their
linkage to D1Z2. Genome Res. 8: 929-939, 1998.

6. Lahti, J. M.; Valentine, M.; Xiang, J.; Jones, B.; Amann, J.; Grenet,
J.; Richmond, G.; Look, A. T.; Kidd, V. J.: Alterations in the PITSLRE
protein kinase gene complex on chromosome 1p36 in childhood neuroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 7: 370-375, 1994.

7. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

8. White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Beltinger, C.; Sulman, E.; Marshall,
H. N.; Fujimori, M.; Kaufman, B. A.; Biegel, J. A.; Allen, C.; Hilliard,
C.; Valentine, M. B.; Look, A. T.; Enomoto, H.; Sakiyama, S.; Brodeur,
G. M.: A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within
human chromosome 1p36.2-36.3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5520-5524,
1995.

9. Xiang, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Kidd, V. J.:
Molecular cloning and expression of alternatively spliced PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15786-15794, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/24/1991

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
alopez: 11/19/2010
terry: 11/15/2010
alopez: 5/7/2007
mgross: 6/20/2000
alopez: 1/27/1999
alopez: 11/30/1998
alopez: 7/30/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mimadm: 2/25/1995
carol: 7/20/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992
carol: 11/11/1991

609988	TITLE *609988 PYROPHOSPHATASE, INORGANIC, 2; PPA2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inorganic pyrophosphates are generated as byproducts of many
biosynthetic reactions, including DNA and RNA synthesis, fatty acid and
amino acid activation, and cyclic nucleotide synthesis. Inorganic
pyrophosphatases (EC 3.6.1.1), such as PPA2, maintain the thermodynamic
favorability of these reactions by catalyzing the hydrolysis of
pyrophosphates into organic phosphates, which are then exported across
the cell membrane (Curbo et al., 2006).

CLONING

By searching databases using PPA1 (179030) as query, Curbo et al. (2006)
identified PPA2. The deduced 334-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 38 kD. PPA2 shares about 60% amino acid identity with
PPA1, and it has a 31-amino acid N-terminal extension not found in PPA1
that functions as a mitochondrial import signal. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.4-kb PPA2 transcript in all 12 tissues examined, with
highest levels in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.
Fluorescence-tagged PPA2 localized with a mitochondrial marker in
transfected HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Curbo et al. (2006) found that recombinant PPA2 hydrolyzed pyrophosphate
in vitro. The reaction was dependent on Mg(2+) and inhibited by Ca(2+).

GENE STRUCTURE

Curbo et al. (2006) determined that the PPA2 gene contains 12 exons and
spans about 100 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Curbo et al. (2006) mapped the PPA2 gene
to chromosome 4q25.

REFERENCE 1. Curbo, S.; Lagier-Tourenne, C.; Carrozzo, R.; Palenzuela, L.; Lucioli,
S.; Hirano, M.; Santorelli, F.; Arenas, J.; Karlsson, A.; Johansson,
M.: Human mitochondrial pyrophosphatase: cDNA cloning and analysis
of the gene in patients with mtDNA depletion syndromes. Genomics 87:
410-416, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/21/2006

EDITED mgross: 03/21/2006

601540	TITLE *601540 BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; BRD2
;;FEMALE STERILE HOMEOTIC-RELATED GENE 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; FSRG1;;
RING3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BRD2 is a putative nuclear transcriptional regulator and a member of a
family of genes that are expressed during development.

CLONING

In a search for novel genes in the human major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II region on chromosome 6p21.3, Okamoto et al.
(1991) and Beck et al. (1992) identified a gene that they termed RING3.
('RING' is an acronym for 'really interesting new gene.') Based on
mapping and genomic sequencing, RING3 was located in the middle of the
class II region between the genes HLA-DNA (142930) and HLA-DMA (142855).
In contrast to all the other genes encoded in the class II region, RING3
appeared to have no obvious function associated with the immune system
based on sequence comparisons. The striking sequence similarity to the
female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in Drosophila, however, suggested a
conserved biologic function for RING3.

Denis and Green (1996) discovered that the RING3 product is, in fact, a
mitogen-activated nuclear kinase involved in signal transduction and
that it is upregulated in certain types of leukemia.

With the aim of learning more about the phylogeny of RING3, Thorpe et
al. (1996) identified further homologs in different species and
determined their gene structures. The functional analysis of RING3 had
been further complicated by the finding of a second, non-MHC-linked copy
of RING3 in humans by Nomura et al. (1994). This was referred to by them
as ORFX (601541).

GENE FUNCTION

Dawson et al. (2011) demonstrated that I-BET151, a novel small molecule
inhibitor of the BET family, of which BRD2 is a member, has profound
efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukemia cell lines through
the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151
treatment in 2 human leukemia cell lines with different MLL fusions
altered the expression of a common set of genes whose function may
account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is,
at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes
BCL2 (151430), C-MYC (190080), and CDK6 (603368) through the
displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc, and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo
studies indicated that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value,
providing survival benefit in 2 distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9
and human MLL-AF4 leukemia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the BRD2
gene and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, see EJM3 (608816).

REFERENCE 1. Beck, S.; Hanson, I.; Kelly, A.; Pappin, D. J.; Trowsdale, J.:
A homologue of the Drosophila female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in
the class II region of the human MHC. DNA Sequence 2: 203-210, 1992.

2. Dawson, M. A.; Prinjha, R. K.; Dittmann, A.; Giotopoulos, G.; Bantscheff,
M.; Chan, W.-I.; Robson, S. C.; Chung, C.; Hopf, C.; Savitski, M.
M.; Huthmacher, C.; Gudgin, E.; and 15 others: Inhibition of BET
recruitment to chromatin as an effective treatment for MLL-fusion
leukaemia. Nature 478: 529-533, 2011.

3. Denis, G. V.; Green, M. R.: A novel, mitogen-activated nuclear
kinase is related to a Drosophila developmental regulator. Genes
Dev. 10: 261-271, 1996.

4. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

5. Okamoto, N.; Ando, A.; Kawai, J.; Yoshiwara, T.; Tsuji, K.; Inoko,
H.: Orientation of HLA-DNA gene and identification of a CpG island-associated
gene adjacent to DNA in human major histocompatibility complex class
II region. Hum. Immun. 32: 221-228, 1991.

6. Thorpe, K. L.; Abdulla, S.; Kaufman, J.; Trowsdale, J.; Beck, S.
: Phylogeny and structure of the RING3 gene. Immunogenetics 44:
391-396, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1996

EDITED alopez: 01/06/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
ckniffin: 10/2/2009
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/13/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
mgross: 7/24/2000
psherman: 12/30/1999
alopez: 6/21/1999
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
alopez: 6/27/1997
jenny: 12/5/1996
mark: 11/27/1996

604065	TITLE *604065 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, T TYPE, ALPHA-1G SUBUNIT; CACNA1G
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-activated calcium channels can be distinguished based on their
voltage-dependence, deactivation, and single-channel conductance. See
601011. Low-voltage-activated calcium channels are referred to as 'T'
type because their currents are both transient, owing to fast
inactivation, and tiny, owing to small conductance. T-type channels are
thought to be involved in pacemaker activity, low-threshold calcium
spikes, neuronal oscillations and resonance, and rebound burst firing.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences related to calcium channels,
Perez-Reyes et al. (1998) identified a partial human cDNA encoding a
novel channel that they designated alpha-1G or Ca(V)T.1. The authors
used the partial cDNA to isolate additional human, rat, and mouse
alpha-1G cDNAs. Northern blot analysis of human and rat tissues
indicated that the alpha-1G gene was expressed as an 8.5-kb mRNA
predominantly in brain. An additional 9.7-kb transcript was also
detected. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes, the rat alpha-1G channel
exhibited the properties of a low-voltage-activated T-type calcium
channel.

Jagannathan et al. (2002) found that multiple isoforms of CACNA1G and at
least 2 isoforms of CACNA1H (607904) are generated by alternative
splicing and are expressed in testis. In situ hybridization localized
transcripts both in germ cells and in other testis cell types. Within
cardiac tissue, both CACNA1G and CACNA1H were expressed in vascular
tissue and not in myocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

By whole-cell patch clamp, Jagannathan et al. (2002) detected T-type
voltage-operated Ca(2+) channel currents in isolated round spermatids.
Currents were consistent with those generated by CACNA1H or CACNA1G
channels.

By action potential clamp studies, Chemin et al. (2002) found
significant differences in the biochemical properties of CACNA1G,
CACNA1H, and CACNA1I (608230) following transient transfection in human
embryonic kidney cells. Using firing activities recorded in dissociated
rat cerebellar Purkinje neurons and thalamocortical relay neurons as
voltage-clamp waveforms, they showed that CACNA1I currents contributed
to sustained electrical activities, while CACNA1G and CACNA1H currents
generated short burst firing. Chemin et al. (2002) hypothesized that
each of the T-channel pore-forming subunits displays specific gating
properties that uniquely contribute to neuronal firing and that CACNA1I
channels provide pacemaker activity.

MAPPING

By FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Perez-Reyes et al. (1998) mapped
the CACNA1G gene to 17q22. Using interspecific backcross analysis, they
mapped the mouse Cacna1g gene to the distal portion of chromosome 11, in
a region showing homology of synteny with 17q22.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate whether T-type Ca(2+) channels in thalamocortical relay
(TC) neurons are involved in the generation of spike-and-wave discharges
(SWDs), Kim et al. (2001) used gene targeting to generate a null
mutation of CACNA1G that encodes the pore-forming subunit of T-type
Ca(2+) channels. The knockout mice grew normally and were fertile.
General development of the brain and major organs appeared normal. Using
pharmacologic models, Kim et al. (2001) analyzed the ability of mutant
mice to generate SWDs. The thalamocortical relay neurons of the knockout
mice lacked the burst mode firing of action potentials, whereas they
showed the normal pattern of tonic mode firing. The knockout thalamus
was specifically resistant to the generation of SWDs in response to
GABA-B receptor (see 603540) activation. Kim et al. (2001) concluded
that the modulation of the intrinsic firing pattern mediated by CACNA1G
T-type Ca(2+) channels plays a critical role in the generation of GABA-B
receptor-mediated SWDs in the thalamocortical pathway, the hallmark of
absence seizures.

Sensations from viscera, like fullness, easily become painful if the
stimulus persists. Kim et al. (2003) demonstrated that mice lacking
alpha 1G T-type calcium channels show hyperalgesia to visceral pain.
Thalamic infusion of a T-type blocker induced similar hyperalgesia in
wildtype mice. In response to visceral pain, the ventroposterolateral
thalamic neurons evoked a surge of single spikes, which then slowly
decayed as T type-dependent burst spikes gradually increased. In
alpha-1G-deficient neurons, the single-spike response persisted without
burst spikes. Kim et al. (2003) concluded that T-type calcium channels
underlie an antinociceptive mechanism operating in the thalamus and that
their findings support the idea that burst firing plays a critical role
in sensory gating in the thalamus.

REFERENCE 1. Chemin, J.; Monteil, A.; Perez-Reyes, E.; Bourinet, E.; Nargeot,
J.; Lory, P.: Specific contribution of human T-type calcium channel
isotypes (alpha-1G, alpha-1H, and alpha-1I) to neuronal excitability. J.
Physiol. 540: 3-14, 2002.

2. Jagannathan, S.; Punt, E. L.; Gu, Y.; Arnoult, C.; Sakkas, D.;
Barratt, C. L. R.; Publicover, S. J.: Identification and localization
of T-type voltage-operated calcium channel subunits in human male
germ cells: expression of multiple isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
8449-8456, 2002.

3. Kim, D.; Park, D.; Choi, S.; Lee, S.; Sun, M.; Kim, C.; Shin, H.-S.
: Thalamic control of visceral nociception mediated by T-type Ca(2+)
channels. Science 302: 117-119, 2003.

4. Kim, D.; Song, I.; Keum, S.; Lee, T.; Jeong, M.-J.; Kim, S.-S.;
McEnery, M. W.; Shin, H.-S.: Lack of the burst firing of thalamocortical
relay neurons and resistance to absence seizures in mice lacking alpha-1G
T-type Ca(2+) channels. Neuron 31: 35-45, 2001.

5. Perez-Reyes, E.; Cribbs, L. L.; Daud, A.; Lacerda, A. E.; Barclay,
J.; Williamson, M. P.; Fox, M.; Rees, M.; Lee, J.-H.: Molecular characterization
of a neuronal low-voltage-activated T-type calcium channel. Nature 391:
896-900, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/06/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/20/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 2/1/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/26/1999

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2003
alopez: 10/29/2003
mgross: 6/20/2003
carol: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/1/2002
mgross: 7/26/1999

