600912	TITLE *600912 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 19; TCF19
;;SC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ku et al. (1991) cloned a growth-regulated cDNA by differential
screening of a mouse 3T3 cell line library to identify transcripts
induced by serum stimulation. Transcripts of the gene, designated SC1,
were detectable beginning at about 8 hours after stimulation. The mouse
cDNA was used to clone the human SC1 cDNA. The 2.6-kb cDNA encoded a
deduced 359-amino acid polypeptide with features characteristic of
transactivating factors. The gene was mapped by in situ hybridization to
chromosome 6p21-p22. The bacterially expressed protein had the predicted
size of 39 kD.

MAPPING

Krishnan et al. (1995) mapped TCF19 with POU5F1 (164177) to a 0.2-Mb
region between HLA-C (142840) and the so-called S gene (602593) at
6p21.3. POU5F1 and TCF19 are about 130 kb telomeric of HLAC and about
600 bp from each other.

REFERENCE 1. Krishnan, B. R.; Jamry, I.; Chaplin, D. D.: Feature mapping of
the HLA class I region: localization of the POU5F1 and TCF19 genes. Genomics 30:
53-58, 1995.

2. Ku, D.-H.; Chang, C..; Koniecki, J.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Boghosian-Sell,
L.; Alder, H.; Baserga, R.: A new growth-regulated complementary
DNA with the sequence of a putative trans-activating factor. Cell
Growth Differ. 2: 179-186, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/13/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 11/2/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/05/2003
dkim: 10/28/1998
carol: 6/18/1998
psherman: 5/5/1998
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 11/2/1995

614463	TITLE *614463 NMYC DOWNSTREAM-REGULATED GENE 4; NDRG4
;;SMOOTH MUSCLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 8; SMAP8;;
KIAA1180
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned NDRG4. The deduced protein
contains 273 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression in
adult and fetal brain and adult heart, followed by lung and testis.
Lower expression was detected in other adult tissues examined, but
little to no expression was detected in fetal liver. High NDRG4
expression was detected in all specific adult brain regions examined,
with highest expression in amygdala, cerebellum, and thalamus.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NDRG1 (605262),
followed by 3-prime and 5-prime RACE of human brain and heart cDNA
libraries and cap-site hunting, Zhou et al. (2001) cloned 3 splice
variants of NDRG4. The variants NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var, which were
obtained from the brain library, encode deduced proteins of 339 and 352
amino acids with calculated molecular masses of 37.1 and 38.5 kD,
respectively. Compared with NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var has a 14-amino acid
insertion near the C terminus. The variant NDRG4H, which was obtained
from the heart library, encodes a deduced 371-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 40.6 kD. NDRG4H differs from NDRG4B and
NDRG4B-var at its N-terminal end, and it lacks the 14-amino acid
insertion. Northern blot analysis detected NDRG4 transcripts of about
3.2 kb in brain and heart only. Variant-specific probes showed NDRG4B
expression in brain only, whereas NDRG4H was expressed in both brain and
heart, with higher expression in heart. RT-PCR confirmed expression of
all 3 variants in brain and of NDRG4H in heart. RNA dot-blot analysis
revealed NDRG4 expression in spinal cord, all specific brain regions
examined, and all specific heart regions examined except aorta.
Expression was also detected in spleen, lymph node, testis, adrenal
gland, and fetal brain and heart, but not in other tissues examined. In
situ hybridization of normal adult brain detected NDRG4 mRNA in
cytoplasm of neurons in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, mesencephalon,
pons, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. No signal was detected in
peripheral nerves or other cell types, such as glial cells. Western blot
analysis of endogenous or exogenously expressed proteins showed that
NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H had apparent molecular masses of 37, 39,
and 41 kD, respectively.

Using expression profiling to identify genes expressed in aortic smooth
muscle, followed by screening a heart cDNA library, Nishimoto et al.
(2003) cloned NDRG4, which they called SMAP8. The deduced 371-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 40.7 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected high expression of an approximately 3.3-kb transcript
in heart and brain, with little to no expression in other tissues
examined. PCR analysis showed moderate expression in aorta and vascular
smooth muscle cells. Western blot analysis of heart and brain detected
SMAP8 at an apparent molecular mass of about 45 kD. SMAP8 localized to
the cytoplasmic fraction of transfected A10 embryonic rat aortic smooth
muscle cells.

By in situ hybridization of adult mouse brain, Yamamoto et al. (2011)
detected wide distribution of Ndrg4 in neurons, but not in astrocytes.
Western blot analysis of adult mouse brain detected 3 Ndrg4 isoforms
representing orthologs of human NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishimoto et al. (2003) showed that homocysteine upregulated SMAP8
expression in primary human aortic smooth muscle cells and rat A10
cells, but not in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Proliferation
and migration of A10 cells significantly decreased following expression
of human SMAP8. SMAP8 was phosphorylated by a serine/threonine kinase
via activation of a PDGF (see 173430) signaling pathway. In addition,
ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) and MEK1 (MAP2K1; 176872)/MEK2
(MAP2K2; 601263) were activated in SMAP8-transfected A10 cells.

Hongo et al. (2006) found that overexpression of 1 of the 6 isoforms of
rat Ndrg4, Ndrg4c2, in PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells reduced NGF (see
162030)-induced phosphorylation of Elk1 (311040), a nuclear target of
Erk. Reporter gene assays revealed that Ndrg4c2 suppressed Elk1-mediated
activation of a serum response element.

By RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Schilling et al. (2009)
found that NDRG4 expression was increased in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM; see 137800) compared with normal human astrocytes. Knockdown of
NDRG4 via short hairpin RNA reduced the viability of GBM cells via G1
cell cycle arrest and subsequent apoptosis. Knockdown of NDRG4 also
reduced the viability of several GBM cell lines and primary astrocytes.
Knockdown of NDRG4 in GBM tumor xenografts reduced tumor growth
following intracranial injection in immunocompromised mice.
Overexpression of NDRG4B or NDRG4H did not affect cell viability.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhou et al. (2001) determined that the NDRG4 gene contains 17 exons and
spans 26 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are specific for NDRG4H, exon 3 is specific
for NDRG4B and NDGR4B-var, and exon 16 is specific for NDRG4B-var. The
region upstream of exon 1 contains a GGCG sequence that may represent a
TATA-less promoter for NDRG4H expression. The region upstream of exon 3
contains a consensus TATA box and 2 CCAAT sequences and may represent
the promoter for NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhou et al. (2001) mapped the NDRG4 gene
to chromosome 16q21-q22.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yamamoto et al. (2011) found that Ndrg4 -/- mice were born at the
expected mendelian ratio, appeared normal, and were fertile. However,
Ndrg4 -/- mice showed deficits in spatial learning and memory, and they
exhibited increased sensitivity to ischemic stress following middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Consistent with these findings, Ndrg4 -/-
mice had reduced expression of the neuroprotective factor Bdnf (113505).

REFERENCE 1. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

2. Hongo, S.; Watanabe, T.; Takahashi, K.; Miyazaki, A.: Ndrg4 enhances
NGF-induced ERK activation uncoupled with Elk-1 activation. J. Cell.
Biochem. 98: 185-193, 2006.

3. Nishimoto, S.; Tawara, J.; Toyoda, H.; Kitamura, K.; Komurasaki,
T.: A novel homocysteine-responsive gene, smap8, modulates mitogenesis
in rat vascular smooth muscle cells. Europ. J. Biochem. 270: 2521-2531,
2003.

4. Schilling, S. H.; Hjelmeland, A. B.; Radiloff, D. R.; Liu, I. M.;
Wakeman, T. P.; Fielhauer, J. R.; Foster, E. H.; Lathia, J. D.; Rich,
J. N.; Wang, X.-F.; Datto, M. B.: NDRG4 is required for cell cycle
progression and survival in glioblastoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 284:
25160-25169, 2009.

5. Yamamoto, H.; Kokame, K.; Okuda, T.; Nakajo, Y.; Yanamoto, H.;
Miyata, T.: NDRG4 protein-deficient mice exhibit spatial learning
deficits and vulnerabilities to cerebral ischemia. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
26158-26165, 2011.

6. Zhou, R.-H.; Kokame, K.; Tsukamoto, Y.; Yutani, C.; Kato, H.; Miyata,
T.: Characterization of the human NDRG gene family: a newly identified
member, NDRG4, is specifically expressed in brain and heart. Genomics 73:
86-97, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2012

EDITED terry: 02/01/2012
mgross: 1/31/2012

612895	TITLE *612895 NUCLEOREDOXIN; NXN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kurooka et al. (1997) cloned mouse nucleoredoxin from a neonatal skin
cDNA library. The deduced 435-amino acid protein is rich in acidic amino
acids, has an internal long direct repeat, and shares significant
similarity with thioredoxin (TXN; 187700). Northern blot analysis
detected several nucleoredoxin splice variants in adult mouse tissues,
with highest expression in testis and skin and lowest expression in
liver. In situ hybridization showed that expression of nucleoredoxin
varied during mouse embryonic development. Expression was widespread in
embryos at days 9.5 and 10.5, with expression in limb buds, somites,
dorsal root ganglia, branchial bars, and parts of the brain, but
expression was marginal at day 12.5. Epitope-tagged nucleoredoxin
localized to nuclei of transfected COS-7 cells. Southern blot analysis
detected nucleoredoxin orthologs in human, rat, and rabbit, but not in
frog, fly, nematode, and yeast.

GENE FUNCTION

Kurooka et al. (1997) showed that the recombinant C-terminal domain of
mouse nucleoredoxin had oxidoreductase activity toward the disulfide
bonds of insulin (INS; 176730), with kinetics similar to that of
purified E. coli thioredoxin. Deletion of 55 N-terminal amino acids from
the construct, including the putative redox active site, resulted in a
protein that failed to reduce insulin.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the NXN gene to chromosome 17p13.3 based on an
alignment of the NXN sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF086523) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

Kurooka et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Nxn gene to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/30/2009.

2. Kurooka, H.; Kato, K.; Minoguchi, S.; Takahashi, Y.; Ikeda, J.;
Habu, S.; Osawa, N.; Buchberg, A. M.; Moriwaki, K.; Shisa, H.; Honjo,
T.: Cloning and characterization of the nucleoredoxin gene that encodes
a novel nuclear protein related to thioredoxin. Genomics 39: 331-339,
1997.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/7/2009

EDITED mgross: 07/07/2009

605284	TITLE *605284 TSC1 GENE; TSC1
;;HAMARTIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The TSC1 gene encodes hamartin, a protein that interacts with tuberin
(TSC2; 191092) to form a protein complex that inhibits signal
transduction to the downstream effectors of the mammalian target of
rapamycin (MTOR, or FRAP1; 601231) (Inoki et al., 2002).

CLONING

As part of a comprehensive strategy to identify the gene mutant in
tuberous sclerosis-1 (191100), van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) developed
an overlapping contig of clones from the 1.4-Mb TSC1 region on
chromosome 9. Several techniques showed the region to be gene-rich, with
at least 30 genes in a 900-kb segment. They identified 142 exons and 13
genes between D9S1199 and D9S114. The authors PCR-amplified putative and
confirmed exons in a set of 60 DNA samples from 40 sporadic tuberous
sclerosis cases and 20 unrelated familial tuberous sclerosis patients
showing linkage to 9q34. Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) identified
mutations in an exon that was part of a transcriptional unit identified
by earlier gene discovery efforts (Nagase et al., 1996). The predicted
TSC1 protein, which was called 'hamartin' by van Slegtenhorst et al.
(1997), consists of 1,164 amino acids and has a calculated mass of 130
kD.

GENE STRUCTURE

The TSC1 gene consists of 23 exons, of which the last 21 contain coding
sequence and the second is alternatively spliced (van Slegtenhorst et
al., 1997).

Cheadle et al. (2000) described the genomic organization of the mouse
Tsc1 locus.

GENE FUNCTION

Hamartin (TSC1), the protein that is defective in tuberous sclerosis-1,
has no significant homology to tuberin (TSC2; 191092), the protein
defective in tuberous sclerosis-2, which is a putative GTPase-activating
protein for RAP1 (see 600278) and RAB5 (179512). Van Slegtenhorst et al.
(1998) showed that hamartin and tuberin associate physically in vivo,
however, and that the interaction is mediated by predicted coiled-coil
domains. The data suggested to the authors that hamartin and tuberin
function in the same complex rather than in separate pathways.

Benvenuto et al. (2000) showed that overexpression of the TSC1 gene in
rat fibroblasts inhibits growth and causes changes in cell morphology.
Growth inhibition was associated with an increase in the endogenous
level of tuberin. As overexpression of tuberin inhibits cell growth, and
hamartin is known to bind tuberin, these results suggested that hamartin
stabilizes tuberin and that this contributes to the inhibition of cell
growth. The stabilization was explained by the finding that tuberin is
highly ubiquitinated in cells, while the fraction of tuberin that is
bound to hamartin is not ubiquitinated. Coexpression of tuberin
stabilized hamartin, which is weakly ubiquitinated, in transiently
transfected cells. The amino-terminal two-thirds of tuberin was
responsible for its ubiquitination and for stabilization of hamartin. A
mutant of tuberin from a patient with a missense mutation of the TSC2
gene, N1658K, was also highly ubiquitinated, and was unable to stabilize
hamartin. Benvenuto et al. (2000) concluded that hamartin is a growth
inhibitory protein whose biologic effect is probably dependent on its
interaction with tuberin.

Hodges et al. (2001) used a series of hamartin and tuberin constructs to
assay for interaction in the yeast 2-hybrid system. Hamartin (amino
acids 302-430) and tuberin (amino acids 1-418) interacted strongly with
one another. A region of tuberin encoding a putative coiled-coil (amino
acids 346-371) was necessary but not sufficient to mediate the
interaction with hamartin, as more N-terminal residues were also
required. A region of hamartin (amino acids 719-998) predicted to encode
coiled-coils was capable of oligomerization but was not important for
the interaction with tuberin. Subtle, non-truncating mutations
identified in patients with tuberous sclerosis and located within the
putative binding regions of hamartin or tuberin abolished or
dramatically reduced interaction of the proteins.

Miloloza et al. (2000) showed that expression of hamartin, assayed by
immunoblot analyses, is high in G0-arrested cells, although it is
expressed throughout the entire ongoing cell cycle. In addition, ectopic
expression of high levels of hamartin attenuated cellular proliferation.
The authors proposed that hamartin affects cell proliferation via
deregulation of G1 phase.

Activated ezrin (123900), radixin (179410), and moesin (309845) (ERM)
family proteins promote linkages between integral membrane proteins and
cytoskeleton proteins, such as F-actin (see ACTA1; 102610). In the
inactive form, the N and C termini of the ERM protein interact, masking
their membrane- and actin-interacting activities, respectively.
Activation of ERM proteins requires RHO (see ARHA; 165390), which
induces a cascade that results in the phosphorylation of threonine in
the C terminus of the ERM protein and causes the intramolecular bond
between the N and C termini to dissociate (Fukuhara and Gutkind, 2000).
Lamb et al. (2000) used yeast 2-hybrid analysis to screen a mouse
fibroblast cDNA library with ezrin as bait. Slot blot analysis,
immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence microscopy, and mutation
analysis indicated that the N terminus of ezrin interacts with the C
terminus of hamartin, whereas it interacts only weakly with merlin
(607379) and not at all with giantin (602500). Hamartin also interacted
with the N termini of radixin and moesin. Immunofluorescence microscopy
showed that hamartin interacts with F-actin, suggesting that hamartin
may be a direct binding partner for ERM proteins. Inactivation of
hamartin by microscale chromophore-assisted laser inactivation
(micro-CALI) or by antisense hamartin caused a marked retraction of the
affected area of endothelial cell membranes, loss of adhesion, and cell
rounding. Cell adhesion could be restored by injection of active RHO.
Expression of hamartin in cells without organized actin filaments
promoted the assembly of focal adhesions and the assembly of actin
stress fibers. This activity required RHO and residues 145 to 510 of
hamartin. Introduction of a C-terminal fragment of hamartin inhibited
the assembly of actin stress fibers by lysophosphatidic acid, a serum
factor that activates RHO, suggesting that the interaction of hamartin
with ERM proteins is required upstream of RHO. Lamb et al. (2000)
proposed that loss or perturbation of hamartin function leads to loss of
adhesion to the cellular matrix and initiates the development of TSC
hamartomas

Tapon et al. (2001) characterized mutations in the Drosophila Tsc1 and
Tsc2 (gigas) genes. Inactivating mutations in either gene caused an
identical phenotype characterized by enhanced growth and increased cell
size with no change in ploidy. Overall, mutant cells spent less time in
G1. Coexpression of both Tsc1 and Tsc2 restricted tissue growth and
reduced cell size and cell proliferation. This phenotype was modulated
by manipulations in cyclin levels. In postmitotic mutant cells, levels
of cyclin E (123837) and cyclin A (123835) were elevated. This
correlated with a tendency for these cells to reenter the cell cycle
inappropriately, as is observed in the human lesions.

Potter et al. (2001) isolated a mutation in the Drosophila Tsc1 gene.
Cells mutant for Tsc1 were dramatically increased in size yet
differentiated normally. Organ size was also increased in tissues that
contained a majority of mutant cells. Clones of Tsc1 mutant cells in the
imaginal discs underwent additional divisions but retained normal
ploidy. Potter et al. (2001) also showed that the Tsc1 protein binds to
Drosophila Tsc2 in vitro. Overexpression of Tsc1 or Tsc2 alone in the
wing and eye had no effect, but co-overexpression led to a decrease in
cell size, cell number, and organ size. Genetic epistasis data were
consistent with a model in which Tsc1 and Tsc2 function together in the
insulin (INS; 176730) signaling pathway.

Inoki et al. (2002) showed that the Tsc1-Tsc2 complex inhibits the
mammalian target of rapamycin (MTOR) (FRAP1; 601231), leading to
inhibition of p70 ribosomal S6 kinase-1 (608938) and activation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein-1 (EIF4EBP1;
602223).

Astrinidis et al. (2006) found that endogenous polo-like kinase-1 (PLK1;
602098) associated with the hamartin-tuberin complex in several human
and nonhuman cell lines and that the complex localized to centrosomes.
Phosphorylated hamartin interacted with PLK1 independent of tuberin, and
the interaction required thr310 of hamartin. Hamartin negatively
regulated the protein levels of PLK1 and regulated centrosome number in
an MTOR-dependent manner. Hamartin-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts
had an increased number of centrosomes and a mitotic defect leading to
increased DNA content, and these defects were reversed by rapamycin.

Loss of the TSC genes leads to constitutive activation of MTOR and
downstream signaling elements, resulting in tumor development,
neurologic disorders, and severe insulin/IGF1 (147440) resistance. Ozcan
et al. (2008) found that loss of TSC1 or TSC2 in cell lines and mouse or
human tumors caused endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activated the
unfolded protein response. The resulting ER stress played a significant
role in the MTOR-mediated negative feedback inhibition of insulin action
and increased the vulnerability to apoptosis.

Choi et al. (2008) showed that Tsc1 and Tsc2 had critical functions in
axon formation and growth in mouse. Overexpression of Tsc1/Tsc2
suppressed axon formation, whereas lack of Tsc1 or Tsc2 induced ectopic
axons in vitro and in mouse brain. Tsc2 was phosphorylated and inhibited
in axons, but not dendrites. Inactivation of Tsc1/Tsc2 promoted axonal
growth, at least in part, via upregulation of neuronal polarity Sad
kinase (see BRSK2; 609236), which was also elevated in cortical tubers
of a TSC patient. Choi et al. (2008) concluded that TSC1 and TSC2 have
critical roles in neuronal polarity, and that a common pathway regulates
polarization and growth in neurons and cell size in other tissues.

To test for the role of intrinsic impediments to axon regrowth, Park et
al. (2008) analyzed cell growth control genes using a virus-assisted in
vivo conditional knockout approach. In wildtype adult mice, mTOR
activity was suppressed and new protein synthesis was impaired in
axotomized retinal ganglion cells, which may have contributed to the
regeneration failure. Reactivating this pathway by conditional knockout
of TSC1, a negative regulator of the mTOR pathway, led to axon
regeneration.

DiBella et al. (2009) showed that morpholino knockdown of zebrafish
Tsc1a led to a ciliary phenotype including kidney cyst formation and
left-right asymmetry defects. Tsc1a localized to the Golgi, but
morpholinos against it, nonetheless, acted synthetically with ciliary
genes in producing kidney cysts. Consistent with a role of the cilium in
the same pathway as Tsc genes, the TOR (FRAP1; 601231) pathway was found
to be aberrantly activated in ciliary mutants, resembling the effect of
Tsc1a knockdown. Kidney cyst formation in ciliary mutants was blocked by
the Tor inhibitor rapamycin. DiBella et al. (2009) suggested a signaling
network between the cilium and the TOR pathway wherein ciliary signals
can feed into the TOR pathway and where Tsc1a may regulate the length of
the cilium itself.

Hartman et al. (2009) reported that hamartin (TSC1) localized to the
basal body of the primary cilium, and that Tsc1-null and Tsc2-null mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were significantly more likely to contain a
primary cilium than wildtype controls. In addition, the cilia of Tsc1-
and Tsc2-null MEFs were 17 to 27% longer than cilia from wildtype MEFs.
Enhanced ciliary formation in the Tsc1- and Tsc2-null MEFs was not
abrogated by rapamycin, which suggests an mTOR-independent mechanism.
Polycystin-1 (PC1; see 601313) has been found to interact with TSC2, but
Pkd1-null MEFs did not have enhanced ciliary formation. While activation
of mTOR has been observed in renal cysts from ADPKD patients, Pkd1-null
MEFs did not have evidence of constitutive mTOR activation, thereby
underscoring the independent functions of the TSC proteins and PC1 in
regulation of primary cilia and mTOR.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Tuberous Sclerosis

Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) screened exons in the 1.4-Mb TSC1 region
on chromosome 9 for mutations in tuberous sclerosis patients. One of the
exons of the TSC1 gene screened for mutations demonstrated mobility
shifts in heteroduplex analysis of samples from 10 of the 60 patient
samples. Sequence analysis revealed 7 small frameshifting mutations
(e.g., 605284.0001), 1 nonsense mutation (605284.0002), 1 missense
mutation (605284.0003), and 1 polymorphism that did not change the
encoded amino acid. It was exon 15 in which the high frequency of
mutations was found on the initial screen. Exon 15 is 559 bp long and
represents 16% of the coding region. Mutation was found in exon 15 in 8
of 55 tuberous sclerosis families (15%) showing linkage to 9q34 and in
only 15 of 607 (2.5%) of sporadic patients or families uninformative for
linkage. A screen for mutations in all coding exons in 20 familial cases
and 152 sporadic patients yielded 8 mutations in each group (40% and 5%,
respectively). Of 32 distinct mutations found in TSC1, 30 were
truncating, and 1 mutation (2105delAAAG; 605284.0001) was seen in 6
apparently unrelated patients. In one of these 6, a somatic mutation in
the wildtype allele was found in a tuberous sclerosis-associated renal
carcinoma, which suggested that hamartin acts as a tumor suppressor.

Jones et al. (1997) comprehensively defined the TSC1 mutation spectrum
in 171 sequentially ascertained, unrelated TSC patients by SSCP and
heteroduplex analysis of all 21 coding exons, and by assaying a
restriction fragment spanning the whole locus. Mutations were identified
in 9 of 24 familial cases, but in only 13 of 147 sporadic cases. In
contrast, a limited screen revealed mutations in the TSC2 gene in 2 of
the 24 familial cases and in 45 of the 147 sporadic cases. Thus, TSC1
mutations were significantly underrepresented among sporadic cases. Both
large deletions and missense mutations were common at the TSC2 locus,
whereas most TSC1 mutations were small truncated lesions. Mental
retardation was significantly less frequent among carriers of TSC1
mutations than TSC2 mutations (odds ratio, 5.54 for sporadic cases only;
6.78 +/- 1.54 when a single randomly selected patient per
multigeneration family was also included). No correlation between mental
retardation and the type of mutation was found. Jones et al. (1997)
concluded that there is a reduced risk of mental retardation in tuberous
sclerosis-1 as opposed to tuberous sclerosis-2 and that consequent
ascertainment bias, at least in part, explains the relative paucity of
TSC1 mutations in sporadic TSC.

Kwiatkowska et al. (1998) performed a comprehensive analysis for
mutations in the TSC1 gene using Southern blot analysis, and SSCP and
heteroduplex analysis of amplified exons in 13 families with genetic
linkage to the TSC1 region, 22 small families without linkage
information, and 126 sporadic patients. Seventeen unique mutations were
identified in 21 patients. Mutations were found in 7 of 13 (54%)
tuberous sclerosis-1-linked families, in 1 of 22 (5%) small families
without linkage, and in 13 of 126 (10%) sporadic cases. The mutations
were all chain-terminating, with 14 small deletions, 1 small insertion,
and 6 nonsense mutations. Twelve of the 21 mutations were previously
reported by van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997), and 9 were new. In families
with mutations, all individuals carrying a mutation met formal
diagnostic criteria for tuberous sclerosis, apart from a 3-year-old girl
who had inherited a deletion mutation and who had no seizures, normal
intelligence, normal abdominal ultrasound, and hypomelanotic macules
only on physical examination. Her 7-year-old sister with the same TSC1
mutation had severe mental retardation. They found no significant
difference in the incidence and severity of mental retardation in the 13
sporadic patients with TSC1 mutations versus the entire sporadic cohort.
The observation indicated that TSC1 mutations are all inactivating,
suggested that tuberous sclerosis-1 occurs in only 15 to 20% of the
sporadic tuberous sclerosis population, and demonstrated that
presymptomatic tuberous sclerosis occurs.

Jones et al. (1999) reported a comprehensive mutation analysis of the
TSC1 and TSC2 genes in a cohort of 150 unrelated tuberous sclerosis
patients and their families, using heteroduplex and SSCP analysis of all
coding exons, and pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Southern blot
analysis, and long PCR to screen for large rearrangements. Mutations
were detected in 120 (80%) of the 150 cases, affecting the TSC1 gene in
22 cases and the TSC2 gene in 98 cases. TSC1 mutations were
significantly underrepresented in sporadic cases. All TSC1 mutations
were predicted to be truncating, consistent with a structural or adaptor
role for the encoded protein. In contrast, 22 patients had TSC2 missense
mutations that were found predominantly in the GAP-related domain (8
cases) and in a small region encoded in exons 16 and 17, between
nucleotides 1849 and 1859 (8 cases), consistent with the presence of
residues performing key functions at these sites. Intellectual
disability was significantly more frequent in tuberous sclerosis-2
sporadic cases than in tuberous sclerosis-1 sporadic cases.

Young et al. (1998) performed a mutation screen of the TSC1 gene in a
panel of 79 tuberous sclerosis patients. Twelve of the patients were
from families showing linkage to 9q34 markers. Causative mutations in
the TSC1 gene were found in 27 of these patients, and 5 other variations
in the gene were identified. Twenty-six of the mutations were predicted
to cause premature termination of the protein product of the gene and
one mutation was in a splice site. The mutation screen showed that TSC1
mutations are rarer in sporadic tuberous sclerosis patients than in
familial cases. This is consistent with the expectation that a larger
proportion of the tuberous sclerosis-2 patients will be sporadic because
of the more severe nature of TSC2 as compared to TSC1. Young et al.
(1998) found that in family 214 of Povey et al. (1994) a presumably
nonpenetrant mother of a severely affected boy in one branch of the
family did not carry the nonsense mutation leu250-to-ter present in
affected individuals in other branches of the family. Furthermore, the
grandmother of the severely affected boy was the 'connecting link' to
the rest of the family not carrying the mutation, thus leading to the
conclusion that the single ungual fibroma that had been thought to mean
that she was affected was not in fact diagnostic of tuberous sclerosis.

Ali et al. (1998) screened 83 unrelated individuals with tuberous
sclerosis for mutations in TSC1. Mutations were found in 16 of the 83
cases (19%). The mutations comprised base substitutions, small
insertions, or small deletions giving rise to 6 nonsense mutations, 8
frameshifts, and 2 splice site mutations, all of which would be expected
to result in a truncated or absent protein. In 8 of 10 cases showing
linkage to the TSC1 locus, mutations were found. In the remaining 73
unassigned cases, only 8 mutations were found (11%). From these data,
Ali et al. (1998) estimated that TSC1 mutations account for 22% of
tuberous sclerosis cases.

Mayer et al. (1999) pointed out that all known TSC1 mutations, as well
as most TSC2 mutations, truncate the proteins hamartin and tuberin,
respectively. Mayer et al. (1999) described an RNA-based screening of
the entire coding regions of both TSC genes for truncating mutations,
applying the protein truncation test (PTT). Simultaneous investigation
of both TSC genes in a group of 48 unassigned TSC patients, which were
previously tested to exclude large intragenic TSC2 rearrangements,
revealed aberrant migrating polypeptides resulting from truncating
mutations in 9 TSC1 cases and in 16 TSC2 cases, while 3 TSC2 cases
showed enlarged proteins. TSC1 mutations included 2 nonsense mutations,
4 insertions, and 3 splice mutations. Nineteen mutations identified in
TSC2 comprised 4 different nonsense mutations in 5 patients, 1 deletion,
1 insertion, and 7 different splicing aberrations due to at least 8
different mutations found in 12 patients. Additional predicted
truncating mutations according to PTT without possible identification of
the causative alteration allowed assignment to TSC1 in 1 and TSC2 in 7
cases. Twelve patients without abnormalities in the PTT were assumed to
harbor missense mutations, probably in TSC2. The high proportion of TSC2
splicing aberrations strengthens the importance of intronic
disease-causing mutations and the application of RNA-based screening
methods to confirm their consequences. Benit et al. (1999) likewise
devised a protein truncation test to analyze the full-length coding
sequence of TSC1. In a study of 15 cases (12 sporadic and 3 familial) by
a combination of PTT and SSCP, they found 5 of 15 mutations, whereas PTT
alone detected 4 of 15 truncating mutations, 2 of which escaped SSCP
analysis.

Niida et al. (1999) reported mutation analysis of the entire coding
region of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 126 unrelated TSC patients,
including 40 familial and 86 sporadic cases, by SSCP followed by direct
sequencing. Mutations were identified in a total of 74 (59%) cases,
including 16 TSC1 mutations (5 sporadic and 11 familial) and 58 TSC2
mutations (42 sporadic and 16 familial). Overall, significantly more
TSC2 mutations were found in this population, with a relatively equal
distribution of mutations between TSC1 and TSC2 among the familial
cases, but a marked underrepresentation of TSC1 mutations among the
sporadic cases (P = 0.0035, Fisher's exact test). All TSC1 mutations
were predicted to be protein truncating; however, in TSC2 13 missense
mutations were found, 5 clustering in the GAP-related domain and 3
others occurring in exon 16. Upon comparison of clinical manifestations,
including the incidence of intellectual disability, they could not find
any observable differences between TSC1 and TSC2 patients.

Carbonara et al. (1996) studied LOH in both the TSC1 and TSC2 loci and 7
tumor suppressor gene-containing regions, p53 (191170), NF1 (613113),
NF2 (607379), BRCA1 (113705), APC (611731), VHL (608537), and MLM
(155600), in 20 hamartomas from 18 tuberous sclerosis patients. Overall,
8 angiomyolipomas, 8 giant cell astrocytomas, 1 cortical tuber, and 3
rhabdomyomas were analyzed. LOH at either TSC locus was found in a large
fraction of the informative patients, both sporadic (7/14) and familial
(1/4). A statistically significant preponderance of LOH of TSC2 was
observed in the sporadic group (P less than 0.01). Carbonara et al.
(1996) suspected that bias in the selection for TSC patients with the
most severe organ impairment was responsible for the finding. According
to this suggestion, a TSC2 defect may confer a greater risk for early
kidney failure or possibly a more rapid growth of a giant cell
astrocytoma. None of the 7 antioncogenes tested showed LOH, indicating
that the loss of either TSC gene product may be sufficient to promote
hamartomatous cell growth. The observation of LOH at different markers
in an astrocytoma and in an angiomyolipoma from the same patients
suggested to the authors the multifocal origin of a second-hit mutation.

Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1999) reported mutation analysis of the TSC1
gene in a cohort of 225 unrelated patients. Of 29 mutations detected,
all were small changes leading to a truncated protein except for a
splice site mutation and 2 in-frame deletions in exons 7 and 15. No
clear difference was observed in the clinical phenotype of patients with
an in-frame deletion or a frameshift or nonsense mutation. Van
Slegtenhorst et al. (1999) found no obvious underrepresentation of
mutations among sporadic cases, in contrast to the findings of Jones et
al. (1999). Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1999) found no genotype-phenotype
correlation for patients with TSC1 mutations compared to the overall
population of tuberous sclerosis patients.

Yamashita et al. (2000) examined 27 unrelated Japanese patients with
tuberous sclerosis for mutations in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes, using SSCP
analysis of genomic DNA. They identified 4 mutations in TSC1 that they
considered to be pathogenic, including 3 frameshifts and 1 nonsense
mutation. All were expected to result in a truncated hamartin gene
product. The authors found no difference in the risk for mental
retardation between their series of tuberous sclerosis-1 and tuberous
sclerosis-2 patients. In addition, the extent of protein truncation
expected from the mutations did not correlate with the severity of
clinical symptoms.

Carbonara et al. (1994) presented evidence of loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) at the tuberous sclerosis-1 critical region in a giant cell
astrocytoma occurring in a patient with familial tuberous sclerosis.
Segregation analysis showed that the 9q34 haplotype lost in the tumor
carried the putative normal TSC1 gene. These data supported the
hypothesis of both a germline and somatic loss-of-function mutation
necessary for the development of tuberous sclerosis hamartomas and
suggested a tumor-suppressor activity for the TSC1 gene product. (In the
same astrocytoma, a second small region of LOH was found at 9p21.) Green
et al. (1994) likewise found allele loss consistent with a
tumor-suppressor role of the TSC1 gene. They studied 6 hamartomas from 4
sporadic and 2 familial cases of tuberous sclerosis, none of which
showed allele loss for markers on 16p13.3. The hamartomas were
paraffin-embedded sections of 3 renal angiomyolipomas, 2 giant cell
astrocytomas, and a cardiac rhabdomyoma. One angiomyolipoma showed
allele loss for the markers ABO, DBH, and D9S66. The family structure
did not permit determination of the phase of the disease and marker
alleles. Findings supported the assignment of tuberous sclerosis-1 to
9q34 and placed the gene between D9S149 and D9S67. Similar evidence had
supported a growth suppressor role for the TSC2 gene.

Green et al. (1996) used nonrandom X chromosome inactivation studies to
demonstrate the clonality of tuberous sclerosis hamartomas. Previously,
LOH for DNA markers in the region of either the TSC1 gene on 9q34 or the
TSC2 gene on 16p13.3 had supported the conclusion that these lesions are
indeed clonal. In the studies of X-chromosome inactivation, Green et al.
(1996) examined clonality in 13 TSC hamartomas from female cases by
analyzing X-chromosome inactivation in DNA extracted from archival
paraffin-embedded tumors compared with normal tissue from the same
patient. Seven of the cases were sporadic; 2 were from families linked
to 9q34, 1 was from a family linked to 16p13.3 and 3 were from families
too small to assign by linkage. Only 4 of the 13 hamartomas had
previously shown LOH, 1 in the region of the TSC1 gene and 3 in the
region of the TSC2 gene. A PCR assay was used to analyze differential
methylation of the HpaII restriction site adjacent to the
androgen-receptor triplet-repeat polymorphism on Xq11-q12. In 12 of the
lesions, there was a skewed inactivation pattern, one X-chromosome being
fully methylated and the other unmethylated. Normal tissue showed a
random pattern of inactivation. The finding was considered particularly
intriguing by the authors since the lesions were composed of more than 1
cell type.

Henske et al. (1996) analyzed 87 lesions from 47 TSC patients for LOH in
the TSC1 and TSC2 regions. Of the 28 patients with angiomyolipomas or
rhabdomyomas, LOH for 16p13 was detected in lesions from 12 (57%). LOH
for 9q34 was detected in only 1 patient. The authors noted that LOH
occurred in only 4% of TSC brain lesions and suggested that TSC brain
lesions may result from a different pathogenetic mechanism than TSC
kidney or rhabdomyoma lesions.

Niida et al. (2001) analyzed 24 hamartomas from 10 patients for
second-hit mutations by multiple methods including LOH analysis, SSCP
screening of TSC1 and TSC2, promoter methylation studies of TSC2, and
clonality analysis. The results provided evidence that complete
inactivation of the TSC genes is characteristic of renal angiomyolipomas
but not of other TSC lesions.

Sepp et al. (1996) described the spectrum of LOH in 51 hamartomas from
34 cases of tuberous sclerosis. Of 51 hamartomas analyzed, 21 (41%)
showed LOH; 16 hamartomas showed LOH around TSC2 and 5 showed LOH in the
vicinity of TSC1. No hamartomas showed LOH for markers around both loci.
Sepp et al. (1996) reported that there did not appear to be any major
differences in the frequency of LOH between the different types of
hamartoma. LOH was observed in 7 of 17 angiomyolipomas, 5 of 9 giant
cell astrocytomas, 3 of 8 fibromas, 3 of 5 cortical tubers, and in a
shagreen patch, a cardiac rhabdomyoma, and a renal carcinoma. Sepp et
al. (1996) noted that the excess of LOH for the TSC2 region on
chromosome 16p13.3 may simply reflect that the TSC1 locus is less well
defined and that LOH for 9q34 is therefore harder to find.

Bjornsson et al. (1996) studied 6 TSC-associated RCCs. Their findings
suggested that some TSC-associated RCCs have clinical, pathologic, and
genetic features which distinguish them from sporadic RCC. Clinically
the TSC-associated RCC occurred at a younger age (36 years) than
sporadic tumors and occurred primarily in women (5 of 6 cases).
Bjornsson et al. (1996) reported that 5 tumors displayed clear cell
morphology and 2 of those 5 had high-grade spindle cell areas in
addition to granular cell histology. Of the 6 patients studied, 4 died
from their carcinoma and 3 had pulmonary metastases in addition to
retroperitoneal spread. The 2 surviving patients had tumors that were
detected incidentally (one at surgery for angiomyolipoma and renal
hemorrhage, the other at surgery for renal cysts). Immunostaining for a
melanocyte-associated marker, HMB-45, was positive in 4 of the 6 cases.
LOH was observed on 9q34, 16p13.3, and in 2 cases on chromosome 3p.
Bjornsson et al. (1996) noted that the tumor with LOH of 9q34 alone was
incidentally detected and lacked anaplastic features. In contrast, the
tumors with LOH on 9q34 and 3p had anaplastic features and metastasized.

Cheadle et al. (2000) reviewed the molecular genetic advances in
tuberous sclerosis. They found reports of 154 cases with mutations in
the TSC1 gene and 292 cases with mutations in the TSC2 gene. Forty-seven
percent (73/154) of TSC1 mutations were single-base substitutions, 82%
of which were nonsense mutations.

In a study of 224 index patients with tuberous sclerosis, Dabora et al.
(2001) found mutations in 186 (83%), comprising 138 small TSC2
mutations, 20 large TSC2 mutations, and 28 small TSC1 mutations.
Clinical assessment indicated that sporadic patients with TSC1 mutations
had, on average, milder disease than did patients with TSC2 mutations,
despite being of similar age. They had a lower frequency of seizures and
moderate to severe mental retardation, fewer subependymal nodules and
cortical tubers, less severe kidney involvement, no retinal hamartomas,
and less severe facial angiofibroma. Patients in whom no mutation was
found also had disease that was milder, on average, than that in
patients with TSC2 mutations. Although there was overlap in the spectrum
of many clinical features of patients with TSC1 versus TSC2 mutations,
some features (grade 2-4 kidney cysts or angiomyolipomas, forehead
plaques, retinal hamartomas, and liver angiomyolipomas) were very rare
or not seen at all in TSC1 patients. Thus, both germline and somatic
mutations appear to be less common in TSC1 than in TSC2. The reduced
severity of disease in patients without defined mutations suggests that
many of these patients are mosaic for a TSC2 mutation and/or have TSC
because of mutations in an as yet undefined locus with a relatively mild
clinical phenotype.

Langkau et al. (2002) genotyped 68 unrelated and nonselected patients
(59 sporadic and 9 familial) with clinically confirmed TSC and
identified 29 mutations in the TSC2 gene and 2 mutations in the TSC1
gene. They noted that the TSC1-TSC2 mutation ratio in this group of
patients differed significantly from the 1:1 ratio previously predicted
on the basis of linkage studies. They suggested that milder phenotypes
are more often associated with TSC1 mutations and are likely to escape
ascertainment.

Many mRNAs carrying mutations that encode a truncated protein are
subject to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), which results in reduced
levels of mutant transcript. Virtually all TSC1 mutations truncate the
protein product. Jeganathan et al. (2002) used coding and 3-prime
untranslated region polymorphisms in TSC1 to develop a transcript
imbalance assay to investigate TSC1 transcript levels in patients. This
approach allowed the correct identification of 6 of 7 TSC1 patients
tested blind from a panel of TSC1 and TSC2 patients, with no false
positives. The extent of NMD in TSC1 correlated with each individual
mutation regardless of intrafamilial variation in clinical features and
with no strong evidence for positional bias.

Au et al. (2007) performed mutational analyses on 325 individuals with
definite tuberous sclerosis complex diagnostic status. The authors
identified mutations in 72% (199 of 257) of de novo and 77% (53 of 68)
of familial cases, with 17% of mutations in the TSC1 gene and 50% in the
TSC2 gene. There were 4% unclassified variants and 29% with no mutation
identified. Genotype/phenotype analyses of all observed tuberous
sclerosis complex findings in probands were performed, including several
clinical features not analyzed in 2 previous large studies (see, e.g.,
Sancak et al., 2005). Au et al. (2007) showed that patients with TSC2
mutations have significantly more hypomelanotic macules and learning
disability in contrast to those with TSC1 mutations, findings not noted
in previous studies. The authors also observed results consistent with 2
similar studies suggesting that individuals with mutations in TSC2 have
more severe symptoms.

Nellist et al. (2009) identified 8 different missense mutations in the
TSC1 gene (see, e.g., M224R; 605284.0008 and L180P; 605284.0009) that
segregated with tuberous sclerosis. In vitro functional expression
studies demonstrated that these changes resulted in reduced levels of
TSC1 and a reduction in TSC1-dependent inhibition of mTOR activity, as
detected by immunoblotting. In each case, the functional
characterization was consistent with the genetic and phenotypic
findings, indicating that the missense changes were pathogenic. Nellist
et al. (2009) concluded that mutations close to the N terminus of TSC1
(amino acids 117 to 224) reduce the steady-state levels of TSC1.

- Pulmonary Lymphangioleiomyomatosis

Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM; 606690) is a destructive lung
disease characterized by a diffuse hamartomatous proliferation of smooth
muscle cells in the lungs. Pulmonary LAM can occur as an isolated form
(sporadic LAM) or in association with tuberous sclerosis complex
(TSC-LAM). Sato et al. (2002) studied the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 6
Japanese patients with TSC-LAM and 22 patients with sporadic LAM and
identified 6 novel mutations. TSC2 germline mutations were detected in 2
(33.3%) of the 6 patients with TSC-LAM, and a TSC1 germline mutation was
detected in 1 (4.5%) of the 22 sporadic LAM patients. In accordance with
the tumor suppressor model, LOH was detected in LAM cells from 3 of 4
patients with TSC-LAM and from 4 of 8 patients with sporadic LAM.
Furthermore, an identical LOH or 2 identical somatic mutations were
demonstrated in LAM cells microdissected from several tissues,
suggesting that LAM cells can spread from one lesion to another. These
results confirmed the prevailing concept of pathogenesis of LAM: TSC-LAM
has a germline mutation, but sporadic LAM does not; sporadic LAM is a
TSC2 disease with 2 somatic mutations; and a variety of TSC mutations
can cause LAM. However, this study indicated that a fraction of sporadic
LAM can be a TSC1 disease; therefore, both TSC genes should be examined,
even in patients with sporadic LAM.

- Focal Cortical Dysplasia of Taylor

Focal cortical dysplasia of Taylor (FCDT; 607341) is characterized by a
localized malformation of the neocortex and underlying white matter.
Balloon cells, similar to those observed in TSC, are present in many
cases, referred to by Becker et al. (2002) as FCD(bc). Becker et al.
(2002) studied alterations of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in a cohort of 48
patients with chronic, focal epilepsy and histologically documented
FCD(bc). DNA was obtained after microdissection and laser-assisted
isolation of balloon cells, dysplastic neurons, and nonlesional cells
from adjacent normal brain tissue. Sequence alterations resulting in
amino acid exchange of the TSC1 gene product affecting exons 5 and 17
and silent base exchanges in exons 14 and 22 were increased in patients
with FCD(bc) compared with 200 controls. Sequence alterations were
detected in FCD(bc) and adjacent normal cells. In 24 patients, DNA was
suitable to study LOH at the TSC1 gene locus in microdissected FCD(bc)
samples compared with control tissues. LOH was found in 11 FCD(bc)
cases. In the TSC2 gene, only silent polymorphisms were detected at
similar frequencies as in controls. Becker et al. (2002) concluded that
FCD(bc) constitutes a clinicopathologic entity with distinct
neuroradiologic, neuropathologic, and molecular genetic features, and
suggested the TSC1 gene has a role in its development, with a pathogenic
relationship between it and the TSC complex.

Becker et al. (2002) noted that LOH for alleles at 16p13.3 (where the
TSC2 gene is located) have been observed in brain lesions of TSC, and at
9q34 (where the TSC1 gene is located) in extracerebral lesions of TSC.
Their findings of LOH related to the TSC1 gene in focal cortical
dysplasia are possibly relevant to the 2-hit hypothesis for the
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. The observed combination of LOH
within the TSC1 locus and sequence polymorphism in the other alleles
suggests that the latter functions as a predisposing germline variant
with low penetrance and a severely restricted manifestation pattern.
Given that TSC1 and TSC2 may act as a cell cycle-regulating complex
(Potter et al., 2001; Tapon et al., 2001), such variant alleles may
induce proliferation activity for a limited time during brain
development.

- Everolimus Sensitivity

Iyer et al. (2012) studied the tumor genome of a patient with metastatic
bladder cancer who achieved a durable (greater than 2 years) and ongoing
complete response to everolimus, a drug targeting the mTORC1 complex
(see 601231). Iyer et al. (2012) identified a 2-bp deletion in the TSC1
gene resulting in a frameshift truncation, and a nonsense mutation in
the NF2 (607379) gene. Iyer et al. (2012) sequenced both genes in the
second cohort of 96 high-grade bladder cancers and identified 5
additional somatic TSC1 mutations, whereas no additional NF2 mutations
were detected. Subsequently, Iyer et al. (2012) explored whether TSC1
mutations is a biomarker of clinical benefit from everolimus therapy in
bladder cancer, and studied 13 additional bladder cancer patients
treated with everolimus. Three additional tumors harbored nonsense
mutations in TSC1, including 2 patients who had minor responses to
everolimus (17 and 24% tumor regression, respectively). Tumors from 8 of
the 9 patients who showed disease progression were TSC1 wildtype.
Patients with TSC1-mutant tumors remained on everolimus longer than
those with wildtype tumors (7.7 vs 2.0 months, p = 0.004) with a
significant improvement in time to recurrence (4.1 vs 1.8 months; hazard
ratio = 18.5, 95% confidence interval 2.1 to 162, p = 0.001). Iyer et
al. (2012) concluded that mTORC1-directed therapies may be most
effective in cancer patients whose tumors harbor TSC1 somatic mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kobayashi et al. (2001) established a line of Tsc1 knockout mice by gene
targeting. Heterozygous mutant mice (Tsc1 +/-) developed renal and
extrarenal tumors such as hepatic hemangiomas. In these tumors, loss of
the wildtype Tsc1 allele was observed. Homozygous Tsc1 mutants died
around embryonic days 10.5 to 11.5, frequently associated with neural
tube unclosure. As a whole, phenotypes of Tsc1-KO mice resembled those
of Tsc2-KO mice previously reported, suggesting that the presumptive
common pathway for the Tsc1 and Tsc2 products may exist in mice as is
thought to be the case in humans. Notably, however, development of renal
tumors in Tsc1 +/- mice was apparently slower than that in Tsc2 +/-
mice.

Kwiatkowski et al. (2002) developed a murine model of TSC1 disease
wherein the mutant allele lacked exons 17 and 18, which leads to
premature termination. Tsc1-null embryos died at midgestation from a
failure of liver development. Tsc1 heterozygotes developed kidney
cystadenomas and liver hemangiomas at high frequency, but the incidence
of kidney tumors was somewhat lower than in Tsc2 heterozygous mice.
Liver hemangiomas were more common, more severe, and caused higher
mortality in female than in male Tsc1 heterozygotes. Tsc1-null embryo
fibroblast lines exhibited persistent phosphorylation of the p70-S6K and
its substrate S6, which was sensitive to treatment with rapamycin,
indicating constitutive activation of the MTOR (FRAP1; 601231)-S6K
pathway due to loss of the Tsc1 protein, hamartin. Hyperphosphorylation
of S6 was also seen in kidney tumors in the heterozygous mice,
suggesting that inhibition of this pathway may aid in control of TSC
hamartomas.

Uhlmann et al. (2002) demonstrated that heterozygous Tsc1 and Tsc2 mice
exhibit increased numbers of astrocytes, suggesting that hamartin and
tuberin are important growth regulators for astrocytes. To study the
consequence of hamartin loss on astrocyte function, Uhlmann et al.
(2002) generated mice in which the Tsc1 gene was specifically
inactivated in astrocytes. The mice demonstrated an age-dependent
progression of increased astrocyte proliferation, abnormal neuronal
organization in the hippocampus, seizures, and death. The findings
suggested that the increase in astrocyte proliferation preceded the
neuronal abnormalities, causing mass effect changes or disturbance of
complex astrocyte-neuron interactions. In culture, the Tsc1-null
astrocytes grew in association with reduced expression of the cell cycle
regulator p27(KIP1) (600778), suggesting disruption of a TSC-mediated
growth regulation complex involving p27(KIP1).

Meikle et al. (2005) developed a conditional mouse mutant of Tsc1. Mice
with ventricular loss of Tsc1 had a median survival of 6 months and
developed a dilated cardiomyopathy with the occurrence of scattered foci
of enlarged ventricular myocytes. The enlarged cells were PAS-positive,
indicating the presence of excess glycogen, and expressed elevated
levels of phospho-S6 (RPS6; 180460), similar to findings in patient
rhabdomyoma cells. The observations were consistent with a 2-hit
mechanism for rhabdomyoma formation. However, the mice showed no
evidence of fetal/neonatal demise, and there was no evidence of
proliferation in the lesions. Meikle et al. (2005) proposed that these
differences may be due to the timing of loss of Tsc1 in the ventricular
myocytes and/or the truncated gestational period in the mouse compared
with humans.

Wilson et al. (2005) showed that approximately 27% of Tsc1 +/- mice on a
C57BL/6 background died at 1 to 2 days from unknown causes. Forty-four
percent of Tsc1 +/- mice on a C3H background developed macroscopically
visible renal lesions as early as 3 to 6 months, increasing to 95% by 15
to 18 months. Renal lesions progressed from cysts through cystadenomas
to solid carcinomas. Eighty percent of Tsc1 +/- mice on a Balb/c
background exhibited solid renal cell carcinomas by 15 to 18 months, and
lesions showed loss of the wildtype Tsc1 allele and elevated protein
levels of MTOR and RPS6.

Goorden et al. (2007) found that Tsc1 +/- mice had no spontaneous
seizures or cerebral lesions but showed impaired learning in
hippocampus-sensitive versions of learning tasks and impaired social
behavior. The findings indicated that haploinsufficiency for Tsc1
resulted in a functional neuronal deficit in the absence of overt
cerebral pathology.

Zeng et al. (2008) observed that mice with conditional Tsc1 inactivation
primarily in glia developed glial proliferation, enlarged brain size,
progressive epilepsy, and premature death. Treatment with rapamycin at
postnatal day 14 before the onset of neurologic symptoms prevented the
development of epilepsy and premature death. Treatment at 6 weeks, after
the onset of symptoms, suppressed seizures and prolonged survival. Brain
histology showed that treatment with rapamycin resulted in decreased
abnormal astrocyte proliferation and increased neuronal organization
compared to untreated mice, even at later treatment. Rapamycin caused a
dose-dependent decrease in S6 phosphorylation, indicating inhibition of
the MTOR pathway. Cessation of rapamycin treatment resulted in
reappearance of seizures, progressive brain enlargement, and premature
death, similar to untreated mice. Zeng et al. (2008) concluded that
rapamycin has strong efficacy for preventing seizures and prolonging
survival in these transgenic mice.

Patients with tuberous sclerosis often develop renal cysts and those
with inherited codeletions of PKD1 gene (601313) develop severe,
early-onset polycystic kidneys. Using mouse models, Bonnet et al. (2009)
showed that many of the earliest lesions from Tsc1 +/-, Tsc2 +/-, and
Pkd1 +/- mice did not exhibit activation of mTOR (601231), confirming an
mTOR-independent pathway of renal cystogenesis. Using Tsc1/Pkd1 and
Tsc2/Pkd1 heterozygous double-mutants, the authors showed functional
cooperation and an effect on renal primary cilium length between
hamartin and tuberin with polycystin-1. The Tsc1, Tsc2, and Pkd1 gene
products helped regulate primary cilia length in renal tubules, renal
epithelial cells, and precystic hepatic cholangiocytes. Consistent with
the function of cilia in modulating cell polarity, Bonnet et al. (2009)
found that many dividing precystic renal tubule and hepatic bile duct
cells from Tsc1, Tsc2, and Pkd1 heterozygous mice were highly
misoriented. Bonnet et al. (2009) proposed that defects in cell polarity
may underlie cystic disease associated with TSC1, TSC2, and PKD1, and
that targeting of this pathway may be of key therapeutic benefit.

Zhou et al. (2009) developed a polycystic kidney disease (PKD) mouse
model by knocking out Tsc1 in a subset of renal tubular cells. Extensive
renal cyst formation in these mice was accompanied by broadly elevated
mammalian target of rapamycin complex-1 (mTORC1; 607536) activity in
both cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous compartments. Cyst
development required mTORC1 activation, as low dosage of rapamycin
administration effectively blocked cyst formation. Disruption of Pten
(601728), an upstream regulator of Tsc1/Tsc2, in the same cells did not
lead to PKD, seemingly due to limited activation of mTORC1, suggesting
to the authors that PTEN may not be a major upstream regulator of
TSC/mTORC1 during early postnatal kidney development.

In mutant mice lacking the Tsc1 gene in oocytes, Adhikari et al. (2010)
showed that the entire pool of primordial follicles was activated
prematurely due to elevated mTORC1 activity in the oocyte, resulting in
follicular depletion in early adulthood and premature ovarian failure
(POF). Maintenance of the quiescence of primordial follicles required
synergistic, collaborative functioning of both Tsc1 and Pten, and these
2 molecules suppressed follicular activation through distinct ways.
Adhikari et al. (2010) concluded that Tsc/mTORC1 signaling and PTEN/PI3K
(see 171834) signaling synergistically regulate the dormancy and
activation of primordial follicles, and together ensure the proper
length of female reproductive life.

Tsai et al. (2012) showed that both heterozygous and homozygous loss of
Tsc1 in mouse cerebellar Purkinje cells results in autistic-like
behaviors, including abnormal social interaction, repetitive behavior,
and vocalizations, in addition to decreased Purkinje cell excitability.
Treatment of mutant mice with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin prevented the
pathologic and behavioral deficits. Tsai et al. (2012) concluded that
their findings demonstrated new roles for Tsc1 in Purkinje cell function
and defined a molecular basis for a cerebellar contribution to cognitive
disorders such as autism.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, 4-BP DEL, 2105AAAG

Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) found a 4-bp deletion in exon 15 of the
TSC1 gene (2105delAAAG) in 6 apparently unrelated individuals with
tuberous sclerosis (191100). Four were familial and 2 were sporadic. In
2 familial cases with the deletion and a sporadic case, haplotype
analysis using flanking markers confirmed an independent origin of the 3
mutations.

.0002
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, LEU250TER

In a patient with tuberous sclerosis-1 (191100), van Slegtenhorst et al.
(1997) identified a nonsense mutation in the TSC1 gene, a T-to-G
transversion of nucleotide 970 leading to termination at amino acid 250.

.0003
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, LYS585ARG

In patients with tuberous sclerosis-1 (191100), the only missense
mutation among the 32 mutations found by van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997)
in the TSC1 gene was an A-to-G transition of nucleotide 1981, leading to
a lys585-to-arg (K585R) amino acid change.

.0004
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, 2-BP DEL, 2122AC

Kwiatkowska et al. (1999) described a patient with severe tuberous
sclerosis (191100) in whom a mutated TSC1 allele was present in only
one-third of leukocytes and in different proportions in other tissues.
The case illustrated the importance of considering mosaicism and the
limitation of molecular diagnostic methods. The infant girl was born to
young healthy parents. Her development was normal until the age of 18
months, when myoclonic seizures occurred. Although the seizures stopped
with corticotropin therapy, the child subsequently learned few
additional words and withdrew from interaction with her parents and
others. At the age of 12 years, she began to have absence seizures.
Evaluation revealed a normal body habitus but limited activity and
diminished social interaction. Formal testing showed an IQ score of less
than 40. Several angiofibromas were present in the malar regions of the
face. MRI and CT of the brain showed several calcified subependymal
nodules, 2 large cortical tubers (one of which was calcified), and many
smaller cortical tubers. Results of renal ultrasonography,
echocardiography, and retinal examination were all normal. In exon 15 of
the TSC1 gene, a 2-bp deletion, 2122delAC, was found. This deletion
changed the TSC1 protein sequence after amino acid residue 634 and
truncated it at residue 685; in contrast, the normal TSC1 protein has
1164 residues. DNA from urine and hair roots formed heteroduplexes,
indicating that they contained the mutant allele. However, a sample of
buccal-mucosa DNA had no heteroduplex product, suggesting that the
mutant allele was absent in that sample.

.0005
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, 23-BP DUP

Smith and Sperling (1999) reported the results of mutation analysis in a
sporadic case of tuberous sclerosis (191100) first identified in
intrauterine life on the basis of the presence of cardiac rhabdomyomas.
Postnatally, this infant was also found to have subependymal nodules on
brain computed tomographic scan. Hypomelanotic macules were not detected
neonatally or at 12 months of age. The specific mutation identified in
this patient was duplication of a 23-bp segment of DNA between two 9-bp
repeated sequence elements within exon 15 of the TSC1 gene. These repeat
elements were located between nucleotides 1892 and 1900 and between
nucleotides 1915 and 1923. Smith and Sperling (1999) considered it
likely that the presence of these 2 repeated elements predisposed to
misalignment of DNA strands and unequal crossing-over. The mechanism of
origin of rhabdomyomas in tuberous sclerosis was reviewed. Loss of
heterozygosity in the tuberous sclerosis gene regions had been reported
in cardiac rhabdomyomas; however, these lesions are self limiting in
their growth. The basis for this self-limiting proliferation was not
clear. One interesting postulation was that cardiac rhabdomyomas may be
due to delay or failure of apoptosis which occurs as part of the normal
remodeling process in the heart.

.0006
LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS
TSC1, CYS165TER

In a Japanese patient with isolated pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis
(LAM; 606690), Sato et al. (2002) identified a C-to-A transversion at
nucleotide 716 in exon 6 of the TSC1 gene, resulting in a cys165-to-ter
mutation. Complete inactivation of the TSC1 gene concordant with the
Knudson tumor suppressor model (Knudson, 1971) was observed in this
patient, who had a TSC1 germline mutation and TSC1 LOH for 2 chromosome
9 markers, D9S149 and D9S1198. Since there was a germline mutation in
this case, the isolated pulmonary LAM could be considered
monosymptomatic TSC; however, the patient had no clinical features
characteristic of TSC.

.0007
FOCAL CORTICAL DYSPLASIA OF TAYLOR, TYPE IIB
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1, INCLUDED
TSC1, HIS732TYR

Becker et al. (2002) showed that an amino acid change in residue 732 of
hamartin from histidine to tyrosine (H732Y) was present in 14 of 40
(35%) cases of focal cortical dysplasia of the Taylor balloon cell type
(see 607341) as compared with 2 of 200 (1%) controls. The change was
produced by a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2415 in exon 17 of the
TSC1 gene. Exon 17 was the site of a number of other polymorphisms
associated with focal cortical dysplasia, as were exons 14 and 22. The
H732Y mutation had been previously observed at low frequencies in
tuberous sclerosis (191100) and in unaffected individuals (Jones et al.,
1997; van Slegtenhorst et al., 1999). Becker et al. (2002) interpreted
the change and others as germline polymorphisms that predispose toward
the cerebral lesion when combined with LOH in the other allele. The
H732T substitution is located in a region of the hamartin protein
involved in the interaction domain with tuberin, the product of the TSC2
gene (191092).

.0008
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, MET224ARG

In 4 affected individuals from a family with tuberous sclerosis
(191100), Nellist et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 671T-G
transversion in the TSC1 gene, resulting in a met224-to-arg (M224R)
substitution. The proband had definite TSC with multiple shagreen
patches, hypomelanotic macules, ungual fibromas, dental pits, epilepsy
and severe mental disability. One parent and both siblings also
fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for definite TSC, including seizures,
cortical tubers, and below-average intelligence. All affected
individuals also carried a neutral 3103G-A polymorphism (gly1035 to ser;
G1035S) in cis with the M224R mutation. In vitro functional expression
studies showed that M224R-mutant protein did not decrease
phosphorylation of p70-S6K (608938), indicating constitutive activation
of the MTOR (FRAP1; 601231)-S6K pathway, whereas the G1035S variant and
wildtype protein reduced S6K phosphorylation. These findings indicated
that M224R mutation was responsible for the phenotype in this family.

.0009
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, LEU180PRO

In 5 affected individuals from a 3-generation family with tuberous
sclerosis (191100), Nellist et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous
539T-C transition in the TSC1 gene, resulting in a leu180-to-pro (L180P)
substitution. In vitro functional expression studies detected the mutant
protein at low levels and showed that the mutant protein did not inhibit
S6K (608938) phosphorylation.

REFERENCE 1. Adhikari, D.; Zheng, W.; Shen, Y.; Gorre, N.; Hamalainen, T.; Cooney,
A. J.; Huhtaniemi, I.; Lan, Z.-J.; Liu, K.: Tsc/mTORC1 signaling
in oocytes governs the quiescence and activation of primordial follicles. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 397-410, 2010.

2. Ali, J. B. M.; Sepp, T.; Ward, S.; Green, A. J.; Yates, J. R. W.
: Mutations in the TSC1 gene account for a minority of patients with
tuberous sclerosis. J. Med. Genet. 35: 969-972, 1998.

3. Astrinidis, A.; Senapedis, W.; Henske, E. P.: Hamartin, the tuberous
sclerosis complex 1 gene product, interacts with polo-like kinase
1 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15:
287-297, 2006.

4. Au, K. S.; Williams, A. T.; Roach, E. S.; Batchelor, L.; Sparagana,
S. P.; Delgado, M. R.; Wheless, J. W.; Baumgartner, J. E.; Roa, B.
B.; Wilson, C. M.; Smith-Knuppel, T. K.; Cheung, M.-Y. C.; Whittemore,
V. H.; King, T. M.; Northrup, H.: Genotype/phenotype correlation
in 325 individuals referred for a diagnosis of tuberous sclerosis
complex in the United States. Genet. Med. 9: 88-100, 2007.

5. Becker, A. J.; Urbach, H.; Scheffler, B.; Baden, T.; Normann, S.;
Lahl, R.; Pannek, H. W.; Tuxhorn, I.; Elger, C. E.; Schramm, J.; Wiestler,
O. D.; Blumcke, I.: Focal cortical dysplasia of Taylor's balloon
cell type: mutational analysis of the TSC1 gene indicates a pathogenic
relationship to tuberous sclerosis. Ann. Neurol. 52: 29-37, 2002.

6. Benit, P.; Kara-Mostefa, A.; Hadj-Rabia, S.; Munnich, A.; Bonnefont,
J.-P.: Protein truncation test for screening hamartin gene mutations
and report of new disease-causing mutations. Hum. Mutat. 14: 428-432,
1999.

7. Benvenuto, G.; Li, S.; Brown, S. J.; Braverman, R.; Vass, W. C.;
Cheadle, J. P.; Halley, D. J. J.; Sampson, J. R.; Wienecke, R.; DeClue,
J. E.: The tuberous sclerosis-1 (TSC1) gene product hamartin suppresses
cell growth and augments the expression of the TSC2 product tuberin
by inhibiting its ubiquitination. Oncogene 19: 6306-6316, 2000.

8. Bjornsson, J.; Short, M. P.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Henske, E. P.
: Tuberous sclerosis-associated renal cell carcinoma. Am. J. Path. 149:
1201-1208, 1996.

9. Bonnet, C. S.; Aldred, M.; von Ruhland, C.; Harris, R.; Sandford,
R.; Cheadle, J. P.: Defects in cell polarity underlie TSC and ADPKD-associated
cystogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2166-2176, 2009.

10. Carbonara, C.; Longa, L.; Grosso, E.; Borrone, C.; Garre, M. G.;
Brisigotti, M.; Migone, N.: 9q34 loss of heterozygosity in a tuberous
sclerosis astrocytoma suggests a growth suppressor-like activity also
for the TSC1 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1829-1832, 1994.

11. Carbonara, C.; Longa, L.; Grosso, E.; Mazzucco, G.; Borrone, C.;
Garre, M. L.; Brisigotti, M.; Filippi, G.; Scabar, A.; Giannotti,
A.; Falzoni, P.; Monga, G.; Garini, G.; Gabrielli, M.; Riegler, P.;
Danesino, C.; Ruggieri, M.; Magro, G.; Migone, N.: Apparent preferential
loss of heterozygosity at TSC2 over TSC1 chromosomal region in tuberous
sclerosis hamartomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 15: 18-25, 1996.

12. Cheadle, J. P.; Dobbie, L.; Idziaszczyk, S.; Hodges, A. K.; Smith,
A. J. H.; Sampson, J. R.; Young, J.: Genomic organization and comparative
analysis of the mouse tuberous sclerosis 1 (Tsc1) locus. Mammalian
Genome 11: 1135-1138, 2000.

13. Cheadle, J. P.; Reeve, M. P.; Sampson, J. R.; Kwiatkowski, D.
J.: Molecular genetic advances in tuberous sclerosis. Hum. Genet. 107:
97-114, 2000.

14. Choi, Y.-J.; Di Nardo, A.; Kramvis, I.; Meikle, L.; Kwiatkowski,
D. J.; Sahin, M.; He, X.: Tuberous sclerosis complex proteins control
axon formation. Genes Dev. 22: 2485-2495, 2008.

15. Dabora, S. L.; Jozwiak, S.; Franz, D. N.; Roberts, P. S.; Nieto,
A.; Chung, J.; Choy, Y.-S.; Reeve, M. P.; Thiele, E.; Egelhoff, J.
C.; Kasprzyk-Obara, J.; Domanska-Pakiela, D.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.:
Mutational analysis in a cohort of 224 tuberous sclerosis patients
indicates increased severity of TSC2, compared with TSC1, disease
in multiple organs. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 64-80, 2001.

16. DiBella, L. M.; Park, A.; Sun, Z.: Zebrafish Tsc1 reveals functional
interactions between the cilium and the TOR pathway. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 595-606, 2009.

17. Fukuhara, S.; Gutkind, J. S.: A new twist for the tumour suppressor
hamartin. Nature Cell Biol. 2: E76-E78, 2000.

18. Goorden, S. M. I.; van Woerden, G. M.; van der Weerd, L.; Cheadle,
J. P.; Elgersma, Y.: Cognitive deficits in Tsc1(+/-) mice in the
absence of cerebral lesions and seizures. Ann. Neurol. 62: 648-655,
2007.

19. Green, A. J.; Johnson, P. H.; Yates, J. R. W.: The tuberous sclerosis
gene on chromosome 9q34 acts as a growth suppressor. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 1833-1834, 1994.

20. Green, A. J.; Sepp, T.; Yates, J. R. W.: Clonality of tuberous
sclerosis hamartomas shown by non-random X-chromosome inactivation. Hum.
Genet. 97: 240-243, 1996.

21. Hartman, T. R.; Liu, D.; Zilfou, J. T.; Robb, V.; Morrison, T.;
Watnick, T.; Henske, E. P.: The tuberous sclerosis proteins regulate
formation of the primary cilium via a rapamycin-insensitive and polycystin
1-independent pathway. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 151-163, 2009.

22. Henske, E. P.; Scheithauer, B. W.; Short, M. P.; Wollmann, R.;
Nahmias, J.; Hornigold, N.; van Slegtenhorst, M.; Welsh, C. T.; Kwiatkowski,
D. J.: Allelic loss is frequent in tuberous sclerosis kidney lesions
but rare in brain lesions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 400-406, 1996.

23. Hodges, A. K.; Li, S.; Maynard, J.; Parry, L.; Braverman, R.;
Cheadle, J. P.; DeClue, J. E.; Sampson, J. R.: Pathological mutations
in TSC1 and TSC2 disrupt the interaction between hamartin and tuberin. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 2899-2905, 2001.

24. Inoki, K.; Li, Y.; Zhu, T.; Wu, J.; Guan, K.-L.: TSC2 is phosphorylated
and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling. Nature Cell
Biol. 4: 648-657, 2002.

25. Iyer, G. Hanrahan, A. J.; Milowsky, M. I.; Al-Ahmadie, H.; Scott,
S. N.; Janakiraman, M.; Pirun, M.; Sander, C.; Socci, N. D.; Ostrovnaya,
I.; Viale, A.; Heguy, A.; Peng, L.; Chan, T. A.; Bochner, B.; Bajorin,
D. F.; Berger, M. F.; Taylor, B. S.; Solit, D. B.: Genome sequencing
identifies a basis for everolimus sensitivity. Science 338: 221
only, 2012.

26. Jeganathan, D.; Fox, M. F.; Young, J. M.; Yates, J. R. W.; Osborne,
J. P.; Povey, S.: Nonsense-mediated RNA decay in the TSC1 gene suggests
a useful tool pre- and post-positional cloning. Hum. Genet. 111:
555-565, 2002.

27. Jones, A. C.; Daniells, C. E.; Snell, R. G.; Tachataki, M.; Idziaszczyk,
S. A.; Krawczak, M.; Sampson, J. R.; Cheadle, J. P.: Molecular genetic
and phenotypic analysis reveals differences between TSC1 and TSC2
associated familial and sporadic tuberous sclerosis. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 2155-2161, 1997.

28. Jones, A. C.; Shyamsundar, M. M.; Thomas, M. W.; Maynard, J.;
Idziaszczyk, S.; Tomkins, S.; Sampson, J. R.; Cheadle, J. P.: Comprehensive
mutation analysis of TSC1 and TSC2--and phenotypic correlations in
150 families with tuberous sclerosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1305-1315,
1999.

29. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

30. Kobayashi, T.; Minowa, O.; Sugitani, Y.; Takai, S.; Mitani, H.;
Kobayashi, E.; Noda, T.; Hino, O.: A germ-line Tsc1 mutation causes
tumor development and embryonic lethality that are similar, but not
identical to, those caused by Tsc2 mutation in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 98: 8762-8767, 2001.

31. Kwiatkowska, J.; Jozwiak, S.; Hall, F.; Henske, E. P.; Haines,
J. L.; McNamara, P.; Braiser, J.; Wigowska-Sowinska, J.; Kasprzyk-Obara,
J.; Short, M. P.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: Comprehensive mutational analysis
of the TSC1 gene: observations on frequency of mutation, associated
features, and nonpenetrance. Ann. Hum. Genet. 62: 277-285, 1998.

32. Kwiatkowska, J.; Wigowska-Sowinska, J.; Napierala, D.; Slomski,
R.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: Mosaicism in tuberous sclerosis as a potential
cause of the failure of molecular diagnosis. New Eng. J. Med. 340:
703-707, 1999.

33. Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Zhang, H.; Bandura, J. L.; Heiberger, K. M.;
Glogauer, M.; el-Hashemite, N.; Onda, H.: A mouse model of TSC1 reveals
sex-dependent lethality from liver hemangiomas, and up-regulation
of p70S6 kinase activity in Tsc1 null cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
525-534, 2002.

34. Lamb, R. F.; Roy, C.; Diefenbach, T. J.; Vinters, H. V.; Johnson,
M. W.; Jay, D. G.; Hall, A.: The TSC1 tumour suppressor hamartin
regulates cell adhesion through ERM proteins and the GTPase Rho. Nature
Cell Biol. 2: 281-286, 2000.

35. Langkau, N.; Martin, N.; Brandt, R.; Zugge, K.; Quast, S.; Wiegele,
G.; Jauch, A.; Rehm, M.; Kuhl, A.; Mack-Vetter, M.; Zimmerhackl, L.
B.; Janssen, B.: TSC1 and TSC2 mutations in tuberous sclerosis, the
associated phenotypes and a model to explain observed TSC1/TSC2 frequency
ratios. Europ. J. Pediat. 161: 393-402, 2002.

36. Mayer, K.; Ballhausen, W.; Rott, H.-D.: Mutation screening of
the entire coding regions of the TSC1 and the TSC2 gene with the protein
truncation test (PTT) identifies frequent splicing defects. Hum.
Mutat. 14: 401-411, 1999.

37. Meikle, L.; McMullen, J. R.; Sherwood, M. C.; Lader, A. S.; Walker,
V.; Chan, J. A.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: A mouse model of cardiac rhabdomyoma
generated by loss of Tsc1 in ventricular myocytes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
429-435, 2005.

38. Miloloza, A.; Rosner, M.; Nellist, M.; Halley, D.; Bernaschek,
G.; Hengstschlager, M.: The TSC1 gene product, hamartin, negatively
regulates cell proliferation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1721-1727, 2000.

39. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

40. Nellist, M.; van den Heuvel, D.; Schluep, D.; Exalto, C.; Goedbloed,
M.; Maat-Kievit, A.; van Essen, T.; van Spaendonck-Zwarts, K.; Jansen,
F.; Helderman, P.; Bartalini, G.; Vierimaa, O.; Penttinen, M.; van
den Ende, J.; van den Ouweland, A.; Halley, D.: Missense mutations
to the TSC1 gene cause tuberous sclerosis complex. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 17: 319-328, 2009.

41. Niida, Y.; Lawrence-Smith, N.; Banwell, A.; Hammer, E.; Lewis,
J.; Beauchamp, R. L.; Sims, K.; Ramesh, V.; Ozelius, L.: Analysis
of both TSC1 and TSC2 for germline mutations in 126 unrelated patients
with tuberous sclerosis. Hum. Mutat. 14: 412-422, 1999.

42. Niida, Y.; Stemmer-Rachamimov, A. O.; Logrip, M.; Tapon, D.; Perez,
R.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Sims, K.; MacCollin, M.; Louis, D. N.; Ramesh,
V.: Survey of somatic mutations in tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)
hamartomas suggests different genetic mechanisms for pathogenesis
of TSC lesions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 493-503, 2001.

43. Ozcan, U.; Ozcan, L.; Yilmaz, E.; Duvel, K.; Sahin, M.; Manning,
B. D.; Hotamisligil, G. S.: Loss of the tuberous sclerosis complex
tumor suppressors triggers the unfolded protein response to regulate
insulin signaling and apoptosis. Molec. Cell 29: 541-551, 2008.

44. Park, K. K.; Liu, K.; Hu, Y.; Smith, P. D.; Wang, C.; Cai. B.;
Xu, B.; Connolly, L.; Kramvis, I.; Sahin, M.; He, Z.: Promoting axon
regeneration in the adult CNS by modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322:
963-966, 2008.

45. Potter, C. J.; Huang, H.; Xu, T.: Drosophila Tsc1 functions with
Tsc2 to antagonize insulin signaling in regulating cell growth, cell
proliferation, and organ size. Cell 105: 357-368, 2001.

46. Povey, S.; Burley, M. W.; Attwood, J.; Benham, F.; Hunt, D.; Jeremiah,
S. J.; Franklin, D.; Gillett, G.; Malas, S.; Robson, E. B.; Tippett,
P.; Edwards, J. H.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Super, M.; Mueller, R.; Fryer,
A.; Clarke, A.; Webb, D.; Osborne, J.: Two loci for tuberous sclerosis:
one on 9q34 and one on 16p13. Ann. Hum. Genet. 58: 107-127, 1994.

47. Sancak, O.; Nellist, M.; Goedbloed, M.; Elfferich, P.; Wouters,
C.; Maat-Kievit, A.; Zonnenberg, B.; Verhoef, S.; Halley, D.; van
den Ouweland, A.: Mutational analysis of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes
in a diagnostic setting: genotype-phenotype correlations and comparison
of diagnostic DNA techniques in tuberous sclerosis complex. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 13: 731-741, 2005.

48. Sato, T.; Seyama, K.; Fujii, H.; Maruyama, H.; Setoguchi, Y.;
Iwakami, S.; Fukuchi, Y.; Hino, O.: Mutation analysis of the TSC1
and TSC2 genes in Japanese patients with pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis. J.
Hum. Genet. 47: 20-28, 2002.

49. Sepp, T.; Yates, J. R. W.; Green, A. J.: Loss of heterozygosity
in tuberous sclerosis hamartomas. J. Med. Genet. 33: 962-964, 1996.

50. Smith, M.; Sperling, D.: Novel 23-base-pair duplication mutation
in TSC1 exon 15 in an infant presenting with cardiac rhabdomyomas. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 84: 346-349, 1999.

51. Tapon, N.; Ito, N.; Dickson, B. J.; Treisman, J. E.; Hariharan,
I. K.: The Drosophila tuberous sclerosis complex gene homologs restrict
cell growth and cell proliferation. Cell 105: 345-355, 2001.

52. Tsai, P. T.; Hull, C.; Chu, Y.; Greene-Colozzi, E.; Sadowski,
A. R.; Leech, J. M.; Steinberg, J.; Crawley, J. N.; Regehr, W. G.;
Sahin, M.: Autistic-like behaviour and cerebellar dysfunction in
Purkinje cell Tsc1 mutant mice. Nature 488: 647-651, 2012.

53. Uhlmann, E. J.; Apicelli, A. J.; Baldwin, R. L.; Burke, S. P.;
Bajenaru, M. L.; Onda, H.; Kwiatkowski, D.; Gutmann, D. H.: Heterozygosity
for the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) gene products results in
increased astrocyte numbers and decreased p27-Kip1 expression in TSC2
+/- cells. Oncogene 21: 4050-4059, 2002.

54. Uhlmann, E. J.; Wong, M.; Baldwin, R. L.; Bajenaru, M. L.; Onda,
H.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Yamada, K.; Gutmann, D. H.: Astrocyte-specific
TSC1 conditional knockout mice exhibit abnormal neuronal organization
and seizures. Ann. Neurol. 52: 285-296, 2002.

55. van Slegtenhorst, M.; de Hoogt, R.; Hermans, C.; Nellist, M.;
Janssen, B.; Verhoef, S.; Lindhout, D.; van den Ouweland, A.; Halley,
D.; Young, J.; Burley, M.; Jeremiah, S.; and 29 others: Identification
of the tuberous sclerosis gene TSC1 on chromosome 9q34. Science 277:
805-808, 1997.

56. van Slegtenhorst, M.; Nellist, M.; Nagelkerken, B.; Cheadle, J.;
Snell, R.; van den Ouweland, A.; Reuser, A.; Sampson, J.; Halley,
D.; van der Sluijs, P.: Interaction between hamartin and tuberin,
the TSC1 and TSC2 gene products. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1053-1057,
1998.

57. van Slegtenhorst, M.; Verhoef, S.; Tempelaars, A.; Bakker, L.;
Wang, Q.; Wessels, M.; Bakker, R.; Nellist, M.; Lindhout, D.; Halley,
D.; van den Ouweland, A.: Mutational spectrum of the TSC1 gene in
a cohort of 225 tuberous sclerosis complex patients: no evidence for
genotype-phenotype correlation. J. Med. Genet. 36: 285-289, 1999.

58. Wilson, C.; Idziaszczyk, S.; Parry, L.; Guy, C.; Griffiths, D.
F. R.; Lazda, E.; Bayne, R. A. L.; Smith, A. J. H.; Sampson, J. R.;
Cheadle, J. P.: A mouse model of tuberous sclerosis 1 showing background
specific early post-natal mortality and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 1839-1850, 2005.

59. Yamashita, Y.; Ono, J.; Okada, S.; Wataya-Kaneda, M.; Yoshikawa,
K.; Nishizawa, M.; Hirayama, Y.; Kobayashi, E.; Seyama, K.; Hino,
O.: Analysis of all exons of TSC1 and TSC2 genes for germline mutations
in Japanese patients with tuberous sclerosis: report of 10 mutations. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 90: 123-126, 2000.

60. Young, J. M.; Burley, M. W.; Jeremiah, S. J.; Jeganathan, D.;
Ekong, R.; Osborne, J. P.; Povey, S.: A mutation screen of the TSC1
gene reveals 26 protein truncating mutations and 1 splice site mutation
in a panel of 79 tuberous sclerosis patients. Ann. Hum. Genet. 62:
203-213, 1998.

61. Zeng, L.-H.; Xu, L.; Gutmann, D. H.; Wong, M.: Rapamycin prevents
epilepsy in a mouse model of tuberous sclerosis complex. Ann. Neurol. 63:
444-453, 2008.

62. Zhou, J.; Brugarolas, J.; Parada, L. F.: Loss of Tsc1, but not
Pten, in renal tubular cells causes polycystic kidney disease by activating
mTORC1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4428-4441, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/14/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/3/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/11/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/6/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/4/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/11/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2007
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 7/29/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/6/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/18/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/14/2001
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 9/12/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/13/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/15/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/2000

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
alopez: 11/5/2012
terry: 11/2/2012
alopez: 9/19/2012
terry: 9/18/2012
wwang: 1/14/2011
alopez: 10/22/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
wwang: 3/12/2010
terry: 3/3/2010
joanna: 11/23/2009
mgross: 11/13/2009
terry: 11/11/2009
wwang: 11/3/2009
terry: 10/23/2009
wwang: 10/21/2009
ckniffin: 9/24/2009
wwang: 8/13/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
carol: 6/19/2009
wwang: 4/15/2009
ckniffin: 4/6/2009
alopez: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/30/2008
mgross: 11/10/2008
terry: 11/7/2008
wwang: 10/28/2008
mgross: 4/28/2008
wwang: 4/14/2008
ckniffin: 4/4/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 12/28/2007
terry: 12/11/2007
terry: 8/9/2007
alopez: 8/2/2007
alopez: 8/1/2007
terry: 7/25/2007
carol: 8/29/2005
mgross: 9/23/2004
tkritzer: 8/27/2004
carol: 7/29/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
joanna: 3/19/2004
carol: 1/28/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 12/4/2002
terry: 11/27/2002
tkritzer: 11/14/2002
alopez: 11/12/2002
carol: 11/12/2002
ckniffin: 11/6/2002
cwells: 10/3/2002
tkritzer: 9/23/2002
tkritzer: 9/19/2002
tkritzer: 9/18/2002
cwells: 8/14/2002
mgross: 2/14/2002
terry: 2/11/2002
mcapotos: 9/18/2001
mcapotos: 9/14/2001
carol: 9/12/2001
mgross: 8/13/2001
mgross: 5/7/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/23/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
terry: 12/15/2000
alopez: 10/19/2000
alopez: 10/9/2000
alopez: 9/25/2000

186760	TITLE *186760 ANTIGEN CD28; CD28
;;T-CELL ANTIGEN CD28;;
Tp44
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD28 costimulation is essential for CD4 (186940)-positive T-cell
proliferation, survival, interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) production, and
T-helper type-2 (Th2) development.

CLONING

Monoclonal antibodies recognize 3 antigens, CD3 (186790), CD2 (186990),
and CD28 (Tp44), that cause human T cells to proliferate in the presence
of phorbol esters. Whereas CD3 appeared to be involved in transduction
of the signal generated by antigen binding to the T-cell receptor, the
role of the CD2 and CD28 antigens in physiologic proliferation was not
understood. Aruffo and Seed (1987) isolated a cDNA clone encoding CD28
by a simple and highly efficient cloning strategy based on transient
expression. In COS cells the CD28 encodes a highly glycosylated membrane
protein with homology to the immunoglobulin superfamily.

Magistrelli et al. (1999) identified 3 CD28 splice variants in
nonactivated T cells: CD28a, which lacks exon 3, leading to loss of the
transmembrane domain; CD28b, which lacks most of the 3-prime end of exon
2 and exon 3; and CD28c, which lacks exon 2 and exon 3. CD28b and CD28c
were expressed at a low level relative to CD28a. Magistrelli et al.
(1999) suggested that resting T cells may constitutively express both
membrane and soluble CD28, potentially regulating the T-cell response at
different levels.

GENE FUNCTION

Harada et al. (2003) noted that the CD28 cytoplasmic domain contains a
YMNM motif, which binds PI3K (see 601232) and GRB2 (108355), whereas the
corresponding region of ICOS (604558) contains a YMFM motif, which binds
the former but not the latter. Harada et al. (2003) hypothesized that
the reason CD28 signaling, but not ICOS signaling, induces IL2
production is its ability to bind GRB2. To test this hypothesis, they
generated mutant ICOS containing the YMNM motif of CD28. This alteration
allowed ICOS to activate the IL2 promoter, and further analysis showed
that GRB2 binding to ICOS led to activation of the NFAT (see 600490)/AP1
(165160) site in the IL2 promoter. Harada et al. (2003) concluded that
the difference of a single amino acid defines a functional difference
between CD28- and ICOS-mediated costimulatory signals.

By a comprehensive structure-function analysis of the mouse Cd28
cytoplasmic tail, Andres et al. (2004) found that Il2 production and
T-cell proliferation did not require a particular cytoplasmic domain.
However, Il4 (147780) production was driven by cooperative activity of
at least 2 structural motifs, a pro-rich motif at residues 187 to 190
and tyr residues at positions 170 and 188, within the Cd28 cytoplasmic
tail. A gene complementation approach determined that Pdk1 (605213), but
not Itk (186973) or Akt (164730), in an Akt-independent pathway,
mediated a component of the Il4 signal induced by Cd28.

CTLA4 shares 2 ligands, CD80 (112203) and CD86 (601020), with a
stimulatory receptor, CD28. Qureshi et al. (2011) showed that CTLA4 can
capture its ligands from opposing cells by a process of
trans-endocytosis. After removal, these costimulatory ligands are
degraded inside CTLA4-expressing cells, resulting in impaired
costimulation via CD28. Acquisition of CD86 from antigen-presenting
cells is stimulated by T cell receptor engagement and observed in vitro
and in vivo. Qureshi et al. (2011) concluded that their data revealed a
mechanism of immune regulation in which CTLA4 acts as an effector
molecule to inhibit CD28 costimulation by the cell-extrinsic depletion
of ligands, accounting for many of the features of the CD28-CTLA4
system.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lee et al. (1990) found that the CD28 gene is present in single copy and
is organized into 4 exons, each of which defines a functional domain of
the predicted protein. Posttranslational processing appears to result in
variant isotypes of CD28 with potentially different physiologic roles on
the cell surface.

MAPPING

Using in situ hybridization on prometaphase cells, Lafage-Pochitaloff et
al. (1990) demonstrated that the CD28 gene maps to 2q33-q34. The CTLA4
gene (123890) maps to the same region. Both are members of the Ig
superfamily, where they define a subgroup of membrane-bound single V
domains. The chromosomal proximity of CD28 and CTLA4 and their close
structural relationship suggest that these 2 genes resulted from
duplication of a common evolutionary precursor and that they share some
functional properties. By means of intersubspecific crosses, Howard et
al. (1991) mapped the Cd28 gene to the proximal part of mouse chromosome
1. By study of yeast artificial chromosomes (YAC), Buonavista et al.
(1992) demonstrated that the CD28 and CTLA4 genes were in the same
fragment, indicating that they were separated by only 25 to 150 kb. A
CpG island was found between these genes.

ANIMAL MODEL

CD28 undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation after interacting with its
ligand, B7 (CD80; 112203). Phosphorylation of tyr173 (tyr170 in mouse)
in the cytoplasmic domain of CD28 allows the recruitment of signaling
proteins such as phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (see PIK3R1; 171833),
GRB2 (108355), and GADS (GRAP2; 604518) via their SH2 domains. Okkenhaug
et al. (2001) reconstituted CD28 knockout mice with transgenes encoding
wildtype Cd28 or Cd28 carrying a tyr170-to-phe mutation. Mutant Cd28 did
not bind to the SH2 domain of PIK3R1, resulting in diminished protein
kinase B (164730) activation. Mutant Cd28 was able to prevent the
induction of anergy, to promote T-cell proliferation and IL2 secretion,
and to provide B-cell help, but was unable to upregulate expression of
the prosurvival protein BCLXL (600039). The defect in BCLXL upregulation
was correlated with increased susceptibility of the T cells to gamma
radiation. Okkenhaug et al. (2001) suggested that other tyrosine
residues or asn172 may be critical to functions not affected by the
tyr170-to-phe mutation.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Lesslauer et al. (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Andres, P. G.; Howland, K. C.; Nirula, A.; Kane, L. P.; Barron,
L.; Dresnek, D.; Sadra, A.; Imboden, J.; Weiss, A.; Abbas, A. K.:
Distinct regions in the CD28 cytoplasmic domain are required for T
helper type 2 differentiation. Nature Immun. 5: 435-442, 2004.

2. Aruffo, A.; Seed, B.: Molecular cloning of a CD28 cDNA by a high-efficiency
COS cell expression system. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 8573-8577,
1987.

3. Buonavista, N.; Balzano, C.; Pontarotti, P.; Le Paslier, D.; Golstein,
P.: Molecular linkage of the human CTLA4 and CD28 Ig-superfamily
genes in yeast artificial chromosomes. Genomics 13: 856-861, 1992.

4. Harada, Y.; Ohgai, D.; Watanabe, R.; Okano, K.; Koiwai, O.; Tanabe,
K.; Toma, H.; Altman, A.; Abe, R.: A single amino acid alteration
in cytoplasmic domain determines IL-2 promoter activation by ligation
of CD28 but not inducible costimulator (ICOS). J. Exp. Med. 197:
257-262, 2003.

5. Howard, T. A.; Rochelle, J. M.; Seldin, M. F.: Cd28 and Ctla-4,
two related members of the Ig supergene family, are tightly linked
on proximal mouse chromosome 1. Immunogenetics 33: 74-76, 1991.

6. Lafage-Pochitaloff, M.; Costello, R.; Couez, D.; Simonetti, J.;
Mannoni, P.; Mawas, C.; Olive, D.: Human CD28 and CTLA-4 Ig superfamily
genes are located on chromosome 2 at bands q33-q34. Immunogenetics 31:
198-201, 1990.

7. Lee, K. P.; Taylor, C.; Petryniak, B.; Turka, L. A.; June, C. H.;
Thompson, C. B.: The genomic organization of the CD28 gene: implications
for the regulation of CD28 mRNA expression and heterogeneity. J.
Immun. 145: 344-352, 1990.

8. Lesslauer, W.; Gmunder, H.; Bohlen, P.: Purification and N-terminal
amino acid sequence of the human T90/44 (CD28) antigen. Immunogenetics 27:
388-391, 1988.

9. Magistrelli, G.; Jeannin, P.; Elson, G.; Gauchat, J.-F.; NGuyen,
T. N.; Bonnefoy, J.-Y.; Delneste, Y.: Identification of three alternatively
spliced variants of human CD28 mRNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 259:
34-37, 1999.

10. Okkenhaug, K.; Wu, L.; Garza, K. M.; La Rose, J.; Khoo, W.; Odermatt,
B.; Mak, T. W.; Ohashi, P. S.; Rottapel, R.: A point mutation in
CD28 distinguishes proliferative signals from survival signals. Nature
Immun. 2: 325-332, 2001.

11. Qureshi, O. S.; Zheng, Y.; Nakamura, K.; Attridge, K.; Manzotti,
C.; Schmidt, E. M.; Baker, J.; Jeffery, L. E.; Kaur, S.; Briggs, Z.;
Hou, T. Z.; Futter, C. E.; Anderson, G.; Walker, L. S. K.; Sansom,
D. M.: Trans-endocytosis of CD80 and CD86: a molecular basis for
the cell-extrinsic function of CTLA-4. Science 332: 600-603, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 06/21/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/13/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/14/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/5/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/10/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/10/1987

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2011
wwang: 9/23/2009
carol: 1/19/2006
mgross: 1/13/2006
mgross: 10/14/2004
alopez: 5/3/2004
mgross: 4/5/2004
mgross: 7/10/2001
mark: 8/25/1997
carol: 7/21/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/16/1991
carol: 10/10/1990
supermim: 9/28/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

604585	TITLE *604585 NUCLEAR BODY PROTEIN SP100; SP100
;;NUCLEAR ANTIGEN SP100; SP100;;
SPECKLED, 100-KD
SP100B, INCLUDED;;
LYSP100B, INCLUDED;;
SP100-HMG, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The PML/SP100 nuclear bodies (NBs), also referred to as Kr-bodies, ND10,
or PODs, represent a subnuclear 'organelle' whose integrity is
compromised in promyelocytic leukemia (PML). NBs contain the SP100
autoantigen as well as the PML protein (102578) that is part of the
leukemogenic PML-RARA (180240) fusion protein associated with acute PML.

To characterize further the 95- to 100-kD SP100 autoantigen, Szostecki
et al. (1990) isolated overlapping cDNA fragments from HeLa, placenta,
and liver cDNA libraries and obtained a full-length SP100 cDNA. SP100
encodes a 480-amino acid acidic (pI 4.7) protein with multiple
phosphorylation sites for casein kinase type II. Szostecki et al. (1990)
found that anti-SP100 autoantibodies occur predominantly in patients
with primary biliary cirrhosis (109720). The authors noted sequence
similarities with alpha-1 and alpha-2 membrane-associated regions of
human and nonhuman MHC class I antigens.

GENE FUNCTION

Using SP100 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid system and by GST 'pull down'
experiments, Seeler et al. (1998) showed that SP100 complexes with
members of the HP1 family of nonhistone chromosomal proteins (e.g.,
CBX5, 604478). A variant of SP100, termed SP100B by the authors,
contains additional 3-prime sequence encoding a 688-amino acid protein.
A splice variant of SP100B, termed SP100-HMG, is joined to an 81-amino
acid HMG1 (163905)-like peptide by a 14-amino acid bridge. The HMG1-like
domain is 87% identical and 93% similar to HMG1. SP100-HMG has the
potential to be a DNA-binding protein. All 3 variants, SP100, SP100B,
and SP100-HMG, colocalize with HP1 in NBs, suggesting that the
N-terminal portion of SP100 is responsible for the interaction. HP1
expression is enhanced when SP100 synthesis is induced by interferon.

By Northern blot analysis, Dent et al. (1996) found that SP100B, which
they called LYSP100, is expressed only in lymphoid tissues (spleen,
tonsil, and thymus), mature B-cell lines, and some T-cell lines, but not
in brain, liver, muscle, or nonlymphoid cell lines. They noted that
SP100 expression is widespread. By confocal immunofluorescence
microscopy, they determined that a minority of the nuclear dots for
SP100B overlapped with SP100 and PML, whereas most localized to another
class of subnuclear structures, which they termed LANDs
(LYSP100-associated nuclear domains), which are morphologically and
spatially distinct from PML NBs.

REFERENCE 1. Dent, A. L.; Yewdell, J.; Puvion-Dutilleul, F.; Koken, M. H.; de
The, H.; Staudt, L. M.: LYSP100 associated nuclear domains (LANDs):
description of a new class of subnuclear structures and their relationship
to PML nuclear bodies. Blood 88: 1423-1426, 1996.

2. Seeler, J. S.; Marchio, A.; Sitterlin, D.; Transy, C.; Dejean,
A.: Interaction of SP100 with HP1 proteins: a link between the promyelocytic
leukemia-associated nuclear bodies and the chromatin compartment. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 7316-7321, 1998.

3. Szostecki, C.; Guldner, H. H.; Netter, H. J.; Will, H.: Isolation
and characterization of cDNA encoding a human nuclear antigen predominantly
recognized by autoantibodies from patients with primary biliary cirrhosis. J.
Immun. 145: 4338-4347, 1990.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/21/2000

EDITED alopez: 05/24/2006
mgross: 4/22/2004
carol: 2/22/2000

600355	TITLE *600355 NEURONAL APOPTOSIS INHIBITORY PROTEIN; NAIP
;;BACULOVIRAL IAP REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; BIRC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In a search for the gene causing spinal muscular atrophy (SMA; 253300),
Roy et al. (1995) isolated a gene on chromosome 5q13.1, of which the
first 2 coding exons were deleted in approximately 67% of type I SMA
chromosomes compared with 2% of non-SMA chromosomes. One model of SMA
pathogenesis invokes an inappropriate persistence of motor neuron
apoptosis, which is a normally occurring phenomenon in development.
Consistent with this hypothesis, the novel gene was labeled 'neuronal
apoptosis inhibitory protein' (NAIP) and its function was supported by
the finding that it contains domains with sequence similarity to IAPs,
baculovirus proteins that inhibit virally induced insect cell apoptosis.
The presence of a variable number of copies of truncated and internally
deleted versions of the NAIP gene (pseudogenes) was thought to be a
possible factor in the genesis of SMA. This situation was compared to
that of the genes on 6p that code for steroid 21-hydroxylase (CYP21)
deficiency (201910); through the processes of unequal crossing-over or
gene conversion, mutations in the functional CYP21 gene (613815) can
result. Roy et al. (1995) raised the possibility that NAIP functions in
concert with SMN (600354) mutations in causing spinal muscular atrophy.

GENE FUNCTION

Liston et al. (1996) demonstrated that expression of NAIP in mammalian
cells inhibits apoptosis induced by a variety of signals.

NAIP, HIAP1 (601721), HIAP2 (601712), XIAP (300079), BIRC5 (603352), and
BIRC6 (605638) are members of the mammalian inhibitors of apoptosis
family and contain an N-terminal domain with 1 to 3 imperfect repeats of
an approximately 65-amino acid domain named the baculovirus IAP repeat
(BIR) motif. Gotz et al. (2000) identified 6 mouse Naip genes which were
expressed in a broad range of tissues. Using a neurite outgrowth assay
in rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells, they observed that Naip
overexpression impaired nerve growth factor (NGF)-induced neurite
outgrowth. The BIR motifs of Naip (residues 1-345) were not required for
this effect. However, the BIR domains of Naip were essential to prevent
apoptosis in PC12 cells after NGF deprivation or tumor necrosis
factor-alpha receptor (TNFAR; 191190) stimulation. Expression of
full-length but not BIR-deleted Naip protected against cell death. This
correlated with reduced activity of the cell death effector protease,
caspase-3 (600636), in lysates of Naip-PC12 cells. The authors
hypothesized that dysregulation of cellular differentiation and/or
caspase suppression may contribute to motoneuron dysfunction and cell
death in spinal muscular atrophy where NAIP is mutated.

Kofoed and Vance (2011) showed in mice that different NAIP paralogs
determine the specificity of the NLRC4 (606831) inflammasome for
distinct bacterial ligands. In particular, they found that activation of
endogenous NLRC4 by bacterial PrgJ requires NAIP2, a previously
uncharacterized member of the NAIP gene family, whereas NAIP5 and NAIP6
activate NLRC4 specifically in response to bacterial flagellin. Kofoed
and Vance (2011) dissected the biochemical mechanism underlying the
requirement for NAIP proteins by use of a reconstituted NLRC4
inflammasome system. They found that NAIP proteins control
ligand-dependent oligomerization of NLRC4 and that the NAIP2-NLRC4
complex physically associates with PrgJ but not flagellin, whereas
NAIP5-NLRC4 associates with flagellin but not PrgJ. Kofoed and Vance
(2011) concluded that their results identified NAIPs as immune sensor
proteins in the mouse and provided biochemical evidence for a simple
receptor-ligand model for activation of the NAIP-NLRC4 inflammasomes.

Zhao et al. (2011) showed that NAIP5, required for Legionella
pneumophila replication in mouse macrophages, is a universal component
of the flagellin-NLCR4 pathway. NAIP5 directly and specifically
interacted with flagellin, which determined the inflammasome stimulation
activities of different bacterial flagellins. NAIP5 engagement by
flagellin promoted a physical NAIP5-NLRC4 association, rendering full
reconstitution of a flagellin-responsive NLRC4 inflammasome in
nonmacrophage cells. The related NAIP2 functioned analogously to NAIP5,
serving as a specific inflammasome receptor for type III secretion
system (TTSS) rod proteins such as Salmonella PrgJ and Burkholderia
BsaK. Genetic analysis of Chromobacterium violaceum infection revealed
that the TTSS needle protein Cpr1 can stimulate NLRC4 inflammasome
activation in human macrophages. Similarly, Cpr1 is specifically
recognized by human NAIP, the sole NAIP family member in human. The
finding that NAIP proteins are inflammasome receptors for bacterial
flagellin and TTSS apparatus components further predicted that the
remaining NAIP family members may recognize other microbial products to
activate NLRC4 inflammasome-mediated innate immunity.

To identify CASP1 (147678) functions in vivo, von Moltke et al. (2012)
devised a strategy for cytosolic delivery of bacterial flagellin, a
specific ligand for the NAIP5/NLRC4 inflammasome. Von Moltke et al.
(2012) showed that systemic inflammasome activation by flagellin leads
to a loss of vascular fluid into the intestine and peritoneal cavity,
resulting in rapid (less than 30 minutes) death in mice. This unexpected
response depends on the inflammasome components NAIP5, NLRC4, and CASP1,
but is independent of the production of IL1-beta (147720) or IL18
(600953). Instead, inflammasome activation results, within minutes, in
an 'eicosanoid storm'--a pathologic release of signaling lipids,
including prostaglandins and leukotrienes, that rapidly initiate
inflammation and vascular fluid loss. Mice deficient in cyclooxygenase-1
(COX1, PTGS1; 176805), a critical enzyme in prostaglandin biosynthesis,
are resistant to these rapid pathologic effects of systemic inflammasome
activation by either flagellin or anthrax lethal toxin.
Inflammasome-dependent biosynthesis of eicosanoids is mediated by the
activation of cytosolic phospholipase A2 (see 172410) in resident
peritoneal macrophages, which are specifically primed for the production
of eicosanoids by high expression of eicosanoid biosynthetic enzymes.
Von Moltke et al. (2012) concluded that their results identified
eicosanoids as a previously unrecognized cell type-specific signaling
output of the inflammasome with marked physiologic consequences in vivo.

MAPPING

Roy et al. (1995) mapped the NAIP gene to chromosome 5q13.1. DiDonato et
al. (1997) mapped the mouse homolog of NAIP to chromosome 13 in a region
showing conserved synteny with human 5q13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Although NAIP deletions are more frequently observed in patients
affected by the acute form of SMA, it is not possible to establish an
unambiguous correlation between deletion size and clinical severity.
Novelli et al. (1997) investigated the effects of gender on the
association between NAIP gene deletion and disease severity. No
significant relationship between deletion size and clinical phenotype
was observed among male patients, whereas in females the absence of NAIP
was strongly associated with a severe phenotype (p less than 0.0001).
SMA I was found in 75.6% of females and only 52.5% of males lacking
NAIP. These results provided a possible molecular explanation for the
sex-dependent phenotypic variation observed in SMA patients.

ANIMAL MODEL

In inbred mouse strains, permissiveness to intracellular replication of
Legionella pneumophila is controlled by a single locus (Lgn1), which
maps to a region within distal chromosome 13 that contains multiple
copies of the Birc1 gene. Genomic BAC clones from the critical interval
were transferred into transgenic mice to complement functionally the
Lgn1-associated susceptibility of A/J mice to L. pneumophila. Diez et
al. (2003) found that 2 independent BAC clones that rescued
susceptibility had an overlapping region of 56 kb in which the entire
Lgn1 transcript must lie. The full-length transcript of Birc1e (also
called Naip5) is coded in this region. The results indicated a role for
Birc1e in macrophage resistance to L. pneumophila infection. BIRC1
proteins are members of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) family,
structurally defined by baculovirus inhibitor of apoptosis repeat (BIR)
domains implicated in protein-protein interactions. An antiapoptotic
effect of BIRC1 has been described. Induction of apoptosis seems to be
important for pathogenesis of L. pneumophila in human macrophages in
vitro.

Zamboni et al. (2006) noted that there are 14 amino acid differences in
Birc1e between A/J and C57Bl/6 mice. A/J macrophages permit more L.
pneumophila replication than C57Bl/6 macrophages. Zamboni et al. (2006)
found that Birc1e-expressing cells from C57Bl/6 mice, but not those from
A/J mice, responded to L. pneumophila infection and delivery of
bacterial molecules to the cytosol with Casp1 (147678)-dependent cell
death. Mutation analysis showed that the leucine-rich region of Birc1e
regulated Birc1e activation, Casp1 activation, and Il1b (147720)
secretion and required Ipaf (CARD12; 606831). Zamboni et al. (2006)
concluded that Birc1e is a nucleotide-binding
oligomerization-leucine-rich repeat protein involved in detection and
control of intracellular L. pneumophila.

REFERENCE 1. DiDonato, C. J.; Nadeau, J. H.; Simard, L. R.: The mouse neuronal
apoptosis inhibitory protein gene maps to a conserved syntenic region
of mouse chromosome 13. Mammalian Genome 8: 222 only, 1997.

2. Diez, E.; Lee, S.-H.; Gauthier, S.; Yaraghi, Z.; Tremblay, M.;
Vidal, S.; Gros, P.: Birc1e is the gene within the Lgn1 locus associated
with resistance to Legionella pneumophila. Nature Genet. 33: 55-60,
2003.

3. Gotz, R.; Karch, C.; Digby, M. R.; Troppmair, J.; Rapp, U. R.;
Sendtner, M.: The neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein suppresses
neuronal differentiation and apoptosis in PC12 cells. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 9: 2479-2489, 2000.

4. Kofoed, E. M.; Vance, R. E.: Innate immune recognition of bacterial
ligands by NAIPs determines inflammasome specificity. Nature 477:
592-595, 2011.

5. Liston, P.; Roy, N.; Tamai, K.; Lefebvre, C.; Baird, S.; Cherton-Horvat,
G.; Farahani, R.; McLean, M.; Ikeda, J.-E.; MacKenzie, A.; Korneluk,
R. G.: Suppression of apoptosis in mammalian cells by NAIP and a
related family of IAP genes. Nature 379: 349-353, 1996.

6. Novelli, G.; Semprini, S.; Capon, F.; Dallapiccola, B.: A possible
role of NAIP gene deletions in sex-related spinal muscular atrophy
phenotype variation. Neurogenetics 1: 29-30, 1997.

7. Roy, N.; Mahadevan, M. S.; McLean, M.; Shutler, G.; Yaraghi, Z.;
Farahani, R.; Baird, S.; Besner-Johnston, A.; Lefebvre, C.; Kang,
X.; Salih, M.; Aubry, H.; Tamai, K.; Guan, X.; Ioannou, P.; Crawford,
T. O.; de Jong, P. J.; Surh, L.; Ikeda, J.-E.; Korneluk, R. G.; MacKenzie,
A.: The gene for neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein is partially
deleted in individuals with spinal muscular atrophy. Cell 80: 167-178,
1995.

8. von Moltke, J.; Trinidad, N. J.; Moayeri, M.; Kintzer, A. F.; Wang,
S. B.; van Rooijen, N.; Brown, C. R.; Krantz, B. A.; Leppla, S. H.;
Gronert, K.; Vance, R. E.: Rapid induction of inflammatory lipid
mediators by the inflammasome in vivo. Nature 490: 107-111, 2012.

9. Zamboni, D. S.; Kobayashi, K. S.; Kohlsdorf, T.; Ogura, Y.; Long,
E. M.; Vance, R. E.; Kuida, K.; Mariathasan, S.; Dixit, V. M.; Flavell,
R. A.; Dietrich, W. F.; Roy, C. R.: The Birc1e cytosolic pattern-recognition
receptor contributes to the detection and control of Legionella pneumophila
infection. Nature Immun. 7: 318-325, 2006.

10. Zhao, Y.; Yang, J.; Shi, J.; Gong, Y.-N.; Lu, Q.; Xu, H.; Liu,
L.; Shao, F.: The NLRC4 inflammasome receptors for bacterial flagellin
and type III secretion apparatus. Nature 477: 596-600, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/24/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/16/2001
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 2/22/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/12/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/15/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/27/1995

EDITED alopez: 10/31/2012
terry: 10/24/2012
alopez: 3/9/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
alopez: 3/24/2011
mgross: 8/30/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
alopez: 12/18/2002
terry: 12/18/2002
carol: 2/12/2001
carol: 1/26/2001
mcapotos: 1/26/2001
mcapotos: 1/19/2001
mcapotos: 1/16/2001
mgross: 9/15/2000
alopez: 2/22/1999
terry: 9/12/1997
jenny: 4/15/1997
terry: 4/10/1997
mark: 10/8/1996
mark: 7/22/1996
mimadm: 9/23/1995
terry: 1/27/1995

602009	TITLE *602009 CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE, SUBUNIT VIa, POLYPEPTIDE 2; COX6A2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bachman et al. (1997) cloned the human gene for the heart- and striated
muscle-specific isoform of cytochrome oxidase subunit 6a from a
chromosome 16-enriched genomic library. They reported that the gene
encodes a 97-amino acid polypeptide, including the 12-amino acid
presequence. The gene, symbolized COX6AH by them, is organized on 3
exons spanning approximately 1 kb of genomic DNA. Bachman et al. (1997)
identified several transcription factor binding sites in the promoter
region of the gene and noted that the 5-prime flanking regions of COX6AH
are highly conserved among human, bovine, and rodent.

MAPPING

Using a human/rodent mapping panel, Bachman et al. (1997) mapped the
human COX6AH gene to chromosome 16. The murine localization on distal
chromosome 7 between D7Mit8 and D7Mit13 predicted the location of the
human gene in the region 16p11-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Bachman, N. J.; Riggs, P. K.; Siddiqui, N.; Makris, G. J.; Womack,
J. E.; Lomax, M. I.: Structure of the human gene (COX6A2) for the
heart/muscle isoform of cytochrome c oxidase subunit VIa and its chromosomal
location in humans, mice, and cattle. Genomics 42: 146-151, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 9/19/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/15/2010
alopez: 9/22/1997

