610428	TITLE *610428 CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE ASSEMBLY PROTEIN COX18; COX18
;;COX18, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
MITOCHONDRIAL COX18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

COX18 encodes a cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-assembly protein. The S.
cerevisiae Cox18 protein catalyzes the insertion of the Cox2 (MTCO2;
516040) C-terminal tail into the mitochondrial inner membrane, an
intermediate step in the assembly of complex IV of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain (Sacconi et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using database analysis with S. cerevisiae Cox18 as query, followed by
PCR techniques, Sacconi et al. (2005) cloned COX18 cDNA from skin
fibroblasts. The deduced 333-amino acid protein has a predicted
molecular mass of 37.1 kD. COX18 shares 25% amino acid identity with S.
cerevisiae Cox18 and shares homology with mitochondrial inner membrane
protein Oxa1 (see OXA1L; 601066). Database analysis and comparison to
yeast Cox18 and Oxa1 suggested that COX18 has 5 transmembrane domains.
Northern blot analysis detected a 3.5-kb transcript in all tissues
examined with highest expression in liver, heart, and pancreas. A
shorter transcript was detected at low levels. By RACE analysis, Sacconi
et al. (2005) identified 2 mRNAs of 3,406 and 2,027 nucleotides that are
transcribed from 2 different transcription start sites. Fluorescence
microscopy showed that COX18 expressed in HEK293 cells localized to
mitochondria.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sacconi et al. (2005) determined that the COX18 gene contains 7 exons
and spans about 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sacconi et al. (2005) mapped the COX18
gene to chromosome 4q21.1

REFERENCE 1. Sacconi, S.; Trevisson, E.; Pistollato, F.; Baldoin, M. C.; Rezzonico,
R.; Bourget, I.; Desnuelle, C.; Tenconi, R.; Basso, G.; DiMauro, S.;
Salviati, L.: hCOX18 and hCOX19: two human genes involved in cytochrome
c oxidase assembly. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 337: 832-839,
2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/25/2006

EDITED wwang: 09/25/2006

602644	TITLE *602644 TETRASPANIN 4; TSPAN4
;;TRANSMEMBRANE 4 SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 7; TM4SF7;;
TETRASPAN;;
NOVEL ANTIGEN 2; NAG2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TSPAN4 belongs to the large family of tetraspanins, so named because
they contain 4 transmembrane domains. Tetraspanins are frequently
expressed at the cell surface in association with each other and with
other molecules, such as integrins (see ITGB1; 135630), and they
function to regulate cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and
differentiation (summary by Todd et al., 1998).

CLONING

Tachibana et al. (1997) generated monoclonal antibodies against proteins
that coimmunoprecipitated with CD81 (TAPA1; 186845) from a human breast
cancer cell line. Two antibodies recognized a 28- to 35-kD protein,
which Tachibana et al. (1997) named NAG2 for 'novel antigen-2.' Using
the antibodies to screen a cDNA expression library derived from the
breast cancer cell line, the authors cloned cDNAs encoding NAG2. The
predicted 238-amino acid NAG2 protein contains 4 hydrophobic domains and
shows homology to transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) proteins. Northern
blot analysis detected a 1.5-kb NAG2 mRNA, and together with flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry, showed that NAG2 was expressed in
multiple tissues but was absent in brain, lymphoid cells, and platelets.
Immunofluorescence analysis showed that NAG2 colocalized with CD81 on
the cell surface. Tachibana et al. (1997) identified mouse ESTs encoding
the mouse homolog of NAG2. The human and mouse NAG2 proteins have 95%
amino acid identity.

By searching an EST database for sequences containing a tetraspanin
consensus sequence, Todd et al. (1998) identified human TSPAN4. The
deduced 238-amino acid protein contains 4 transmembrane domains and
other features characteristic of tetraspanins, including conservation of
charged residues in or near the transmembrane domains, similar to ion
channels, and of 4 cysteines in the second extracellular domain.
Northern blot analysis detected highest TSPAN4 expression in heart and
placenta. EST database analysis suggested that TSPAN4 is also expressed
in brain, melanocytes, pancreas, and fetal liver/spleen, in addition to
pregnant uterus and adult and fetal heart.

GENE FUNCTION

Tachibana et al. (1997) found that NAG2 coimmunoprecipitated with
integrins and other TM4SF members, indicating that NAG2 is present in
TM4SF-TM4SF and TM4SF-integrin complexes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the TSPAN4 gene to chromosome 11p15.5 based on an
alignment of the TSPAN4 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF022813) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/23/2009.

2. Tachibana, I.; Bodorova, J.; Berditchevski, F.; Zutter, M. M.;
Hemler, M. E.: NAG-2, a novel transmembrane-4 superfamily (TM4SF)
protein that complexes with integrins and other TM4SF proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 29181-29189, 1997.

3. Todd, S. C.; Doctor, V. S.; Levy, S.: Sequences and expression
of six new members of the tetraspanin/TM4SF family. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1399: 101-104, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/20/2009

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/20/1998

EDITED mgross: 12/03/2009
mgross: 11/23/2009
terry: 11/20/2009
alopez: 1/19/2006
psherman: 1/11/1999
carol: 8/10/1998
psherman: 5/29/1998
psherman: 5/21/1998
psherman: 5/20/1998

151410	TITLE *151410 BREAKPOINT CLUSTER REGION; BCR
;;BCR1
BCR/ABL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
BCR/FGFR1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
BCR/PDGFRA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The normal cellular BCR gene encodes a 160-kD phosphoprotein associated
with serine/threonine kinase activity. The BCR gene is the site of
breakpoints used in the generation of the 2 alternative forms of the
Philadelphia chromosome translocation found in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML; 608232) and acute lymphocytic leukemia (Groffen et al., 1984;
Shtivelman et al., 1985; Hermans et al., 1987). These alternative
breakpoints join different exon sets of BCR to a common subset of the
exons of the ABL1 gene (189980) located on chromosome 9. This fusion
results in 2 alternative chimeric oncogene products called p210(BCR-ABL)
and p185(BCR-ABL). The activation of ABL tyrosine kinase activity is
necessary for the oncogenic potential of the chimeric oncogene (Maru and
Witte, 1991).

Laurent et al. (2001) reviewed the role of BCR alone or when joined with
ABL in normal and leukemic pathophysiology.

CLONING

Hariharan and Adams (1987) isolated cDNA clones that spanned the entire
BCR coding region. The deduced 1,271-residue protein has a molecular
mass of about 160 kD. The BCR gene is expressed as mRNAs of 4.5- and
6.7-kb, which apparently encode the same protein.

Stam et al. (1987) showed that the normal gene on chromosome 22 involved
at the breakpoint cluster region in the translocation between
chromosomes 9 and 22 encodes a 160,000-Da phosphoprotein with serine or
threonine kinase activity.

Chissoe et al. (1995) sequenced the complete BCR gene and greater than
80% of the human ABL gene, which are both involved in the t(9;22)
translocation (Philadelphia chromosome) associated with more than 90% of
CML, 25 to 30% of adult and 2 to 10% of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, and rare cases of acute myelogenous leukemia.

GENE STRUCTURE

Heisterkamp et al. (1985) determined the structural organization of the
BCR gene, which contains 23 exons and occupies a region of about 135 kb
on chromosome 22. The first exon contains a unique serine/threonine
kinase activity and at least two SH2 binding sites.

Stam et al. (1987) demonstrated that the BCR gene is oriented with its
5-prime end toward the centromere of chromosome 22.

Chissoe et al. (1995) determined that the BCR gene contains 23 BCR exons
with putative alternative BCR first and second exons.

MAPPING

The BCR gene is located on chromosome 22q11.2, the site of the
translocation breakpoint in CML (Prakash and Yunis, 1984).

Croce et al. (1987) demonstrated that there are in fact 4 BCR genes, all
located in the 22q11.2 band. By studying mouse-human hybrid cells with
breakpoints at various sites in that region, they concluded that the
order of loci is centromere--BCR2, BCR4, IGL--BCR1--BCR3--SIS. This
linear order was confirmed by Budarf et al. (1988), who also confirmed
that all of the BCR-like genes map proximal to the 22q11-q12 breakpoint
of a t(11;22) in a Ewing sarcoma (612219).

Using an interspecific backcross, Justice et al. (1990) mapped the Bcr
gene to chromosome 10 of the mouse.

GENE FUNCTION

Maru and Witte (1991) demonstrated that purified BCR contains
autophosphorylation activity and transphosphorylation activity for
several protein substrates. A region encoded by the first exon was
essential for this novel phosphotransferase activity. The findings
suggested that the protein kinase and SH2-binding domains may work in
concert with other regions of the molecule in intracellular signaling
processes.

Diekmann et al. (1991) found that the C-terminal domain of BCR functions
as a GTPase activating protein for p21(rac); see rac serine/threonine
protein kinase (164730).

- BCR/ABL Fusion Gene

Nowell and Hungerford (1960) identified the Philadelphia chromosome of
chronic myeloid leukemia (a G group chromosome with part of its long arm
missing). It was called the Philadelphia chromosome because it was
thought to be useful to follow the practice of hemoglobinologists and
name anomalous chromosomes after the city of discovery. It was presumed
to be a deleted chromosome 21, the same chromosome as that which is
trisomic in Down syndrome (190685). The elevated alkaline phosphatase
activity in Down syndrome and depressed activity in CML was viewed as
consistent with this interpretation. Using the improved definition
provided by 'banding' methods, Rowley (1973) showed that in fact there
is a translocation of the distal part of chromosome 22 (not 21) onto
another chromosome, usually 9q.

Fitzgerald (1976) described a family in which a man and 2 of his 3
children had a Philadelphia-like chromosome t(11;22)(q25;q13). The fact
that they did not have leukemia or other hematologic disorder was
thought by Fitzgerald to relate to the finding that the break in
chromosome 22 was distal to that in CML. In these cases it was at the
q12-q13 interface, whereas in the Philadelphia chromosome it is at the
q11-q12 band interface. Thus the 22q12 band may contain critical genetic
material concerned with normal (and abnormal) myeloid proliferation.

De Klein et al. (1982) demonstrated that the Abelson oncogene is
translocated from chromosome 9 to chromosome 22 in the formation of the
Philadelphia chromosome.

Prakash and Yunis (1984) located the breakpoints in CML to subbands
22q11.21 and 9q34.1. Although the position of the breakpoint in
chromosome 9 is quite variable, the breakpoint in chromosome 22 is
clustered in an area called bcr for 'breakpoint cluster region.'
Shtivelman et al. (1985) referred to bcr as a gene and stated that the
ABL oncogene is transferred 'into the bcr gene of chromosome 22.' They
found that an 8-kb RNA specific to CML is a fused transcript of the 2
genes. The fused protein is presumably involved in the malignant
process. The protein has bcr information at its amino terminus and
retains most but not all of the normal abl protein sequences. Since the
breakpoint in 9 may be as much as 30 or 40 kb 5-prime to ABL, a large
amount must be 'looped out' in the fusion process. The fusion protein
has tyrosine kinase activity.

About 10% of patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) have the
translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) indistinguishable from that of CML
(608232). Erikson et al. (1986), however, found in 3 of 5 such cases of
ALL that the bcr region was not involved and that the 22q11 chromosome
breakpoint was proximal (5-prime) to the bcr region. Furthermore, the
bcr and c-abl transcripts were of normal size in an ALL line carrying
the t(9;22) translocation. The breakpoints of the t(9;22) CML, the
t(9;22) of acute lymphocytic leukemia, and the t(8;22) of Burkitt
lymphoma fall into 22q11 and are cytologically indistinguishable. By
chromosomal in situ hybridization, however, they can be distinguished
(Emanuel et al., 1984; Erikson et al., 1986). To this experience,
Griffin et al. (1986) added observations on t(11;22), both
constitutional and tumor-related (see 133450). In the hybrid gene of
CML, the bcr contribution is 5-prime to the abl contribution. In the
creation of the gene, splicing can occur across an interval as great as
100 kb. The product of the bcr/abl hybrid gene is a 210-kD protein. It
was suggested that the hybrid gene and its product protein be designated
PHL.

Mes-Masson et al. (1986) isolated overlapping cDNA clones defining the
complete coding region for the hybrid protein generated from the ABL and
BCR genes.

As a result of the CML translocation, the 3-prime BCR exons are removed
and remain on chromosome 22 (Stam et al., 1987). The BCR and ABL genes
are fused in a head-to-tail fashion.

Verhest and Monsieur (1983) found the Philadelphia chromosome in a case
of essential thrombocytopenia.

Ganesan et al. (1986) found that the BCR gene was rearranged in 7 cases
of Philadelphia chromosome-negative CML. In 5 cases hematologic findings
were indistinguishable from those of patients with the Philadelphia
chromosome.

Hermans et al. (1987) showed that a distinct and different fusion of BCR
and ABL occurs in creation of the Philadelphia chromosome associated
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Rubin et al. (1988) similarly
reported a distinctive fusion in ALL.

Haas et al. (1992) demonstrated a 'parent of origin' bias in cases of
Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemia by use of unique specific
chromosome band polymorphisms. They showed that the translocated
chromosome 9 was always of paternal origin, whereas the translocated
chromosome 22 was derived exclusively from the maternal copy.
Preferential retention of paternal alleles has been found in sporadic
tumors such as Wilms tumor (194070), rhabdomyosarcoma (268210),
osteosarcoma (259500), and retinoblastoma (180200). The finding of
preferential participation of the paternally derived chromosome 9 and
the maternally derived chromosome 22 in the Ph-translocation strongly
indicates that the chromosomal regions involved are imprinted. Feinberg
(1993) reviewed 11 examples of preferential parental allelic alterations
in cancer. Fioretos et al. (1994) were unable to find evidence for
genomic imprinting of the human BCR gene. They identified a BamHI
polymorphism in the coding region of BCR exon 1 and by RT-PCR assay
showed that both BCR alleles are expressed in the peripheral blood cells
of normal persons. Furthermore, Litz and Copenhaver (1994) used PvuII
and MaeII restriction site polymorphisms in the BCR gene to study 3
cases of Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML. In all 3 cases, the
rearranged allele was paternal in origin. Melo et al. (1994) could find
no evidence of parental imprinting of the ABL gene and cited evidence
which appeared to exclude imprinting of the BCR gene and to suggest that
there is, in fact, no preferential involvement of the maternal BCR or
paternal ABL alleles in the formation of the BCR-ABL fusion gene. Melo
et al. (1995) further reviewed the evidence they interpreted as
indicating that there is no parental bias in the origin of the
translocated ABL gene and no evidence for genomic imprinting of ABL in
CML. On the other hand, Haas (1995) argued that it still remains likely
that ABL and BCR are imprinted.

From the sequence of 4 newly studied Philadelphia chromosome
translocations and a review of several other previously sequenced
breakpoints, Chissoe et al. (1995) could discern no consistent
breakpoint features. No clear-cut mechanism for Philadelphia chromosome
translocation was evident.

To block BCR/ABL function, Lim et al. (2000) created a unique tyrosine
phosphatase by fusing the catalytic domain of SHP1 (604630) to the ABL
binding domain of RIN1 (605965), an established binding partner and
substrate for c-ABL and BCR/ABL. This fusion construct binds to BCR/ABL
in cells and functions as an active phosphatase. It effectively
suppressed BCR/ABL function as judged by reductions in transformation of
fibroblast cells, growth factor independence of hematopoietic cell
lines, and proliferation of primary bone marrow cells. In addition, the
leukemogenic properties of BCR/ABL in a murine model system were blocked
by coexpression of the fusion construct. Expression of the construct
also reversed the transformed phenotype of a human leukemia-derived cell
line. These results appeared to have direct implications for leukemia
therapeutics and suggested an approach to block aberrant signal
transduction in other pathologies through the use of appropriately
designed escort/inhibitors.

Saglio et al. (2002) found that a patient with a typical form of CML
carried a large deletion on the derivative chromosome 9q+ and an unusual
BCR-BCL transcript characterized by the insertion, between BCR exon 14
and ABL exon 2, of 126 bp derived from a region located on chromosome 9,
1.4 Mb 5-prime to ABL. This sequence was contained in a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC), which in FISH experiments on normal
metaphases was found to detect, in addition to the predicted clear
signal at 9q34, a faint but distinct signal at 22q11.2, where the BCR
gene is located, suggesting the presence of a large region of homology
between the 2 chromosome regions. A BLAST analysis of the particular BAC
sequence against the entire human genome revealed the presence of a
stretch of homology, about 76 kb long, located approximately 150 kb
3-prime to the BCR gene, and containing the 126-bp insertion sequence.
Evolutionary studies using FISH identified the region as a duplicon,
which transposed from the region orthologous to human 9q34 to chromosome
22 after the divergence of orangutan from the human-chimpanzee-gorilla
common ancestor about 14 million years ago. Saglio et al. (2002) noted
that sequence analyses reported as part of the Human Genome Project had
disclosed an unpredicted extensive segmental duplication in the human
genome, and the impact of duplicons in triggering genomic disorders is
becoming more and more apparent. The discovery of a large duplicon
relatively close to the ABL and BCR genes and the finding that the
126-bp insertion is very close to the duplicon at 9q34 open the question
of the possible involvement of the duplicon in the formation of the
Philadelphia chromosome translocation.

The arrest of differentiation is a feature of chronic myelogenous
leukemia cells both in myeloid blast crisis and in myeloid precursors
that ectopically express the p210(BCR-ABL) oncoprotein. Related to the
underlying mechanisms of this arrest of differentiation, Perrotti et al.
(2002) showed that expression of BCR-ABL in myeloid precursor cells
leads to transcriptional suppression of the gene encoding granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF3R; 138971), possibly through
downmodulation of C/EBP-alpha (116897), the principal regulator of
granulocytic differentiation. Expression of C/EBP-alpha protein is
barely detectable in primary marrow cells taken from individuals
affected with chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis. In contrast,
CEBPA RNA is clearly present. Further experiments by Perrotti et al.
(2002) indicated that BCR-ABL regulates the expression of C/EBP-alpha by
inducing heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein E2 (PCBP2; 601210).

RNA interference (RNAi) is a highly conserved regulatory mechanism that
mediates sequence-specific posttranscriptional gene silencing initiated
by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) (Fire, 1999). Fusion transcripts encoding
oncogenic proteins may represent potential targets for a tumor-specific
RNAi approach. Scherr et al. (2003) demonstrated that small interfering
RNAs (siRNAs) against BCR-ABL specifically inhibited expression of
BCR-ABL mRNA in hematopoietic cell lines and primary CML cells.

Goldman and Melo (2003) tabulated BCR-ABL substrates and diagrammed the
signal-transduction pathways affected by BCR-ABL.

To define oncogenic lesions that cooperate with BCR-ABL1 to induce ALL,
Mullighan et al. (2008) performed a genomewide analysis of diagnostic
leukemia samples from 304 individuals with ALL, including 43 BCR-ABL1
B-progenitor ALLs and 23 CML cases. IKZF1, encoding the transcription
factor Ikaros (603023), was deleted in 83.7% of BCR-ABL1 ALL, but not in
chronic phase CML. Deletion of IKZF1 was also identified as an acquired
lesion at the time of transformation of CML to ALL (lymphoid blast
crisis). The IKZF1 deletions resulted in haploinsufficiency, expression
of a dominant-negative Ikaros isoform, or the complete loss of Ikaros
expression. Sequencing of IKZF1 deletion breakpoints suggested that
aberrant RAG-mediated recombination (see 179615) is responsible for the
deletions. Mullighan et al. (2008) concluded that genetic lesions
resulting in the loss of Ikaros function are an important event in the
development of BCR-ABL1 ALL.

Zhao et al. (2009) demonstrated that the loss of Smoothened (Smo;
601500), an essential component of the hedgehog pathway (see 600725),
impairs hematopoietic stem cell renewal and decreases induction of
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML; 608232) by the BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein.
Loss of Smo causes depletion of CML stem cells, which propagate the
leukemia, whereas constitutively active Smo augments CML stem cell
number and accelerates disease. As a possible mechanism for Smo action,
Zhao et al. (2009) showed that the cell fate determinant Numb (603728),
which depletes CML stem cells, is increased in the absence of Smo
activity. Furthermore, pharmacologic inhibition of hedgehog signaling
impairs not only the propagation of CML driven by wildtype BCR-ABL1, but
also the growth of imatinib-resistant mouse and human CML. Zhao et al.
(2009) concluded that hedgehog pathway activity is required for
maintenance of normal and neoplastic stem cells of the hematopoietic
system and raised the possibility that the drug resistance and disease
recurrence associated with imatinib treatment of CML might be avoided by
targeting this essential stem cell maintenance pathway.

Resistance of Bcr-Abl-positive leukemic stem cells (LSCs) to imatinib
treatment in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) can
cause relapse of disease and might be the origin for emerging
drug-resistant clones. Dierks et al. (2008) identified Smo as a drug
target in Bcr-Abl-positive LSCs. They showed that Hedgehog signaling is
activated in LSCs through upregulation of Smo. While nullity for Smo
does not affect long-term reconstitution of regular hematopoiesis, the
development of retransplantable Bcr-Abl-positive leukemias was abolished
in the absence of Smo expression. Pharmacologic Smo inhibition reduced
LSCs in vivo and enhanced time to relapse after end of treatment. Dierks
et al. (2008) postulated that Smo inhibition might be an effective
treatment strategy to reduce the LSC pool in CML.

Using xenografting and DNA copy number alteration (CNA) profiling of
human BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukemia, Notta et al. (2011) demonstrated
that genetic diversity occurs in functionally defined
leukemia-initiating cells and that many diagnostic patient samples
contain multiple genetically distinct leukemia-initiating cell
subclones. Reconstructing the subclonal genetic ancestry of several
samples by CNA profiling demonstrated a branching multiclonal evolution
model of leukemogenesis, rather than linear succession. For some patient
samples, the predominant diagnostic clone repopulated xenografts,
whereas in others it was outcompeted by minor subclones. Reconstitution
with the predominant diagnosis clone was associated with more aggressive
growth properties in xenografts, deletion of CDKN2A (600160) and CDKN2B
(600431), and a trend towards poorer patient outcome. Notta et al.
(2011) concluded that their findings linked clonal diversity with
leukemia-initiating cell function and underscored the importance of
developing therapies that eradicate all intratumoral subclones.

- BCR/FGFR1 Fusion Gene

Demiroglu et al. (2001) described 2 patients with a clinical and
hematologic diagnosis of CML in chronic phase who had an acquired
t(8;22)(p11;q11). They confirmed that both patients were negative for a
BCR-ABL fusion gene and that both had an in-frame mRNA fusion between
BCR exon 4 and FGFR1 (136350) exon 9. Thus, a BCR-FGFR1 fusion may occur
in patients with apparently typical CML. The possibility of successful
treatment with specific FGFR1 inhibitors was suggested.

- BCR/PDGFRA Fusion Gene

Baxter et al. (2002) reported the identification and cloning of a rare
variant translocation, t(4;22)(q12;q11), in 2 patients with a CML-like
myeloproliferative disease. An unusual in-frame BCR/PDGFRA (173490)
fusion mRNA was identified in both patients, with either BCR exon 7 or
exon 12 fused to short BCR intron-derived sequences, which were in turn
fused to part of PDGFRA exon 12. Sequencing of the genomic breakpoint
junctions showed that the chromosome 22 breakpoints fell in BCR introns,
whereas the chromosome 4 breakpoints were within PDGFRA exon 12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Resistance to Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors

Clinical studies with the Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571 in CML
demonstrated that many patients with advanced-stage disease respond
initially but then relapse. Through biochemical and molecular analysis
of clinical material, Gorre et al. (2001) found that the drug resistance
was associated with a reactivation of BCR-ABL signal transduction in all
cases examined. In 6 of 9 patients, resistance was associated with a
single amino acid substitution in a threonine residue of the Abl kinase
domain known to form a critical hydrogen bond with the drug. This
substitution (T315I; 189980.0001) was sufficient to confer STI571
resistance in a reconstitution experiment. In 3 patients, resistance was
associated with progressive BCR-ABL gene amplification. Gorre et al.
(2001) concluded that their studies provided evidence that genetically
complex cancers retain dependence on an initial oncogenic event and
suggested a strategy for identifying inhibitors of STI571 resistance.

Azam et al. (2003) stated that sequencing of the BCR-ABL gene in
patients who relapsed after STI571 chemotherapy revealed a limited set
of kinase domain mutations that mediate drug resistance. To obtain a
more comprehensive survey of the amino acid substitutions that confer
STI571 resistance, they performed an in vitro screen of randomly
mutagenized BCR-ABL and recovered all the major mutations previously
identified in patients and numerous others that illuminated novel
mechanisms of acquired drug resistance. Structural modeling implied that
a novel class of variants acts allosterically to destabilize the
autoinhibited conformation of the ABL kinase, to which STI571
preferentially binds. The authors concluded that this screening strategy
is a paradigm applicable to a growing list of target-directed anticancer
agents and provides a means of anticipating the drug-resistant amino
acid substitutions that are likely to be clinically problematic.

Resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) develops in virtually
all cases of Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Duy et al. (2011) reported the discovery of a novel mechanism
of drug resistance that is based on protective feedback signaling of
leukemia cells in response to treatment with TKIs. In Philadelphia
chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells, Duy et al.
(2011) identified BCL6 (109565) as a central component of this
drug-resistance pathway and demonstrated that targeted inhibition of
BCL6 leads to eradication of drug-resistant and leukemia-initiating
subclones.

ANIMAL MODEL

To determine whether the P210(bcr/abl) hybrid protein can induce
leukemia, Daley et al. (1990) infected murine bone marrow with a
retrovirus encoding this protein and transplanted the bone marrow into
irradiated syngeneic recipients. Transplant recipients developed several
hematologic malignancies, prominent among which was a myeloproliferative
syndrome closely resembling the chronic phase of human chronic
myelogenous leukemia. Tumor tissue from diseased mice harbored the
provirus encoding P210(bcr/abl). Heisterkamp et al. (1990) satisfied
Koch postulates in relation to leukemia by demonstrating leukemia in
mice transgenic for a bcr/abl p190 construct of the type found in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Tkachuk et al. (1990) used 2-color fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) with probes from portions of the BCR and
ABL (189980) genes to detect the BCR-ABL fusion in individual blood and
bone marrow cells from 6 patients. The fusion event was detected in all
samples analyzed, of which 3 were cytogenetically Ph(1)-negative. One of
the Ph(1)-negative samples was also PCR-negative.

When the Philadelphia-chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia-blast
crisis cell line BV173 is injected into SCID mice, a disease process
closely resembling that seen in leukemia patients results (Kamel-Reid et
al., 1989). For example, BCR-ABL transcripts are detectable in bone
marrow, spleen, peripheral blood, liver, and lungs. Skorski et al.
(1994) found that systemic treatment of the leukemic mice with a 26-mer
BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotide induced disappearance of leukemic
cells and a marked decrease in BCR-ABL mRNA in mouse tissues. Untreated
mice or mice treated with a BCR-ABL sense oligodeoxynucleotide or a
6-base-mismatched antisense oligodeoxynucleotide were dead 8 to 13 weeks
after leukemia cell injection; in marked contrast, mice treated with
BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotide died of leukemia 18 to 23 weeks
after injection of leukemic cells. Findings were interpreted as
indicating the in vivo effectiveness of an anticancer therapy based on
antisense oligodeoxynucleotides targeting a tumor-specific gene.

Cancer is thought to arise from multiple genetic events that establish
irreversible malignancy. A different mechanism might be present in
certain leukemias initiated by a chromosomal translocation. Huettner et
al. (2000) adopted a new approach to determine if ablation of the
genetic abnormality is sufficient for reversion. They generated a
conditional transgenic model of BCR-ABL-induced leukemia. The most
common form of the product of the fusion gene, p210 BCR-ABL1, is found
in more than 90% of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia and in up
to 15% of adult patients with de novo acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Efforts to establish a useful transgenic model had been hampered by
embryonic lethality when the oncogene is expressed during embryogenesis,
by reduced penetrance, or by extremely long latency. Huettner et al.
(2000) used the 'knock-in' approach to induce leukemia by p190 BCR-ABL1
(Castellanos et al., 1997). Lethal leukemia developed within an
acceptable time frame in all animals, and complete remission was
achieved by suppression of BCR-ABL1 expression, even after multiple
rounds of induction and reversion. The results demonstrated that
BCR-ABL1 is required for both induction and maintenance of leukemia. The
findings suggested that complete and lasting remissions can be achieved
if the genetic abnormality is abolished or silenced before secondary
mutations are acquired. The results have implications for therapies that
directly target leukemia oncogenes, with a relevant example being the
use of BCR-ABL1-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Tanabe et al. (2000) designed a ribozyme which exclusively targets the
junction sequence of BCR-ABL and showed that it specifically cleaves the
BCR-ABL mRNA, inducing apoptosis in CML cells. Tanabe et al. (2000)
tested this technology in vivo by embedding genes encoding the maxizyme
downstream of genes for the human tRNA. They used a retroviral system
for the expression of the maxizyme in leukemic cells. A line of CML
cells was transduced either with a control vector in which the maxizyme
sequence had been deleted or with the maxizyme-encoding vector. They
then injected 2 x 10(6) transduced cells into the tail veins of NOD-SCID
mice. Animals transduced with the control vector died between 6 and 13
weeks afterwards due to diffuse leukemia. Animals treated with the
BCR-ABL ribozyme all survived, with no evidence of leukemia in 8 animals
8 weeks after inoculation. Tanabe et al. (2000) stated that their
maxizyme could be useful for purging bone marrow in cases of CML treated
by autologous transplantation, when it would presumably reduce the
incidence of relapse by decreasing the tumorigenicity of contaminating
CML cells in the transplant.

Voncken et al. (1995) found that exposure of Bcr-null mice to
gram-negative endotoxin led to severe septic shock and increased tissue
injury by neutrophils. Neutrophils of Bcr-null mice showed a pronounced
increase in reactive oxygen metabolite production upon activation and
were more sensitive to priming stimuli. Activated Bcr-null neutrophils
displayed a 3-fold increase in Rac2 (602049) membrane translocation
compared with wildtype neutrophils. The results showed that BCR is
involved in the regulation of RAC-mediated superoxide production by the
NADPH-oxidase system (see NOX1; 300225) of leukocytes and suggested a
link between BCR function and the cell type affected in Philadelphia
chromosome-positive leukemias.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Barbany et al. (2002); Brunning  (1980); Druker et al. (2001); Druker
et al. (2001); Goldman and Melo (2001); Grosveld et al. (1986); Klein
(1983); Koeffler and Golde (1981); Kohno and Sandberg (1980); Lillicrap
and Sterndale (1984); Mittelman and Levan (1978); Nowell and Hungerford
(1960); Olavarria et al. (2002); Pegoraro et al. (1983); Priest et
al. (1980); Savage and Antman (2002); Shtivelman et al. (1987); Stam
et al. (1985); Swan et al. (1982); Teyssier et al. (1985); Verma and
Dosik (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Azam, M.; Latek, R. R.; Daley, G. Q.: Mechanisms of autoinhibition
and STI-571/imatinib resistance revealed by mutagenesis of BCR-ABL. Cell 112:
831-843, 2003.

2. Barbany, G.; Hoglund, M.; Simonsson, B.: Complete molecular remission
in chronic myelogenous leukemia after imatinib therapy. (Letter) New
Eng. J. Med. 347: 539-540, 2002.

3. Baxter, E. J.; Hochhaus, A.; Bolufer, P.; Reiter, A.; Fernandez,
J. M.; Senent, L.; Cervera, J.; Moscardo, F.; Sanz, M. A.; Cross,
N. C. P.: The t(4;22)(q12;q11) in atypical chronic myeloid leukaemia
fuses BCR to PDGFRA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 1391-1397, 2002.

4. Brunning, R. D.: Philadelphia chromosome positive leukemia. Hum.
Path. 11: 307-309, 1980.

5. Budarf, M.; Canaani, E.; Emanuel, B. S.: Linear order of the four
BCR-related loci in 22q11. Genomics 3: 168-171, 1988.

6. Castellanos, A.; Pintado, B.; Weruaga, E.; Arevalo, R.; Lopez,
A.; Orfao, A.; Sanchez-Garcia, I.: A BCR-ABL(p190) fusion gene made
by homologous recombination causes B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias
in chimeric mice with independence of the endogenous bcr product. Blood 90:
2168-2174, 1997.

7. Chissoe, S. L.; Bodenteich, A.; Wang, Y.-F.; Wang, Y.-P.; Burian,
D.; Clifton, S. W.; Crabtree, J.; Freeman, A.; Iyer, K.; Jian, L.;
Ma, Y.; McLaury, H.-J.; Pan, H.-Q.; Sarhan, O. H.; Toth, S.; Wang,
Z.; Zhang, G.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen, J.; Roe, B. A.: Sequence
and analysis of the human ABL gene, the BCR gene, and regions involved
in the Philadelphia chromosomal translocation. Genomics 27: 67-82,
1995.

8. Croce, C. M.; Huebner, K.; Isobe, M.; Fainstain, E.; Lifshitz,
B.; Shtivelman, E.; Canaani, E.: Mapping of four distinct BCR-related
loci to chromosome region 22q11: order of BCR loci relative to chronic
myelogenous leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia breakpoints. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 7174-7178, 1987.

9. Daley, G. Q.; Van Etten, R. A.; Baltimore, D.: Induction of chronic
myelogenous leukemia in mice by the P210(bcr/abl) gene of the Philadelphia
chromosome. Science 247: 824-830, 1990.

10. de Klein, A.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Grosveld, G.; Bartram, C.
R.; Hagemeijer, A.; Bootsma, D.; Spurr, N. K.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen,
J.; Stephenson, J. R.: A cellular oncogene is translocated to the
Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelocytic leukaemia. Nature 300:
765-767, 1982.

11. Demiroglu, A.; Steer, E. J.; Heath, C.; Taylor, K.; Bentley, M.;
Allen, S. L.; Koduru, P.; Brody, J. P.; Hawson, G.; Rodwell, R.; Doody,
M.-L.; Carnicero, F.; Reiter, A.; Goldman, J. M.; Melo, J. V.; Cross,
N. C. P.: The t(8;22) in chronic myeloid leukemia fuses BCR to FGFR1:
transforming activity and specific inhibition of FGFR1 fusion proteins. Blood 98:
3778-3783, 2001.

12. Diekmann, D.; Brill, S.; Garrett, M. D.; Totty, N.; Hsuan, J.;
Monfries, C.; Hall, C.; Lim, L.; Hall, A.: Bcr encodes a GTPase-activating
protein for p21(rac). Nature 351: 400-402, 1991.

13. Dierks, C.; Beigi, R.; Guo, G.-R.; Zirlik, K.; Stegert, M. R.;
Manley, P.; Trussell, C.; Schmitt-Graeff, A.; Landwerlin, K.; Veelken,
H.; Warmuth, M.: Expansion of Bcr-Abl-positive leukemic stem cells
is dependent on hedgehog pathway activation. Cancer Cell 14: 238-249,
2008.

14. Druker, B. J.; Sawyers, C. L.; Kantarjian, H.; Resta, D. J.; Reese,
S. F.; Ford, J. M.; Capdeville, R.; Talpaz, M.: Activity of a specific
inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic
myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia
chromosome. New Eng. J. Med. 344: 1038-1042, 2001. Note: Erratum:
New Eng. J. Med. 345: 232 only, 2001.

15. Druker, B. J.; Talpaz, M.; Resta, D. J.; Peng, B.; Buchdunger,
E.; Ford, J. M.; Lydon, N. B.; Kantarjian, H.; Capdeville, R.; Ohno-Jones,
S.; Sawyers, C. L.: Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of
the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia. New Eng.
J. Med. 344: 1031-1037, 2001.

16. Duy, C.; Hurtz, C.; Shojaee, S.; Cerchietti, L.; Geng, H.; Swaminathan,
S.; Klemm, L.; Kweon, S.; Nahar, R.; Braig, M.; Park, E.; Kim, Y.;
and 11 others: BCL6 enables Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells
to survive BCR-ABL1 kinase inhibition. Nature 473: 384-388, 2011.

17. Emanuel, B. S.; Selden, J. R.; Wang, E.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce,
C. M.: In situ hybridization and translocation breakpoint mapping.
I. Non-identical 22q11 breakpoints for the t(9;22) of CML and the
t(8;22) of Burkitt lymphoma. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 38: 127-131,
1984.

18. Erikson, J.; Griffin, C.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Valtieri, M.; Hoxie,
J.; Finan, J.; Emanuel, B. S.; Rovera, G.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.: Heterogeneity of chromosome 22 breakpoint in Philadelphia-positive
(Ph+) acute lymphocytic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 1807-1811,
1986.

19. Feinberg, A. P.: Genomic imprinting and gene activation in cancer. Nature
Genet. 4: 110-113, 1993.

20. Fioretos, T.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen, J.: No evidence for genomic
imprinting of the human BCR gene. Blood 83: 3441-3444, 1994.

21. Fire, A.: RNA-triggered gene silencing. Trends Genet. 15: 358-363,
1999.

22. Fitzgerald, P. H.: Evidence that chromosome band 22q12 is concerned
with cell proliferation in chronic myeloid leukemia. Hum. Genet. 33:
269-274, 1976.

23. Ganesan, T. S.; Rassool, F.; Guo, A.-P.; Th'ng, K. H.; Dowding,
C.; Hibbin, J. A.; Young, B. D.; White, H.; Kumaran, T. O.; Galton,
D. A. G.; Goldman, J. M.: Rearrangement of the bcr gene in Philadelphia
chromosome-negative chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 68: 957-960,
1986.

24. Goldman, J. M.; Melo, J. V.: Targeting the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase
in chronic myeloid leukemia. (Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 344: 1084-1086,
2001.

25. Goldman, J. M.; Melo, J. V.: Chronic myeloid leukemia--advances
in biology and new approaches to treatment. New Eng. J. Med. 349:
1451-1464, 2003.

26. Gorre, M. E.; Mohammed, M.; Ellwood, K.; Hsu, N.; Paquette, R.;
Rao, P. N.; Sawyers, C. L.: Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer
therapy caused by BCR-ABL gene mutation or amplification. Science 293:
876-883, 2001.

27. Griffin, C. A.; McKeon, C.; Israel, M. A.; Gegonne, A.; Ghysdael,
J.; Stehelin, D.; Douglass, E. C.; Green, A. A.; Emanuel, B. S.:
Comparison of constitutional and tumor-associated 11;22 translocations:
nonidentical breakpoints on chromosomes 11 and 22. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 83: 6122-6126, 1986.

28. Groffen, J.; Stephenson, J. R.; Heisterkamp, N.; de Klein, A.;
Bartram, C. R.; Grosveld, G.: Philadelphia chromosomal breakpoints
are clustered within a limited region, bcr, on chromosome 22. Cell 36:
93-99, 1984.

29. Grosveld, G.; Verwoerd, T.; van Agthoven, T.; de Klein, A.; Ramachandran,
K. L.; Heisterkamp, N.; Stam, K.; Groffen, J.: The chronic myelocytic
cell line K562 contains a breakpoint in bcr and produces a chimeric
bcr/c-abl transcript. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 607-616, 1986.

30. Haas, O. A.: Are ABL and BCR imprinted? No definitive answers,
but more questions. Leukemia 9: 740-745, 1995.

31. Haas, O. A.; Argyriou-Tirita, A.; Lion, T.: Parental origin of
chromosomes involved in the translocation t(9;22). Nature 359: 414-416,
1992.

32. Hariharan, I. K.; Adams, J. M.: cDNA sequence for human bcr,
the gene that translocates to the abl oncogene in chronic myeloid
leukaemia. EMBO J. 6: 115-119, 1987.

33. Heisterkamp, N.; Jenster, G.; ten Hoeve, J.; Zovich, D.; Pattengale,
P. K.; Groffen, J.: Acute leukaemia in bcr/abl transgenic mice. Nature 344:
251-253, 1990.

34. Heisterkamp, N.; Stam, K.; Groffen, J.; de Klein, A.; Grosveld,
G.: Structural organization of the bcr gene and its role in the Ph-1
translocation. Nature 315: 758-761, 1985.

35. Hermans, A.; Heisterkamp, N.; von Lindern, M.; van Baal, S.; Meijer,
D.; van der Plas, D.; Wiedemann, L. M.; Groffen, J.; Bootsma, D.;
Grosveld, G.: Unique fusion of bcr and c-abl genes in Philadelphia
chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cell 51: 33-40,
1987.

36. Huettner, C. S.; Zhang, P.; Van Etten, R. A.; Tenen, D. G.: Reversibility
of acute B-cell leukaemia induced by BCR-ABL1. Nature Genet. 24:
57-60, 2000.

37. Justice, M. J.; Siracusa, L. D.; Gilbert, D. J.; Heisterkamp,
N.; Groffen, J.; Chada, K.; Silan, C. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.: A genetic linkage map of mouse chromosome 10: localization
of eighteen molecular markers using a single interspecific backcross. Genetics 125:
855-866, 1990.

38. Kamel-Reid, S.; Letarte, M.; Sirard, C.; Doedens, M.; Grunberger,
T.; Fulop, G.; Freedman, M. H.; Phillips, R. A.; Dick, J. E.: A model
of human acute lymphoblastic leukemia in immune-deficient SCID mice. Science 246:
1597-600, 1989.

39. Klein, G.: Specific chromosomal translocations and the genesis
of the B-cell-derived tumors in mice and men. Cell 32: 311-315,
1983.

40. Koeffler, H. P.; Golde, D. W.: Chronic myelogenous leukemia--new
concepts. New Eng. J. Med. 304: 1201-1209 and 1269-1274, 1981.

41. Kohno, S.-I.; Sandberg, A. A.: Chromosomes and causation of human
cancer and leukemia. XXXIX. Usual and unusual findings in Ph(1)-positive
CML. Cancer 46: 2227-2237, 1980.

42. Laurent, E.; Talpaz, M.; Kantarjian, H.; Kurzrock, R.: The BCR
gene and Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemogenesis. Cancer
Res. 61: 2343-2355, 2001.

43. Lillicrap, D. A.; Sterndale, H.: Familial chronic myeloid leukaemia.
(Letter) Lancet 324: 699 only, 1984. Note: Originally Volume II.

44. Lim, Y.-M.; Wong, S.; Lau, G.; Witte, O. N.; Colicelli, J.: BCR/ABL
inhibition by an escort/phosphatase fusion protein. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 12233-12238, 2000.

45. Litz, C. E.; Copenhaver, C. M.: Paternal origin of the rearranged
major breakpoint cluster region in chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 83:
3445-3448, 1994.

46. Maru, Y.; Witte, O. N.: The BCR gene encodes a novel serine/threonine
kinase activity within a single exon. Cell 67: 459-468, 1991.

47. Melo, J. V.; Yan, X.-H.; Diamond, J.; Goldman, J. M.: Balanced
parental contribution to the ABL component of the BCR-ABL gene in
chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 9: 734-745, 1995.

48. Melo, J. V.; Yan, X.-H.; Diamond, J.; Goldman, J. M.: Lack of
imprinting of the ABL gene. (Letter) Nature Genet. 8: 318-319, 1994.

49. Mes-Masson, A.-M.; McLaughlin, J.; Daley, G. Q.; Paskind, M.;
Witte, O. N.: Overlapping cDNA clones define the complete coding
region for the P210(c-abl) gene product associated with chronic myelogeneous
leukemia cells containing the Philadelphia chromosome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 83: 9768-9772, 1986. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
84: 2507 only, 1987.

50. Mittelman, F.; Levan, G.: Clustering of aberrations to specific
chromosomes in human neoplasms. III. Incidence and geographic distribution
of chromosome aberrations in 856 cases. Hereditas 89: 207-232, 1978.

51. Mullighan, C. G.; Miller, C. B.; Radtke, I.; Phillips, L. A.;
Dalton, J.; Ma, J.; White, D.; Hughes, T. P.; Le Beau, M. M.; Pui,
C.-H.; Relling, M. V.; Shurtleff, S. A.; Downing, J. R.: BCR-ABL1
lymphoblastic leukaemia is characterized by the deletion of Ikaros. Nature 453:
110-114, 2008.

52. Notta, F.; Mullighan, C. G.; Wang, J. C. Y.; Poeppl, A.; Doulatov,
S.; Phillips, L. A.; Ma, J.; Minden, M. D.; Downing, J. R.; Dick,
J. E.: Evolution of human BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukaemia-initiating
cells. Nature 469: 362-367, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature 471: 254
only, 2011.

53. Nowell, P. C.; Hungerford, D. A.: A minute chromosome in human
chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science 132: 1497, 1960.

54. Nowell, P. C.; Hungerford, D. A.: Chromosome studies on normal
and leukemic human leukocytes. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 25: 85-109,
1960.

55. Olavarria, E.; Craddock, C.; Dazzi, F.; Marin, D.; Marktel, S.;
Apperley, J. F.; Goldman, J. M.: Imatinib mesylate (STI571) in the
treatment of relapse of chronic myeloid leukemia after allogeneic
stem cell transplantation. Blood 99: 3861-3862, 2002.

56. Pegoraro, L.; Matera, L.; Ritz, J.; Levis, A.; Palumbo, A.; Biagini,
G.: Establishment of a Ph(1)-positive human cell line (BV173). J.
Nat. Cancer Inst. 70: 447-451, 1983.

57. Perrotti, D.; Cesi, V.; Trotta, R.; Guerzoni, C.; Santilli, G.;
Campbell, K.; Iervolino, A.; Condorelli, F.; Gambacorti-Passerini,
C.; Caligiuri, M. A.; Calabretta, B.: BCR-ABL suppresses C/EBP-alpha
expression through inhibitory action of hnRNP E2. Nature Genet. 30:
48-58, 2002.

58. Prakash, O.; Yunis, J. J.: High resolution chromosomes of the
t(9;22) positive leukemias. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 11: 361-367,
1984.

59. Priest, J. R.; Robison, L. L.; McKenna, R. W.; Lindquist, L. L.;
Warkentin, P. I.; LeBien, T. W.; Woods, W. G.; Kersey, J. H.; Coccia,
P. F.; Nesbit, M. E., Jr.: Philadelphia chromosome positive childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 56: 15-22, 1980.

60. Rowley, J. D.: A new consistent chromosomal abnormality in chronic
myelogenous leukemia identified by quinacrine fluorescence and Giemsa
staining. Nature 243: 290-293, 1973.

61. Rubin, C. M.; Carrino, J. J.; Dickler, M. N.; Leibowitz, D.; Smith,
S. D.; Westbrook, C. A.: Heterogeneity of genomic fusion of BCR and
ABL in Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 2795-2799, 1988.

62. Saglio, G.; Storlazzi, C. T.; Giugliano, E.; Surace, C.; Anelli,
L.; Rege-Cambrin, G.; Zagaria, A.; Velasco, A. J.; Heiniger, A.; Scaravaglio,
P.; Gomez, A. T.; Gomez, J. R.; Archidiacono, N.; Banfi, S.; Rocchi,
M.: A 76-kb duplicon maps close to the BCR gene on chromosome 22
and the ABL gene on chromosome 9: possible involvement in the genesis
of the Philadelphia chromosome translocation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99:
9882-9887, 2002.

63. Savage, D. G.; Antman, K. H.: Imatinib mesylate--a new oral targeted
therapy. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 683-693, 2002.

64. Scherr, M.; Battmer, K.; Winkler, T.; Heidenreich, O.; Ganser,
A.; Eder, M.: Specific inhibition of bcr-abl gene expression by small
interfering RNA. Blood 101: 1566-1569, 2003.

65. Shtivelman, E.; Gale, R. P.; Dreazen, O.; Berrebi, A.; Zaizov,
R.; Kubonishi, I.; Miyoshi, I.; Canaani, E.: bcr-abl RNA in patients
with chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 69: 971-973, 1987.

66. Shtivelman, E.; Lifshitz, B.; Gale, R. P.; Canaani, E.: Fused
transcript of abl and bcr genes in chronic myelogenous leukaemia. Nature 315:
550-554, 1985.

67. Skorski, T.; Nieborowska-Skorska, M.; Nicolaides, N. C.; Szczylik,
C.; Iversen, P.; Iozzo, R. V.; Zon, G.; Calabretta, B.: Suppression
of Philadelphia-1 leukemia cell growth in mice by BCR-ABL antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 4504-4508, 1994.

68. Stam, K.; Heisterkamp, N.; Grosveld, G.; de Klein, A.; Verma,
R. S.; Coleman, M.; Dosik, H.; Groffen, J.: Evidence of a new chimeric
bcr/c-abl mRNA in patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia and the
Philadelphia chromosome. New Eng. J. Med. 313: 1429-1433, 1985.

69. Stam, K.; Heisterkamp, N.; Reynolds, F. H., Jr.; Groffen, J.:
Evidence that the phl gene encodes a 160,000-dalton phosphoprotein
with associated kinase activity. Molec. Cell. Biol. 7: 1955-1960,
1987.

70. Swan, D. C.; McBride, O. W.; Robbins, K. C.; Keithley, D. A.;
Reddy, E. P.; Aaronson, S. A.: Chromosomal mapping of the simian
sarcoma virus onc gene analogue in human cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 4691-4695, 1982.

71. Tanabe, T.; Kuwabara, T.; Warashina, M.; Tani, K.; Taira, K.;
Asano, S.: Oncogene inactivation in a mouse model: tissue invasion
by leukaemic cells is stalled by loading them with a designer ribozyme. Nature 406:
473-474, 2000.

72. Teyssier, J. R.; Bartram, C. R.; Deville, J.; Potron, G.; Pigeon,
F.: C-abl oncogene and chromosome 22 'bcr' juxtaposition in chronic
myelogenous leukemia. New Eng. J. Med. 312: 1393-1394, 1985.

73. Tkachuk, D. C.; Westbrook, C. A.; Andreeff, M.; Donlon, T. A.;
Cleary, M. L.; Suryanarayan, K.; Homge, M.; Redner, A.; Gray, J.;
Pinkel, D.: Detection of bcr-abl fusion in chronic myelogeneous leukemia
by in situ hybridization. Science 250: 559-562, 1990.

74. Verhest, A.; Monsieur, R.: Philadelphia chromosome-positive thrombocythemia
with leukemic transformation. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 308: 1603,
1983.

75. Verma, R. S.; Dosik, H.: Heteromorphisms of the Philadelphia
(Ph-1) chromosome in patients with chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML).
I. Classification and clinical significance. Brit. J. Haemat. 45:
215-222, 1980.

76. Voncken, J. W.; van Schaick, H.; Kaartinen, V.; Deemer, K.; Coates,
T.; Landing, B.; Pattengale, P.; Dorseuil, O.; Bokoch, G. M.; Groffen,
J.; Heisterkamp, N.: Increased neutrophil respiratory burst in bcr-null
mutants. Cell 80: 719-728, 1995.

77. Zhao, C.; Chen, A.; Jamieson, C. H.; Fereshteh, M.; Abrahamsson,
A.; Blum, J.; Kwon, H. Y.; Kim, J.; Chute, J. P.; Rizzieri, D.; Munchhof,
M.; VanArsdale, T.; Beachy, P. A.; Reya, T.: Hedgehog signalling
is essential for maintenance of cancer stem cells in myeloid leukaemia. Nature 458:
776-779, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature 460: 652 only, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/31/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/25/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/26/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/1/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/27/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/2/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/28/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/6/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
terry: 7/27/2012
alopez: 7/8/2011
alopez: 6/22/2011
alopez: 6/20/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
carol: 10/25/2010
alopez: 9/8/2009
terry: 8/27/2009
alopez: 5/6/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
terry: 1/27/2009
ckniffin: 10/13/2008
carol: 8/5/2008
alopez: 6/18/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
joanna: 5/19/2006
mgross: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/31/2006
carol: 1/30/2006
alopez: 2/7/2005
alopez: 11/13/2003
tkritzer: 7/17/2003
tkritzer: 5/28/2003
terry: 5/16/2003
mgross: 4/14/2003
tkritzer: 4/10/2003
cwells: 2/25/2003
carol: 9/30/2002
tkritzer: 9/26/2002
cwells: 9/25/2002
carol: 9/25/2002
cwells: 9/24/2002
carol: 9/20/2002
cwells: 7/23/2002
terry: 7/1/2002
alopez: 3/15/2002
terry: 3/14/2002
cwells: 3/6/2002
alopez: 1/15/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
carol: 11/26/2001
alopez: 8/31/2001
terry: 8/27/2001
mcapotos: 6/1/2001
mcapotos: 5/25/2001
terry: 5/18/2001
mcapotos: 5/2/2001
mcapotos: 4/26/2001
terry: 4/25/2001
mcapotos: 12/6/2000
terry: 11/27/2000
terry: 10/6/2000
alopez: 8/2/2000
terry: 8/2/2000
alopez: 3/6/2000
alopez: 12/29/1999
terry: 12/28/1999
carol: 5/10/1999
terry: 5/6/1999
alopez: 10/19/1998
mark: 2/5/1998
alopez: 6/2/1997
mark: 10/16/1996
terry: 5/16/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
mark: 6/27/1995
terry: 12/21/1994
mimadm: 11/5/1994
jason: 6/13/1994
carol: 9/1/1993
carol: 8/26/1993

609262	TITLE *609262 CEREBLON; CRBN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Higgins et al. (2004) identified a transcript, designated LOC51185,
within a candidate region for a form of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
mental retardation (MRT2; 607417) that was mapped to chromosome
3pter-p25 in a large American family of German ancestry. The
corresponding cDNA encodes a 442-amino acid protein with a 237-residue
ATP-dependent Lon protease domain and several phosphorylation sites. The
gene was named 'cereblon' based on its putative role in cerebral
development and the large, highly conserved Lon domain. RT-PCR
demonstrated abundant expression of CRBN in the human brain.

Jo et al. (2005) cloned rat Crbn from a rat brain cDNA library. The
deduced 445-amino acid proteins shows 98% sequence identity with its
mouse ortholog. Rat Crbn contains an N-terminal domain of the Lon
protease, a RGS-like domain, a leucine zipper motif, and 4 putative
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues detected
strong Crbn expression in brain, liver, kidney, and testis, and in situ
hybridization of rat brain showed strong expression in hippocampus,
habenula, and cortex.

GENE STRUCTURE

Higgins et al. (2004) determined that the CRBN gene contains 11 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Ito et al. (2010) identified CRBN as a thalidomide-binding protein. CRBN
forms an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex with damaged DNA-binding protein-1
(DDB1; 600045) and CUL4A (603137) that is important for limb outgrowth
and expression of the fibroblast growth factor receptor FGF8 (600483) in
zebrafish and chicks. Thalidomide initiates its teratogenic effects by
binding to CRBN and inhibiting the associated ubiquitin ligase activity.
Ito et al. (2010) concluded that their study revealed a basis for
thalidomide teratogenicity and may contribute to the development of
thalidomide derivatives without teratogenic activity.

MAPPING

Higgins et al. (2004) identified the CRBN gene on chromosome 3pter-p25.

Jo et al. (2005) mapped the rat Crbn gene to chromosome 4q41. A mouse
ortholog was mapped to mouse chromosome 6.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a family with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
mental retardation, Higgins et al. (2004) identified a homozygous
arg419-to-ter mutation in the CRBN gene (R419X; 609262.0001) that
segregated with the phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

In rat brain, Jo et al. (2005) observed direct interaction of rat Crbn
with the cytosolic C terminus of the large conductance calcium-activated
potassium BK channel alpha-subunit (KCNMA1; 600150). Direct association
of rat Crbn with Kcnma1 was confirmed by immunoprecipitation in brain
lysate, and the 2 proteins colocalized in cultured rat hippocampal
neurons. Rat Crbn suppressed ionic currents of the channel and decreased
formation of the tetrameric BK channel complex, thus reducing surface
expression of functional channels. Jo et al. (2005) concluded that CRBN
may play an important role in modulating BK channel activity by
affecting assembly and surface expression.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2
CRBN, ARG419TER

In affected members of a large family with autosomal recessive
nonsyndromic mental retardation (607417) previously described by Higgins
et al. (2000), Higgins et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 1274C-T
transition in exon 11 of the CRBN gene, resulting in an arg419-to-ter
(R419X) substitution. The mutation was not detected in 400 control
chromosomes. The truncation spares the Lon domain, but disrupts an
N-myristoylation site and deletes a casein kinase-2 phosphorylation site
at the C terminus, which may prevent proper subcellular targeting. As
human Lon-containing proteins are localized to the mitochondria, where
they selectively degrade short-lived polypeptides, Higgins et al. (2004)
hypothesized that a defect in the CRBN gene may perturb nuclear
regulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism.

Using RT-PCR to examine CRBN expression in lymphoblastoid cells derived
from patients with the R419X mutation, Higgins et al. (2008) found that
R419X-mutant CRBN was expressed at levels similar to wildtype protein.
However, presence of the mutant CRBN resulted in significantly different
expression of different KCNMA1 (600150) channel isoforms. Mutant CRBN
protein was associated with persistent postnatal expression of the
KCNMA1 isoform containing a site 2 insert that is usually downregulated
in adult life. Persistence of protein isoforms with the site 2 insert
would result in BK channels with higher intracellular calcium
sensitivity, faster activation, and slower deactivation kinetics
compared to the mature isoform without the site 2 insert. Higgins et al.
(2008) postulated that such alterations could contribute to abnormal
cortical development and cognitive impairments in patients with the
mutation. The authors noted that R419X-mutant CRBN escapes
nonsense-mediated decay.

REFERENCE 1. Higgins, J. J.; Hao, J.; Kosofsky, B. E.; Rajadhyaksha, A. M.:
Dysregulation of large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel expression
in nonsyndromal mental retardation due to a cereblon p.R419X mutation. Neurogenetics 9:
219-223, 2008.

2. Higgins, J. J.; Pucilowska, J.; Lombardi, R. Q.; Rooney, J. P.
: A mutation in a novel ATP-dependent Lon protease gene in a kindred
with mild mental retardation. Neurology 63: 1927-1931, 2004.

3. Higgins, J. J.; Rosen, D. R.; Loveless, J. M.; Clyman, J. C.; Grau,
M. J.: A gene for nonsyndromic mental retardation maps to chromosome
3p25-pter. Neurology 55: 335-340, 2000.

4. Ito, T.; Ando, H.; Suzuki, T.; Ogura, T.; Hotta, K.; Imamura, Y.;
Yamaguchi, Y.; Handa, H.: Identification of a primary target of thalidomide
teratogenicity. Science 327: 1345-1350, 2010.

5. Jo, S.; Lee, K.-H.; Song, S.; Jung, Y.-K.; Park, C.-S.: Identification
and functional characterization of cereblon as a binding protein for
large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channel in rat brain. J.
Neurochem. 94: 1212-1224, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/13/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/31/2008

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/16/2005

EDITED alopez: 04/15/2010
alopez: 4/15/2010
terry: 4/13/2010
wwang: 11/11/2008
ckniffin: 10/31/2008
carol: 10/15/2008
tkritzer: 3/17/2005
ckniffin: 3/16/2005

603153	TITLE *603153 RAD1, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; RAD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the fission yeast S. pombe, the rad1+ gene product is required for
DNA repair and replication. Parker et al. (1998) cloned 2 alternatively
spliced human cDNAs encoding proteins with significant homology to yeast
rad1+. The longer cDNA, called Hrad1A, encodes a 282-amino acid
polypeptide, while Hrad1B encodes a 163-amino acid polypeptide. Northern
blot analysis revealed that human RAD1 is expressed as mRNAs of 5, 3,
and 1.3 kb in a variety of human tissues, with higher levels present in
some cancer cell lines. Northern blot analysis of cells subjected to
ultraviolet radiation demonstrated that human RAD1 expression is not
induced in response to DNA damage. Purified RAD1 exhibited terminal
exonuclease activity on double-stranded DNA, with a preference for
3-prime ends.

Independently, Udell et al. (1998) isolated RAD1 cDNAs from a
spontaneously transformed human keratinocyte cDNA library. The cDNAs
encode the 282-amino acid RAD1 isoform, which is 90% and 27% identical
to mouse Rad1 and S. pombe rad1+, respectively. Udell et al. (1998)
found that expression of human RAD1 in yeast rad1 mutants partially
restores radiation resistance and G2 checkpoint proficiency.

GENE FUNCTION

Volkmer and Karnitz (1999) demonstrated that the human RAD1 and HUS1
(603760) proteins associate in a complex that interacts with a highly
modified form of RAD9 (603761). They concluded that these 3 proteins are
central components of a DNA damage-responsive protein complex in human
cells.

MAPPING

Parker et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
RAD1 gene to human chromosome 5p13.3-p13.2. The authors stated that loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) of this region has been linked to a variety of
human neoplasias. This mapping assignment was confirmed by Dean et al.
(1998) using fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation hybrid
analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Dean, F. B.; Lian, L.; O'Donnell, M.: cDNA cloning and gene mapping
of human homologs for Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad17, rad1, and hus1
and cloning of homologs from mouse, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila
melanogaster. Genomics 54: 424-436, 1998.

2. Parker, A. E.; Van de Weyer, I.; Laus, M. C.; Oostveen, I.; Yon,
J.; Verhasselt, P.; Luyten, W. H. M. L.: A human homologue of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe rad1+ checkpoint gene encodes an exonuclease. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
18332-18339, 1998.

3. Udell, C. M.; Lee, S. K.; Davey, S.: HRAD1 and MRAD1 encode mammalian
homologues of the fission yeast rad1+ cell cycle checkpoint control
gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 3971-3976, 1998.

4. Volkmer, E.; Karnitz, L. M.: Human homologs of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe Rad1, Hus1, and Rad9 form a DNA damage-responsive protein complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 567-570, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/21/1999
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 12/22/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 05/07/2010
alopez: 4/21/1999
psherman: 12/22/1998
alopez: 10/19/1998
alopez: 10/16/1998

607707	TITLE *607707 CALCIUM/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE II-BETA; CAMK2B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CAMK2B belongs to a family of type II multifunctional calcium- and
calmodulin (see 114180)-dependent protein kinases. There are at least 4
CAMK2 genes, and each yields several isoforms through alternative
splicing. CAMK2B is a prominent kinase in the central nervous system and
may function in long-term potentiation and neurotransmitter release.

CLONING

Tombes and Krystal (1997) cloned a number of CAMK2B variants from
several human tumor cell line and brain cDNA libraries. CAMK2B showed
wide tissue and cell distribution, but 1 variant predominated in adult
brain. The expression of other variants depended upon the tissue of
origin and whether the source was normal or tumor tissue.

By searching an EST database using rat Camk2 as query, followed by
screening a brain cDNA library, Li et al. (2001) obtained a full-length
cDNA encoding CAMK2B. The deduced protein contains 542 amino acids. A
comparison of CAMK2B and CAMK2A (114078) detected no amino acid changes
within the functional domains, including the ATP-binding site, the
calmodulin-binding domain, and autophosphorylation sites. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 3.9-kb transcript in adult and fetal brain;
expression was slightly lower in fetal brain. Using PCR primers designed
to identify alternatively spliced isoforms, Li et al. (2001) identified
3 CAMK2B isoforms in adult and fetal brain. Like other CAMK2 isoforms,
the CAMK2B isoforms have an insertion or deletion of 11 to 39 amino
acids within the central variable region.

Wang et al. (2000) identified and cloned CAMK2B by searching an EST
database using mouse Camk2b. They obtained a full-length cDNA by 5-prime
RACE of a brain cDNA library. Wang et al. (2000) also identified 5
splice variants resulting from alternative splicing within 7 central
variable domains, termed V1 to V7. The deduced proteins have calculated
molecular masses between 49 and 60 kD. Transient transfection of 3
CAMK2B variants in HEK293 cells revealed that all 3 were cytosolic
proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2000) showed that full-length CAMK2B and a variant lacking
V1 displayed Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase activity against a
peptide substrate. Another variant lacking V1 through V5 did not exhibit
significant kinase activity under the same conditions.

By Western blot analysis, Thiagarajan et al. (2002) found that the
protein levels of Camk2a and Camk2b were inversely related during
activity in cultured rat pup hippocampal neurons. The levels of Camk2a
increased with heightened activity, and the levels of Camk2b increased
with suppression of activity. Thiagarajan et al. (2002) hypothesized
that the change in the ratio may help tune the Camk2 holoenzyme to
changing intensities of Ca(2+) signaling.

Novak et al. (2000) determined that expression of CAMK2B mRNA was
elevated about 2-fold in postmortem frontal cortex of schizophrenia
(181500) patients relative to controls.

Konig et al. (2010) used an integrative systems approach, based on
genomewide RNA interference screening, to identify 295 cellular
cofactors required for early-stage influenza virus replication. Within
this group, those involved in kinase-regulated signaling,
ubiquitination, and phosphatase activity are the most highly enriched,
and 181 factors assemble into a highly significant host-pathogen
interaction network. Moreover, 219 of the 295 factors were confirmed to
be required for efficient wildtype influenza virus growth, and further
analysis of a subset of genes showed 23 factors essential for viral
entry, including members of the vacuolar ATPase (see 192132) and COPI
(see 601924) protein families, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
proteins, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-beta (605004).
Furthermore, 10 proteins were confirmed to be involved in post-entry
steps of influenza virus replication. These include nuclear import
components, proteases, and CAMK2B. Notably, growth of swine-origin HIN1
influenza virus is also dependent on the identified host factors, and
Konig et al. (2010) showed that small molecule inhibitors of several
factors, including vATPase and CAMK2B, antagonize influenza virus
replication.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang et al. (2000) determined that the variable region of the CAMK2B
protein is encoded by at least 7 exons. Alternative splicing within this
region gives rise to CAMK2B variants.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2000) mapped the CAMK2B gene
to chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. Konig, R.; Stertz, S.; Zhou, Y.; Inoue, A.; Hoffmann, H.-H.; Bhattacharyya,
S.; Alamares, J. G.; Tscherne, D. M.; Ortigoza, M. B.; Liang, Y.;
Gao, Q.; Andrews, S. E.; and 14 others: Human host factors required
for influenza virus replication. Nature 463: 813-817, 2010.

2. Li, G.; Laabich, A.; Liu, L. O.; Xue, J.; Cooper, N. G. F.: Molecular
cloning and sequence analyses of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II from fetal and adult human brain: sequence analyses of human
brain calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Molec. Biol.
Rep. 28: 35-41, 2001.

3. Novak, G.; Seeman, P.; Tallerico, T.: Schizophrenia: elevated
mRNA for calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-beta in frontal
cortex. Molec. Brain Res. 82: 95-100, 2000.

4. Thiagarajan, T. C.; Piedras-Renteria, E. S.; Tsien, R. W.: Alpha-
and beta-CaMKII: inverse regulation by neuronal activity and opposing
effects on synaptic strength. Neuron 36: 1103-1114, 2002.

5. Tombes, R. M.; Krystal, G. W.: Identification of novel human tumor
cell-specific CaMK-II variants. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1355: 281-292,
1997.

6. Wang, P.; Wu, Y.-L.; Zhou, T.-H.; Sun, Y.; Pei, G.: Identification
of alternative splicing variants of the beta subunit of human Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II with different activities. FEBS Lett. 475: 107-110,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/23/2003

EDITED carol: 12/20/2012
terry: 7/19/2011
alopez: 7/7/2011
terry: 7/1/2011
alopez: 3/8/2010
terry: 3/5/2010
mgross: 4/23/2003

606016	TITLE *606016 KELCH-LIKE ECH-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; KEAP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KEAP1 is a substrate adaptor protein for a CUL3 (603136)-dependent
ubiquitin ligase complex that functions as a sensor for thiol-reactive
chemopreventive compounds and oxidative stress (Lo and Hannink, 2006).

CLONING

Transcription factor NRF2 (600492), which is homologous to the chicken
Ech protein, is essential for the expression of detoxifying enzymes and
oxidative stress-inducible genes to protect against DNA damage. Using a
yeast 2-hybrid screen of a mouse embryo cDNA library with mouse Nrf2 as
bait, Itoh et al. (1999) isolated cDNAs encoding a protein they named
'Kelch-like Ech-associated protein-1,' or Keap1, due to its resemblance
to the Drosophila Kelch protein. Sequence analysis predicted that the
624-amino acid mouse protein is 94% identical to the 624-amino acid
human KIAA0132 protein identified by Nagase et al. (1995). Keap1
contains a central BTB/POZ domain and a C-terminal double glycine repeat
(DGR), or Kelch, module. By RT-PCR analysis, Nagase et al. (1995)
detected strong expression of KIAA0132 in heart and skeletal muscle,
with lower expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, testis, ovary,
small intestine, and colon, and weaker or undetectable expression in
other tissues.

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the KIAA0132 gene (KEAP1) to chromosome 19
by analysis of a human-rodent hybrid cell panel.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid and BIAcore analyses of mutant Keap1, Itoh et al.
(1999) showed that the Kelch motifs of Keap1 interact with the Neh2
domain of Nrf2 and that this interaction is required for the repression
of Nrf2 by Keap1. Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated that Keap1 is
expressed in the cytoplasm with Nrf2. In the presence of the
electrophilic agent diethylmalate, Nrf2 activity was released from Keap1
and Nrf2 translocated to the nucleus.

Eades et al. (2011) found that microRNA-200A (MIR200A; 612090) bound to
the 3-prime UTR of the KEAP1 transcript, leading to degradation of the
mRNA. Epigenetic silencing of MIR200A in breast cancer cells resulted in
KEAP1 dysregulation, inhibition of NRF2 transcriptional activity, and
reduced expression of NQO1 (125860), a detoxifying NRF2 target gene.
Overexpression of MIR200A in human breast cancer cells or treatment of a
mouse model of breast cancer with a histone deacetylase inhibitor
enhanced MIR200A-dependent KEAP1 downregulation and restored NRF2
expression.

Using mass spectrometric analysis and database analysis to identify
transcripts encoding proteins other than NRF2 that copurified with KEAP1
from the MD-MB-231 breast carcinoma cell line, Lo and Hannink (2006)
identified 2 splice variants of PGAM5 (614939). Protein interaction
assays and mutation analysis revealed that the putative N-terminal
KEAP1-binding motif of both PGAM5 isoforms interacted with the Kelch
domain of KEAP1 in transfected HEK293T cells. Coexpression of KEAP1 with
the long isoform of PGAM5 (PGAM5L) resulted in PGAM5L ubiquitination and
reduced PGAM5L half-life and total protein content. Coexpression of CUL3
and RBX1 (603814) markedly induced KEAP1-dependent PGAML ubiquitination,
and proteasome inhibition blocked KEAP1-dependent PGAM5L degradation.
Oxidative stress or treatment of cells with the chemotherapeutic
isothiocyanate sulforaphane inhibited KEAP1-dependent PGAM5L
ubiquitination and increased steady-state PGAM5L protein levels.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Padmanabhan et al. (2006) resolved the crystal structure of the 6-bladed
Kelch repeat and the C-terminal region of mouse Keap1. Extensive inter-
and intrablade hydrogen bonds maintained the structural integrity and
proper association of Keap1 with Nrf2. A peptide containing the ETGE
motif of Nrf2 bound the beta propeller of Keap1 at the entrance of the
central cavity on the bottom side via electrostatic interactions with
conserved arginines. Padmanabhan et al. (2006) identified 2 mutations in
cell lines from lung cancer patients that disrupted the interaction
between Keap1 and Nrf2, thus reducing the ability of Keap1 to repress
Nrf2 transcriptional activity.

ANIMAL MODEL

Transcription factor NRF2 (600492) regulates a battery of detoxifying
and antioxidant genes, and KEAP1 represses NRF2 function. Wakabayashi et
al. (2003) found that Keap1-deficient mice died postnatally, probably
from malnutrition resulting from hyperkeratosis in the esophagus and
forestomach. Nrf2 activity affects the expression levels of several
squamous epithelial genes. Biochemical data showed that, without Keap1,
Nrf2 constitutively accumulates in the nucleus to stimulate
transcription of cytoprotective genes. Breeding to Nrf2-deficient mice
reversed the phenotypic Keap1 deficiencies. These experiments showed
that Keap1 acts upstream of Nrf2 in the cellular response to oxidative
and xenobiotic stress.

Wakabayashi et al. (2003) observed that the transient scaling phenotype
of Keap1 -/- mouse skin is similar to that of autosomal recessive
congenital ichthyosis (ARCI). In a Finnish kindred, Virolainen et al.
(2000) identified an ARCI locus corresponding to 19p13.2-p13.1 (see
ARCI5; 604777). The human KEAP1 locus is located at the same chromosomal
position as this autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis locus. Thus,
KEAP1 may have some relationship to congenital ichthyosis. The scaling
of the reported Finnish cases was mild, as in the scaling phenotype of
the Keap1 mutants, but the neonatal onset of the disorder in Keap1
mutants differed from the human disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Eades, G.; Yang, M.; Yao, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, Q.: miR-200a regulates
Nrf2 activation by targeting Keap1 mRNA in breast cancer cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 286: 40725-40733, 2011.

2. Itoh, K.; Wakabayashi, N.; Katoh, Y.; Ishii, T.; Igarashi, K.;
Engel, J. D.; Yamamoto, M.: Keap1 represses nuclear activation of
antioxidant responsive elements by Nrf2 through binding to the amino-terminal
Neh2 domain. Genes Dev. 13: 76-86, 1999.

3. Lo, S.-C.; Hannink, M.: PGAM5, a Bcl-X-L-interacting protein,
is a novel substrate for the redox-regulated Keap1-dependent ubiquitin
ligase complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 37893-37903, 2006.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

5. Padmanabhan, B.; Tong, K. I.; Ohta, T.; Nakamura, Y.; Scharlock,
M.; Ohtsuji, M.; Kang, M.-I.; Kobayashi, A.; Yokoyama, S.; Yamamoto,
M.: Structural basis for defects of Keap1 activity provoked by its
point mutations in lung cancer. Molec. Cell 21: 689-700, 2006.

6. Virolainen, E.; Wessman, M.; Hovatta, I.; Niemi, K.-M.; Ignatius,
J.; Kere, J.; Peltonen, L.; Palotie, A.: Assignment of a novel locus
for autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis to chromosome 19p13.1-p13.2. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1132-1137, 2000.

7. Wakabayashi, N.; Itoh, K.; Wakabayashi, J.; Motohashi, H.; Noda,
S.; Takahashi, S.; Imakado, S.; Kotsuji, T.; Otsuka, F.; Roop, D.
R.; Harada, T.; Engel, J. D.; Yamamoto, M.: Keap1-null mutation leads
to postnatal lethality due to constitutive Nrf2 activation. Nature
Genet. 35: 238-246, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/31/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/14/2001

EDITED carol: 01/16/2013
mgross: 11/19/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
mgross: 3/31/2006
alopez: 10/31/2003
alopez: 10/1/2003
mgross: 9/4/2001
mgross: 6/14/2001

156565	TITLE *156565 N-@METHYLPURINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; MPG
;;METHYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; MDG;;
3-@METHYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE;;
3@MeAde DNA GLYCOSYLASE;;
3-@ALKYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; AAG;;
ALKYLPURINE DNA N-GLYCOSYLASE; APNG
DESCRIPTION The bacterial enzyme 3-methyladenine (3MeA) DNA glycosylase repairs the
lethal lesion 3MeA that blocks DNA replication in Escherichia coli. The
removal of 3MeA is mediated by two 3MeA DNA glycosylases in E. coli,
encoded by the alkA and tag genes. Using a human cDNA library cloned
into a bacterial expression vector, Boosalis et al. (1991) cloned a
1.15-kb cDNA that rescued alkA(-) tag(-) glycosylase-deficient E. coli
from alkylation-induced killing, and produced a 5-fold increase in 3MeA
DNA glycosylase activity in the E. coli strain. The cDNA hybridized to
human genomic DNA but did not hybridize to E. coli or yeast DNA. DNA
sequence analysis defined an open reading frame coding for a 33-kD
protein that showed extensive amino acid homology with rat 3MeA DNA
glycosylase. The gene (designated N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase, MPG)
was mapped to human chromosome 16 by analysis of a panel of DNAs from
mouse/human and hamster/human hybrid cell lines. Samson et al. (1991)
suggested that because of the 85% identity of 1 part of the human
glycosylase with the middle of the rat glycosylase polypeptide and,
hence, the likely common origin of the rat and human glycosylases, the
human gene should be called AAG for 3-alkyladenine DNA glycosylase.
Vickers et al. (1993) also isolated a cDNA corresponding to the human
MPG gene. They showed that the gene comprises 5 exons and lies within a
group of closely spaced genes in the terminal region of chromosome 16p.
The MPG gene was expressed in all cell lines and tissues examined, but
was found at particularly high levels in a colon adenocarcinoma cell
line (HT29). The completely characterized human MPG gene was found to
span 7 to 8 kb of genomic DNA and to be localized 75 kb upstream of the
embryonic zeta-globin gene (HBZ; 142310).

Kielman et al. (1995) described the genomic organization of the mouse
Mpg gene. Preliminary analyses by Kielman et al. (1993) and Kielman et
al. (1994) indicated that as in the human, the gene is upstream of the
alpha-globin gene cluster on mouse chromosome 11.

The human enzyme 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase removes a diverse group
of damaged bases from DNA, including cytotoxic and mutagenic alkylation
adducts of purines. Lau et al. (1998) reported the crystal structure of
human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase complexed to a mechanism-based
pyrrolidine inhibitor. The enzyme had intercalated into the minor groove
of DNA, causing the abasic pyrrolidine nucleotide to flip into the
enzyme active site, where a bound water was poised for nucleophilic
attack.

ANIMAL MODEL

By targeted homologous recombination, Engelward et al. (1997) generated
mice deficient in the 3MeA DNA glycosylase encoded by the Aag gene. In
several mouse tissues, the Aag gene product appears to be the only DNA
glycosylase that is active against 3MeA, hypoxanthine, and
1,N6-ethenoadenine. Although the Aag protein has the capacity to remove
8-oxoguanine DNA lesions, it does not appear to be the major glycosylase
for 8-oxoguanine repair.

To assess the contribution of Apng to the repair of several mutagenic
lesions in vivo, Hang et al. (1997) biochemically analyzed cell-free
extracts of tissues from mice with a targeted deletion of the Apng gene.
They found that both 1,N6-ethenoadenine and hypoxanthine are substrates
for Apng, but 3,N4-ethenocytosine and 8-oxoguanine are not.

Elder et al. (1998) developed mice deficient in
alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase by targeted disruption. Following
treatment with DNA-methylating agents, increased persistence of
7-methylguanine (meG) was found in liver sections of APNG knockout mice
in comparison with wildtype mice, demonstrating an in vivo phenotype for
the APNG-null animals. Unlike other null mutants of the basic excision
repair pathway, the APNG knockout mice exhibited a very mild phenotype,
showed no outward abnormalities, were fertile, and had an apparently
normal life span. Neither a difference in the number of leukocytes in
peripheral blood nor a difference in the number of bone marrow
polychromatic erythrocytes was found when knockout and wildtype mice
were exposed to methylating or chloroethylating agents. Treatment with
methyl methanesulfonate resulted in 3- to 4-fold more HPRT (308000)
mutations in splenic T lymphocytes from APNG knockout mice than in those
from wildtype mice. These mutations were predominantly single-basepair
changes that most likely were caused by 3-meA and 3- or 7-meG,
respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Boosalis, M.; Derfler, B.; Call, K.; Samson, L.: Cloning of a
human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase cDNA whose gene maps to human
chromosome 16. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49 (suppl.): 399 only,
1991.

2. Elder, R. H.; Jansen, J. G.; Weeks, R. J.; Willington, M. A.; Deans,
B.; Watson, A. J.; Mynett, K. J.; Bailey, J. A.; Cooper, D. P.; Rafferty,
J. A.; Heeran, M. C; Wijnhoven, S. W. P.; van Zeeland, A. A.; Margison,
G. P.: Alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase knockout mice show increased
susceptibility to induction of mutations by methyl methanesulfonate. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 18: 5828-5837, 1998.

3. Engelward, B. P.; Weeda, G.; Wyatt, M. D.; Broekhof, J. L. M.;
de Wit, J.; Donker, I.; Allan, J. M.; Gold, B.; Hoeijmakers, J. H.
J.; Samson, L. D.: Base excision repair deficient mice lacking the
Aag alkyladenine DNA glycosylase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13087-13092,
1997.

4. Hang, B.; Singer, B.; Margison, G. P.; Elder, R. H.: Targeted
deletion of alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase in mice eliminates repair
of 1,N6-ethenoadenine and hypoxanthine but not of 3,N4-ethenocytosine
or 8-oxoguanine. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 12869-12874, 1997.

5. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Structure of the mouse
3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase gene and exact localization upstream
of the alpha-globin gene cluster on chromosome 11. Mammalian Genome 6:
499-504, 1995.

6. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Localization and characterization
of the mouse alpha-globin locus control region. Genomics 21: 431-433,
1994.

7. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Devi, T. S.; Fodde, R.; Bernini, L.
F.: Homology of a 130-kb region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster,
the alpha-locus controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human
and mouse. Mammalian Genome 4: 314-323, 1993.

8. Lau, A. Y.; Scharer, O. D.; Samson, L.; Verdine, G. L.; Ellenberger,
T.: Crystal structure of a human alkylbase-DNA repair enzyme complexed
to DNA: mechanisms for nucleotide flipping and base excision. Cell 95:
249-258, 1998.

9. Samson, L.; Derfler, B.; Boosalis, M.; Call, K.: Cloning and characterization
of a 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase cDNA from human cells whose gene
maps to chromosome 16. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9127-9131, 1991.

10. Vickers, M. A.; Vyas, P.; Harris, P. C.; Simmons, D. L.; Higgs,
D. R.: Structure of the human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase gene
and localization close to the 16p telomere. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
3437-3441, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/11/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/6/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/4/1991

EDITED joanna: 12/17/2009
terry: 10/12/2005
alopez: 8/1/2000
terry: 7/28/2000
carol: 11/13/1998
psherman: 11/6/1998
terry: 7/8/1997
mark: 10/18/1995
carol: 3/10/1994
carol: 5/21/1993
carol: 8/28/1992
carol: 6/19/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

609097	TITLE *609097 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 24; FBXO24
;;FBX24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO24, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXO24 protein contains a central F
box and a C-terminal RCC1 (179710) fold.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO24 gene maps to chromosome 7q22
and the mouse Fbxo24 gene maps to chromosome 5G2.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/15/2004

609024	TITLE *609024 KDEL ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM PROTEIN RETENTION RECEPTOR 2; KDELR2
;;ERD2-LIKE PROTEIN 1; ELP1;;
ERD2.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Resident soluble proteins within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) are retained there by virtue of a C-terminal tetrapeptide ER
retention signal, commonly lys-asp-glu-leu (KDEL) in mammals. KDELR2 is
one of the receptors that cycle between the Golgi apparatus and the ER,
returning proteins containing the KDEL signal to the ER (Lewis and
Pelham, 1992).

CLONING

By screening cDNA libraries with a KDELR1 (131235) sequence, followed by
5-prime RACE of a Burkitt lymphoma cell line cDNA library, Lewis and
Pelham (1992) cloned KDELR2, which they designated ERD2.2. The deduced
212-amino acid protein contains 7 transmembrane domains and shares 83.5%
identity with KDELR1, with most differences between the 2 receptors in
the transmembrane spans.

Using degenerate PCR primers designed from a conserved region of KDELR1
to amplify related cDNAs from an erythroleukemia cell line cDNA library,
followed by screening a T-cell cDNA library, Hsu et al. (1992) cloned
KDELR2, which they called ELP1. The deduced 214-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 24.6 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a
KDELR2 transcript of about 1.2 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Lewis and Pelham (1992) observed that KDELR2 transfected into COS-7
cells accumulated predominantly in the Golgi complex, but when the
receptor was coexpressed with a target protein containing the KDEL ER
retention signal, it redistributed to the ER, mirroring the behavior of
KDELR1 under the same conditions.

Hsu et al. (1992) found that about half of KDELR1- or KDELR2-transfected
COS cells expressed the receptors in a juxtanuclear, Golgi-like pattern,
while the remainder showed a reticular, ER-like pattern with nuclear
envelope staining. Overexpression of the KDEL receptors led to the
ER-like pattern and was associated with the collapse of the Golgi
apparatus into the ER, as seen in cells treated with brefeldin A. In
addition to the loss of the Golgi apparatus as a distinct organelle,
overexpression resulted in redistribution of the Golgi coat protein,
beta-COP (COPB; 600959), to the cytosol, addition of complex
oligosaccharides to resident ER glycoproteins, and blockage of
anterograde traffic. Hsu et al. (1992) concluded that the KDEL receptors
provide signals that regulate retrograde traffic between the Golgi and
the ER.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the KDELR2
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP SHGC-55953).

REFERENCE 1. Hsu, V. W.; Shah, N.; Klausner, R. D.: A brefeldin A-like phenotype
is induced by the overexpression of a human ERD-2-like protein, ELP-1. Cell 69:
625-635, 1992.

2. Lewis, M. J.; Pelham, H. R. B.: Sequence of a second human KDEL
receptor. J. Molec. Biol. 226: 913-916, 1992.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/10/2004

EDITED mgross: 11/10/2004

606494	TITLE *606494 ST3 BETA-GALACTOSIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE 3; ST3GAL3
;;SIALYLTRANSFERASE 6; SIAT6;;
N-ACETYLLACTOSAMINIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE;;
ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE II; ST3GALII;;
ST3N
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ST3GAL3 gene encodes
beta-galactoside-alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase-III, a Golgi resident
membrane protein that forms the sialyl Lewis a (sLe-a) epitope on
glyocoproteins. These glycoproteins form the glycocalyx, composed of
sialic acids that act as key determinants of a variety of cellular
recognition and communication processes (summary by Hu et al., 2011).

CLONING

By screening a human placenta cDNA library with a probe based on the
sialyl motif (a highly conserved region in the catalytic domain of
sialyltransferases), Kitagawa and Paulson (1993) isolated a cDNA
encoding SIAT6, which they termed ST3N (EC 2.4.99.6). The deduced
375-amino acid protein is 97% identical to the rat protein. SDS-PAGE
analysis showed expression of an 80-kD protein having sialyltransferase
activity. Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript with abundant expression in skeletal muscle and high
expression in fetal tissue but low expression in placenta.

Using Northern blot analysis, Kitagawa and Paulson (1994) evaluated the
differential expression of 5 human sialyltransferase genes in adult and
fetal tissues. A 2.7-kb ST3N transcript was expressed highly in skeletal
muscle and moderately in most other tissues examined. A 3.8-kb
transcript was also expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Taniguchi et al. (2003) determined that the 5-prime UTR of the ST3GAL3
gene consists of 2 exons. The 5-prime flanking region of the promoter
lacks canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes, but it contains several putative
transcriptional factor binding sites.

Hu et al. (2011) stated that the ST3GAL3 gene contains 15 exons, 12 of
which are coding exons.

MAPPING

The International RH Mapping Consortium mapped the SIAT6 gene to
chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG22084).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Recessive Mental Retardation 12

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families with
autosomal recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090),
Hu et al. (2011) used linkage analysis, chromosome sorting, and
next-generation sequencing to identify 2 different homozygous mutations
in the ST3GAL3 gene (A13D, 606494.0001 and D370Y, 606494.0002,
respectively.) Neither mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl
motifs, but rather affected the N-terminal transmembrane domain and
catalytic domain, respectively. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant proteins were mislocalized to the endoplasmic
reticulum and that one (D370Y) had loss of catalytic activity. The
findings demonstrated a link between the glycoprotein complex,
sialyltransferase activity, and higher cognitive functioning.

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 15

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous mutation in the ST3GAL3 gene (A320P;
606494.0003). The mutation was identified by linkage analysis combined
with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. The mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl motif S,
which is crucially involved in binding of both donor and acceptor
substrate. In vitro functional expression studies showed that secretion
of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of control levels and it had no
detectable enzymatic activity. The phenotype was severe: patients showed
delayed psychomotor development and had onset of refractory infantile
spasms between ages 3 and 7 months associated with hypsarrhythmia on
EEG. Other features included hypotonia, poor eye contact, and inability
to speak or walk, even later in childhood. All were profoundly mentally
retarded. Edvardson et al. (2013) noted that the phenotype was more
severe than that observed by Hu et al. (2011), who had identified
ST3GAL3 mutations outside of the highly conserved and functionally
important sialyl motifs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ALA13ASP

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), previously reported by
Najmabadi et al. (2007), Hu et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 38C-A
transversion in exon 2 of the ST3GAL3 gene, resulting in an ala13-to-asp
(A13D) substitution in the transmembrane domain. The mutation was not
found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls or
in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that most of the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. Catalytic activity of the A13D mutant enzyme was similar to
wildtype.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ASP370TYR

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), Hu et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1108G-T transversion in exon 14 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an asp370-to-tyr (D370Y) substitution in the
catalytic domain at the C-terminal end of the protein. The mutation was
not found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls
or in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. The D370Y mutant protein also showed a complete lack of enzyme
activity. Studies of recombinant proteins in CHO cells indicated that
secretion of the D370Y mutant protein was dramatically reduced compared
to wildtype. Hu et al. (2011) concluded that the mutant protein was
cleared by the endoplasmic reticulum-mediated system, suggesting that
the C terminus is important for the proper folding of functional
ST3GAL3.

.0003
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 15
ST3GAL3, ALA320PRO

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 958G-C transversion in exon 12 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an ala320-to-pro (A320P) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in the sialyl motif S. The mutation was identified by
linkage analysis combined with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. It segregated with the disorder in
the family and was not found in 123 controls of the same ethnic origin
or in 5,379 control exomes. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that secretion of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of
control levels and that the protein had no detectable enzymatic
activity.

REFERENCE 1. Edvardson, S.; Baumann, A.-M.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Stephan, O.; Kuss,
A. W.; Shaag, A.; He, L.; Zenvirt, S.; Tanzi, R.; Gerardy-Schahn,
R.; Elpeleg, O.: West syndrome caused by ST3Gal-III deficiency. Epilepsia 54:
e24-e27, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Hu, H.; Eggers, K.; Chen, W.; Garshasbi, M.; Motazacker, M. M.;
Wrogemann, K.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach, A.; Hosseini, M.; Bahman, I.;
Hucho, T.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Najmabadi, H.; Ropers,
H. H.; Kuss, A. W.: ST3GAL3 mutations impair the development of higher
cognitive functions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 407-414, 2011.

3. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Cloning and expression of human
Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 194: 375-382, 1993.

4. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Differential expression of five
sialyltransferase genes in human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 17872-17878,
1994.

5. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity mapping
in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of non-syndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies 8 novel gene
loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

6. Taniguchi, A.; Saito, K.; Kubota, T.; Matsumoto, K.: Characterization
of the promoter region of the human Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase
III (hST3Gal III) gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1626: 92-96, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/17/2006
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/1/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/26/2001

EDITED carol: 07/08/2013
carol: 1/8/2013
ckniffin: 1/8/2013
carol: 10/3/2011
ckniffin: 9/27/2011
mgross: 5/23/2006
terry: 5/17/2006
mgross: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/28/2006
alopez: 12/4/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
mgross: 8/22/2002
alopez: 11/26/2001

604221	TITLE *604221 ACTIN-RELATED PROTEIN 2; ACTR2
;;ARP2
ARP2/3 COMPLEX, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The protrusion of the cell membrane is fundamental to cell shape change
and locomotion. Actin polymerization (see 102560) plays a critical role
in this process. The leading edge of motile cells is dominated by thin
actin-rich structures called lamellipodia, which exhibit highly dynamic
behavior characterized by rapid extension and retraction. Many aspects
of the mechanism of lamellipodial protrusion are echoed in the
intracellular motility of certain bacterial and viral pathogens, such as
the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes. Welch et al. (1997) purified an
approximately 220-kD multiprotein complex from human platelets that
induces actin polymerization at the L. monocytogenes cell surface and
mediates bacterial motility. This complex contains actin-related
proteins (Arps) in the Arp2 and Arp3 families and therefore was named
the Arp2/3 complex. In addition to 43-kD ARP2 and 50-kD ARP3 (ACTR3;
604222), the human complex consists of 41/40- (ARPC1B; 604223), 34-
(ARPC2; 604224), 21- (ARPC3; 604225), 20- (ARPC4; 604226), and 16-kD
(ARPC5; 604227) subunits, all present in approximately equal
stoichiometry. By searching an EST database with peptide sequences from
the 7 subunits of the human ARP2/3 complex, Welch et al. (1997)
identified full-length human cDNAs encoding each subunit. The ARP2 cDNA
encodes a deduced 394-amino acid protein that is 99% identical to
chicken Arp2 and 67% identical to S. cerevisiae Arp2. Welch et al.
(1997) localized several subunits of the ARP2/3 complex to the
lamellipodia of stationary and locomoting fibroblasts, as well as to the
actin tails assembled by L. monocytogenes. They suggested that the
ARP2/3 complex promotes actin assembly in lamellipodia and may
participate in lamellipodial protrusion.

Machesky et al. (1997) purified the ARP2/3 complex from human
neutrophils and sequenced peptides from each of the subunits.

GENE FUNCTION

Leisel et al. (1999) used pure components of the actin cytoskeleton to
reconstitute sustained movement in Listeria and Shigella in vitro.
Actin-based propulsion was driven by the free energy released by ATP
hydrolysis linked to actin polymerization and did not require myosin
(see 601478). In addition to actin and activated Arp2/3 complex, actin
depolymerizing factor and capping protein (see 601571) were also
required for motility as they maintained a high steady-state level of
G-actin (see 102610), which controls the rate of unidirectional growth
of actin filaments at the surface of the bacterium. The movement was
more effective when profilin (see 176610), alpha-actinin (see 102575),
and, in the case of Listeria, VASP (601703) were also included.

The protein N-WASP (WASL; 605056) regulates actin polymerization by
stimulating the actin-nucleating activity of the Arp2/3 complex. N-WASP
is tightly regulated by multiple signals; only costimulation by CDC42
(116952) and phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2) yields
potent polymerization. Prehoda et al. (2000) found that regulation
requires N-WASP's constitutively active output domain
(verprolin/cofilin/acidic (VCA) domain) and 2 regulatory domains, a
CDC42-binding domain and a PIP2-binding domain. In the absence of
stimuli, the regulatory modules together hold the VCA-Arp2/3 complex in
an inactive 'closed' conformation. In this state, both the CDC42- and
PIP2-binding sites are masked. Binding of either input destabilizes the
closed state and enhances binding of the other input. This cooperative
activation mechanism shows how combinations of simple binding domains
can be used to integrate and amplify coincident signals.

Using fluorescence anisotropy analysis, Marchand et al. (2001) showed
that efficient actin nucleation requires both recruitment of an actin
monomer to the ARP2/3 complex and a subsequent activation step. The
initial steps in this pathway involve binding by the WA domain of
WASP/SCAR (605035) proteins, which consists of a WH2 motif (W) that
binds to the actin monomers and an acidic tail (A) that binds to the
ARP2/3 complex. Actin filaments seem to stimulate nucleation by
enhancing binding of WA to the ARP2/3 complex and favoring the formation
of a productive nucleus.

Weisswange et al. (2009) analyzed the dynamics of N-WASP,
WASP-interacting protein (WIP; 602357), GRB2 (108355), and NCK (600508),
which are required to stimulate ARP2/3 complex-dependent actin-based
motility of vaccinia virus, using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching. Weisswange et al. (2009) showed that all 4 proteins are
rapidly exchanging, albeit at different rates, and that the turnover of
N-WASP depends on its ability to stimulate ARP2/3 complex-mediated actin
polymerization. Conversely, disruption of the interaction of N-WASP with
GRB2 and/or the barbed ends of actin filaments increases its exchange
rate and results in a faster rate of virus movement. Weisswange et al.
(2009) suggested that the exchange rate of N-WASP controls the rate of
ARP2/3 complex-dependent actin-based motility by regulating the extent
of actin polymerization by antagonizing filament capping.

Nolen et al. (2009) described 2 classes of small molecules that bind to
different sites on the Arp2/3 complex and inhibit its ability to
nucleate actin filaments. CK-0944636 binds between Arp2 and Arp3, where
it appears to block movement of Arp2 and Arp3 into their active
conformation. CK-0993548 inserts into the hydrophobic core of Arp3 and
alters its conformation. Both classes of compounds inhibit formation of
actin filament comet tails by Listeria and podosomes by monocytes.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Western blot analysis, and
knockdown strategies with human lung fibroblasts, Hanisch et al. (2011)
showed that Salmonella entered nonphagocytic cells by manipulating 2
machineries of actin-based motility in the host: actin polymerization
through the ARP2/3 complex, and actomyosin-mediated contractility in a
myosin IIA (MYH9; 160775)- and myosin IIB (MYH10; 160776)-dependent
manner. Hanisch et al. (2011) concluded that Salmonella entry can be
effected independently of membrane ruffling.

Li et al. (2012) showed that interactions between diverse synthetic,
multivalent macromolecules (including multidomain proteins and RNA)
produce sharp liquid-liquid-demixing phase separations, generating
micrometer-sized liquid droplets in aqueous solution. This macroscopic
transition corresponds to a molecular transition between small complexes
and large, dynamic supramolecular polymers. The concentrations needed
for phase transition are directly related to the valency of the
interacting species. In the case of the actin-regulatory protein N-WASP
(605056) interacting with its established biologic partners NCK (600508)
and phosphorylated nephrin (602716), the phase transition corresponds to
a sharp increase in activity towards an actin nucleation factor, the
ARP2/3 complex. The transition is governed by the degree of
phosphorylation of nephrin, explaining how this property of the system
can be controlled to regulatory effect by kinases. Li et al. (2012)
concluded that the widespread occurrence of multivalent systems suggests
that phase transitions may be used to spatially organize and
biochemically regulate information throughout biology.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Volkmann et al. (2001) performed electron cryomicroscopy and
3-dimensional reconstruction of Acanthamoeba castellanii and S.
cerevisiae Arp2/3 complexes bound to the WASP (301000) carboxy-terminal
domain. Asymmetric, oblate ellipsoids were revealed. Image analysis of
actin branches indicated that the complex binds the side of the mother
filament, and ARP2 and ARP3 are the first 2 subunits of the daughter
filament. Comparison to the actin-free WASP-activated complexes suggests
that branch initiation involves large-scale structural rearrangements
within ARP2/3.

Robinson et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of bovine ARP2/3
complex at 2.0-angstrom resolution. ARP2 and ARP3 are folded like actin,
with distinctive surface features. Subunits ARPC2 and ARPC4 in the core
of the complex associate through long carboxy-terminal alpha helices and
have similarly folded amino-terminal alpha/beta domains. ARPC1 is a
7-blade beta propeller with an insertion that may associate with the
side of an actin filament. ARPC3 and ARPC5 are globular alpha-helical
subunits. Robinson et al. (2001) predicted that WASP/SCAR proteins
activate ARP2/3 complex by bringing ARP2 into proximity with ARP3 for
nucleation of a branch on the side of a preexisting actin filament.

REFERENCE 1. Hanisch, J.; Kolm, R.; Wozniczka, M.; Bumann, D.; Rottner, K.;
Stradal, T. E. B.: Activation of a RhoA/myosin II-dependent but Arp2/3
complex-independent pathway facilitates Salmonella invasion. Cell
Host Microbe 9: 273-285, 2011.

2. Leisel, T. P.; Boujemaa, R.; Pantaloni, D.; Carlier, M.-F.: Reconstitution
of actin-based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins. Nature 401:
613-616, 1999.

3. Li, P.; Banjade, S.; Cheng, H.-C.; Kim, S.; Chen, B.; Guo, L.;
Llaguno, M.; Hollingsworth, J. V.; King, D. S.; Banani, S. F.; Russo,
P. S.; Jiang, Q.-X.; Nixon, B. T.; Rosen, M. K.: Phase transitions
in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins. Nature 483:
336-340, 2012.

4. Machesky, L. M.; Reeves, E.; Wientjes, F.; Mattheyse, F. J.; Grogan,
A.; Totty, N. F.; Burlingame, A. L.; Hsuan, J. J.; Segal, A. W.:
Mammalian actin-related protein 2/3 complex localizes to regions of
lamellipodial protrusion and is composed of evolutionarily conserved
proteins. Biochem. J. 328: 105-112, 1997.

5. Marchand, J.-B.; Kaiser, D. A.; Pollard, T. D.; Higgs, H. N.:
Interaction of WASP/Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2/3
complex. Nature Cell Biol. 3: 76-82, 2001.

6. Nolen, B. J.; Tomasevic, N.; Russell, A.; Pierce, D. W.; Jia, Z.;
McCormick, C. D.; Hartman, J.; Sakowicz, R.; Pollard, T. D.: Characterization
of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2/3 complex. Nature 460:
1031-1034, 2009.

7. Prehoda, K. E.; Scott, J. A.; Mullins, R. D.; Lim, W. A.: Integration
of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N-WASP-Arp2/3
complex. Science 290: 801-806, 2000.

8. Robinson, R. C.; Turbedsky, K.; Kaiser, D. A.; Marchand, J.-B.;
Higgs, H. N.; Choe, S.; Pollard, T. D.: Crystal structure of Arp2/3
complex. Science 294: 1679-1684, 2001.

9. Volkmann, N.; Amann, K. J.; Stoilova-McPhie, S.; Egile, C.; Winter,
D. C.; Hazelwood, L.; Heuser, J. E.; Li, R.; Pollard, T. D.; Hanein,
D.: Structure of Arp2/3 complex in its activated state and in actin
filament branch junctions. Science 293: 2456-2459, 2001.

10. Weisswange, I.; Newsome, T. P.; Schleich, S.; Way, M.: The rate
of N-WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2/3-complex-dependent actin-based
motility. Nature 458: 87-91, 2009.

11. Welch, M. D.; DePace, A. H.; Verma, S.; Iwamatsu, A.; Mitchison,
T. J.: The human Arp2/3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved
subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament
assembly. J. Cell Biol. 138: 375-384, 1997.

12. Welch, M. D.; Iwamatsu, A.; Mitchison, T. J.: Actin polymerization
is induced by Arp2/3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes. Nature 385:
265-269, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/21/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/10/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/11/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/7/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 10/29/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/1999

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 10/8/1999

EDITED alopez: 04/17/2012
terry: 4/16/2012
mgross: 3/2/2012
terry: 3/1/2012
alopez: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/15/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
mgross: 2/21/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002
alopez: 10/11/2001
mgross: 11/7/2000
mgross: 11/1/1999
psherman: 10/29/1999
mgross: 10/15/1999
psherman: 10/13/1999
alopez: 10/12/1999
psherman: 10/11/1999

615152	TITLE *615152 KELCH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; KLHDC10
;;SCRUIN-LIKE AT THE MIDLINE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF;;
SLIM, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

By virtue of its interaction with proteins of varied function, KLHDC10
is predicted to influence several intracellular pathways, including
oxidative stress-induced apoptosis (Sekine et al., 2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones from a KG-1 human immature myeloid cell line cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1996) obtained a partial KLHDC10 clone, which
they designated KIAA0265. The deduced protein contained 401 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis detected moderate KLHDC10 expression in skeletal
muscle, with lower expression in all other tissues and cell lines
examined.

By searching a human database for proteins similar to Drosophila Slim,
Sekine et al. (2012) identified KLHDC10. The deduced 442-amino acid
protein contains a large central kelch repeat domain, followed by
putative Cul2 and BC boxes. The kelch repeat domain is predicted to form
a 6-bladed beta propeller structure. The Cul2 box is predicted to bind
cullin-2 (CUL2; 603135) of the CUL2 ubiquitin ligase complex, and the BC
box is predicted to bind the CUL2 adaptor proteins elongin B (TCEB2;
600787) and elongin C (TCEB1; 600788). Epitope-tagged KLHDC10 localized
predominantly to the nucleus of transfected HEK203 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Similar to their results with Drosophila Slim, Sekine et al. (2012)
found that human KLHDC10 was involved in activation of apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase-1 (ASK1; 602448) via its kelch repeat domain.
The activation of ASK1 by reactive oxygen species (ROS) is involved in
oxidative stress-mediated cell death. Overexpression of KLHDC10 and ASK1
in HEK293 cells resulted in activation of ASK1 and downstream effectors
JNK (see MAPK8, 601158) and p38 (MAPK14; 600289). Immunoprecipitation of
HEK293 cells revealed that KLHDC10 interacted with PP5 (PPP5C, 600658),
a protein phosphatase known to inactivate ASK1 via dephosphorylation of
an essential phosphothreonine. KLHDC10 interacted directly with the
phosphatase domain of PP5. Both H2O2 and TNF-alpha (TNF; 191160)
increased the binding between KLHDC10 and PP5. Knockdown of Klhdc10 in
Neuro2A cells reduced H2O2-dependent activation of Ask1 and p38, and
suppressed H2O2-induced cell death. Immunoprecipitation analysis of
mouse Neuro2A neuroblastoma cells revealed that endogenous Klhdc10 also
interacted with Cul2, elongin B, and elongin C, and that the interaction
requires a functional C-terminal BC box of Klhdc10. Knockdown of Cul2
increased the protein level of Klhdc10.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the KLHDC10
gene to chromosome 7.

Hartz (2013) mapped the KLHDC10 gene to chromosome 7q32.2 based on an
alignment of the KLHDC10 sequence (GenBank GENBANK D87454) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

3. Sekine, Y.; Hatanaka, R.; Watanabe, T.; Sono, N.; Iemura, S.; Natsume,
T.; Kuranaga, E.; Miura, M.; Takeda, K.; Ichijo, H.: The Kelch repeat
protein KLHDC10 regulates oxidative stress-induced ASK1 activation
by suppressing PP5. Molec. Cell 48: 692-704, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/29/2013

EDITED alopez: 03/29/2013
alopez: 3/29/2013

603948	TITLE *603948 NUCLEOPORIN, 153-KD; NUP153
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nuclear pore complexes are elaborate structures that mediate the
regulated movement of macromolecules between the nucleus and cytoplasm.
These complexes are composed of at least 100 different polypeptide
subunits, many of which belong to the nucleoporin family. Nucleoporins
are pore complex-specific glycoproteins characterized by cytoplasmically
oriented O-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues and numerous repeats of
the pentapeptide sequence XFXFG.

CLONING

By immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA expression library with a monoclonal
antibody that recognizes a group of nucleoporins, McMorrow et al. (1994)
isolated a cDNA encoding NUP153. The deduced 1,475-amino acid protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 153.8 kD. It contains 33 copies of
the XFXFG sequence, a C-terminal half that is serine- and
threonine-rich, and 4 sequence motifs that resemble those of zinc
fingers. The human and rat NUP153 proteins are 82% identical. Northern
blot analysis detected a 6-kb human NUP153 mRNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Ullman et al. (1999) found that antibodies to Xenopus Nup153 blocked
export of snRNA, mRNA, and 5S rRNA from the nucleus, but did not impede
export of tRNA or recycling of importin-beta (see KPNB1; 602738) to the
cytoplasm. They also determined that Nup153, unlike other nucleoporins,
associates strongly with poly(G) and poly(U). The interaction may be
direct or may be via an adaptor protein.

By immunogold electron microscopy, Walther et al. (2001) localized
Xenopus Nup153 to the nuclear ring of the nuclear pore complex (NPC).
NPCs assembled in the absence of Nup153 lacked several nuclear basket
components, were unevenly distributed in the nuclear envelope, and,
unlike wildtype NPCs, were mobile within the nuclear envelope. Nuclear
import events requiring importin-alpha (see KPNA5; 604545)/importin-beta
were also defective due to reduced translocation of the import complex
rather than defective receptor recycling.

Liu et al. (2003) found that a central region of Xenopus Nup153
associated with COPI (601924), a coatomer complex previously
characterized in the context of vesicle budding during trafficking
within the Golgi and between the Golgi and the endoplasmic reticulum.
Nup153 recruited COPI to the nuclear membrane during mitosis, suggesting
that vesiculation is an important step in nuclear envelope breakdown.
Perturbing the function of the COPI complex impaired nuclear envelope
disassembly.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NUP153
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-7306).

REFERENCE 1. Liu, J.; Prunuske, A. J.; Fager, A. M.; Ullman, K. S.: The COPI
complex functions in nuclear envelope breakdown and is recruited by
the nucleoporin Nup153. Dev. Cell 5: 487-498, 2003.

2. McMorrow, I.; Bastos, R.; Horton, H.; Burke, B.: Sequence analysis
of a cDNA encoding a human nuclear pore complex protein, hnup153. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1217: 219-223, 1994.

3. Ullman, K. S.; Shah, S.; Powers, M. A.; Forbes, D. J.: The nucleoporin
Nup153 plays a critical role in multiple types of nuclear export. Molec.
Biol. Cell 10: 649-664, 1999.

4. Walther, T. C.; Fornerod, M.; Pickersgill, H.; Goldberg, M.; Allen,
T. D.; Mattaj, I. W.: The nucleoporin Nup153 is required for nuclear
pore basket formation, nuclear pore complex anchoring and import of
a subset of nuclear proteins. EMBO J. 20: 5703-5714, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/12/2004

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 6/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 05/12/2004
carol: 2/18/2002
carol: 2/16/2002
mgross: 6/30/1999
psherman: 6/29/1999

607515	TITLE *607515 PLACENTA-SPECIFIC GENE 8; PLAC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By subtractive hybridization, Rissoan et al. (2002) identified PLAC8,
which they designated C15, as 1 of several transcripts expressed at high
levels in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The deduced 115-amino acid
protein contains a cleavable 23-amino acid signal peptide and no
transmembrane domain. PLAC8 shares 83% homology with mouse Plac8, which
contains 112 amino acids. The human sequence conserves 15 of the 16
cysteine residues found in the mouse protein. RT-PCR detected PLAC8
expression in all leukocyte populations tested, with weaker expression
in monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Northern blot analysis detected a
major transcript of 0.7 kb and minor transcripts of 4.4 and 7 kb in
organs of the immune system. High expression was found in spleen, lymph
nodes, peripheral blood leukocytes, and bone marrow, with lower
expression in thymus, appendix, and fetal liver.

By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Galaviz-Hernandez et al.
(2003) detected strong expression of Plac8 in placenta at 9.5 days
postcoitum (dpc) through 18.5 dpc. In situ hybridization showed
expression limited to trophoblast giant cells at 6.5 and 8.5 dpc and to
the derived spongiotrophoblast layer at 10.5 and 18.5 dpc.

GENE FUNCTION

Rissoan et al. (2002) showed that PLAC8 expression was downregulated
upon activation, particularly in dendritic cells generated in vitro from
CD34 (142230) progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rissoan et al. (2002) determined that the PLAC8 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By homology to a BAC clone, Rissoan et al. (2002) mapped the PLAC8 gene
to chromosome 4q13-q21.

By database analysis, Galaviz-Hernandez et al. (2003) mapped the PLAC8
gene to chromosome 4q21 and the mouse Plac8 gene to chromosome 5E3.

REFERENCE 1. Galaviz-Hernandez, C.; Stagg, C.; de Ridder, G.; Tanaka, T. S.;
Ko, M. S. H.; Schlessinger, D.; Nagaraja, R.: Plac8 and Plac9, novel
placental-enriched genes identified through microarray analysis. Gene 309:
81-89, 2003.

2. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 6/11/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/24/2003

EDITED wwang: 06/16/2009
wwang: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/11/2009
mgross: 1/24/2003

602291	TITLE *602291 FORKHEAD BOX J1; FOXJ1
;;FORKHEAD, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 13; FKHL13;;
HFH4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXJ1 is a member of the forkhead gene family, which was originally
identified in Drosophila. The forkhead family is composed of
transcription factors with a conserved 100-amino acid DNA-binding motif.

CLONING

Using the forkhead domain of the rat Hnf3-alpha gene (602294) as a
probe, Murphy et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA from a human testis library
whose sequence showed more than 90% homology with that of rat Hfh4
within the putative coding region. The open reading frame predicted a
403-amino acid protein. By RT-PCR, Murphy et al. (1997) found FKHL13
expression in human testis, oviduct, lung, and brain cortex, which
suggests that expression may be associated with ciliated/flagellated
cells.

Using the rat Hfh4 forkhead domain to probe a fetal lung cDNA library,
Pelletier et al. (1998) cloned FOXJ1, which they called HFH4. The
deduced 421-amino acid protein contains a central 101-amino acid
forkhead domain. HFH4 shares about 91% amino acid identity with mouse
and rat Hfh4, including 100% identity within the forkhead domain.
Northern blot analysis of several adult and fetal tissues detected
highest expression of a 2.5-kb transcript in adult testis. Lower levels
were detected in adult ovary and lung and in fetal brain, lung, and
kidney. No expression was detected in several other adult tissues and
fetal liver.

GENE FUNCTION

By in situ hybridization of fetal tissue at several developmental
stages, Pelletier et al. (1998) found that expression of HFH4 was
associated with differentiation of the proximal pulmonary epithelium,
starting during the pseudoglandular stage of lung development. During
renal morphogenesis, HFH4 was expressed in the developing epithelial
cells of the ureteric duct, glomerulus, and epithelial vesicles.

Using a microarray-based screen, Yu et al. (2008) found that Foxj1a was
positively regulated in response to hedgehog (see SHH; 600725) signaling
in the developing zebrafish neural tube floorplate. Loss of Foxj1a
compromised the assembly of motile cilia that decorate neural tube floor
plate cells. Foxj1a was also expressed in Kupffer vesicles and
pronephric ducts, where it promoted ciliary differentiation. Foxj1a
activated a constellation of genes essential for motile cilia formation
and function, and its activity was sufficient for ectopic development of
motile cilia. Yu et al. (2008) also identified a paralogous gene,
Foxj1b, that was expressed in zebrafish otic vesicle and appeared to
regulate motile cilia formation in that tissue. Yu et al. (2008)
concluded that FOXJ1 is a master regulator of a transcriptional program
that controls the production of motile cilia.

Venugopalan et al. (2008) showed that Foxj1 and the homeobox
transcription factor Pitx2 (601542) were coexpressed temporally during
development of mouse orofacial structures, including molar inner enamel
epithelium, oral and tongue epithelium, and submandibular gland.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Pitx2 bound the
Foxj1 promoter in a mouse ameloblast cell line. Reporter gene assays
showed that the Pitx2a and Pitx2c isoforms strongly activated the Foxj1
promoter, whereas the Pitx2b isoform more weakly activated Foxj1. Pitx2a
interacted with Lef1 (153245) and beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) to
activate the Foxj1 promoter, and once activated, Foxj1 contributed to
its own activation in a positive feedback loop.

GENE STRUCTURE

Murphy et al. (1997) isolated a genomic clone of FKHL13 and showed that
the gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

Using PCR of human-hamster hybrid cell lines, Murphy et al. (1997)
localized the FKHL13 gene to chromosome 17, supporting the map position
of 17q22-q25 predicted by Avraham et al. (1995) on the basis of
comparative mapping of the mouse Hfh4 gene. By Southern blot analysis,
Pelletier et al. (1998) mapped the HFH4 gene to chromosome 17q23-qter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Korean population comprising 295 patients with allergic rhinitis
(607154) and 418 controls, Li et al. (2006) reported a significant
association between allergic rhinitis and 3 SNPs of the FOXJ1 gene:
-460C-T (dbSNP rs880213), 1805G-T (dbSNP rs1868823), and 3375G-C (dbSNP
rs3192453). Haplotype analysis revealed that the main haplotype, CGG of
the 3 SNPs respectively, was significantly associated with allergic
rhinitis (p = 0.000018). There was no association between the SNPs and
serum IgE levels. Li et al. (2006) suggested that dysregulation of FOXJ1
may affect T cell activity.

ANIMAL MODEL

To define the role of HFH4, Chen et al. (1998) created a targeted
mutation in the mouse Hfh4 gene. In mice with the homozygous disruption,
no expression of Hfh4 was detected. The homozygous mice were noted to
have abnormalities of organ situs consistent with random determination
of left-right asymmetry. In addition, a complete absence of cilia was
noted in Hfh4 -/- mice. The Hfh4 gene is thus essential for nonrandom
determination of left-right asymmetry and development of ciliated cells.
Homozygous mutant mice also exhibited prenatal and postnatal growth
failure, perinatal lethality, and, in some cases, hydrocephalus. RT-PCR
revealed an absence of left-right dynein (lrd) expression in the
embryonic lungs of Hfh4 -/- mice, suggesting that HFH4 may act by
regulating expression of members of the dynein family of genes. These
abnormalities are similar to those observed in human congenital
syndromes such as the recessive disorder Kartagener syndrome (244400).

Stubbs et al. (2008) found that the cilia underlying left-right
patterning on the Xenopus gastrocoel roof plate and zebrafish Kupffer
vesicle were severely shortened or failed to form in Foxj1 morphants.
Misexpression of Foxj1 was sufficient to induce ectopic gastrocoel roof
plate-like cilia in frog embryos. Microarray analysis indicated that
Xenopus Foxj1 induced formation of cilia by upregulating expression of
motile cilia genes.

To avoid embryonic lethality in Foxj1-deficient mice, Lin et al. (2004)
targeted Foxj1 deficiency to the lymphoid system using fetal liver
chimeras. By 12- to 16-weeks postreconstitution, a large proportion of
mice that had received Foxj1 null fetal livers appeared moribund, with
ruffled fur and hunched posture. Upon histopathologic examination,
Foxj1-deficient chimeras displayed multiorgan systemic inflammation,
exaggerated Th1 cytokine production, and T-cell proliferation in
autologous mixed lymphocyte reactions. Foxj1 suppressed nuclear factor
kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) transcription activity in vitro, and
Foxj1-deficient T cells possessed increased NFKB activity in vivo,
correlating with the ability of Foxj1 to regulate I-kappa-B proteins,
particularly IKKB (604495). Lin et al. (2004) concluded that FOXJ1
antagonizes proinflammatory transcriptional activities and potentially
enforces lymphocyte quiescence.

Srivatsan and Peng (2005) found that autoimmunity-prone mice with T
cells ectopically expressing Foxj1 showed a significant reduction in
lymphadenopathy, pathogenic autoantibodies, and end-organ disease.
Reversion of autoimmunity was not attributable to Nfkb modulation, but
rather to peripheral T-cell lymphopenia due to impaired exodus of cells
from the thymus. Srivatsan and Peng (2005) concluded that FOXJ1 is not
only important in regulating T-cell tolerance, but also in regulating
thymocyte egress.

REFERENCE 1. Avraham, K. B.; Fletcher, C.; Overdier, D. G.; Clevidence, D. E.;
Lai, E.; Costa, R. H.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: Murine chromosomal
location of eight members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork
head winged helix family of transcription factors. Genomics 25:
388-393, 1995.

2. Chen, J.; Knowles, H. J.; Hebert, J. L.; Hackett, B. P.: Mutation
of the mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 gene results
in an absence of cilia and random left-right asymmetry. J. Clin.
Invest. 102: 1077-1082, 1998.

3. Li, C.-S.; Chae, S.-C.; Lee, J.-H.; Zhang, Q.; Chung, H.-T.: Identification
of single nucleotide polymorphisms in FOXJ1 and their association
with allergic rhinitis. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 292-297, 2006.

4. Lin, L.; Spoor, M. S.; Gerth, A. J.; Brody, S. L.; Peng, S. L.
: Modulation of Th1 activation and inflammation by the NF-kappa-B
repressor Foxj1. Science 303: 1017-1020, 2004.

5. Murphy, D. B.; Seeman, S.; Wiese, S.; Kirschner, R.; Grzeschik,
K. H.; Thies, U.: The human hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head
gene FKHL13: genomic structure and pattern of expression. Genomics 40:
462-469, 1997.

6. Pelletier, G. J.; Brody, S. L.; Liapis, H.; White, R. A.; Hackett,
B. P.: A human forkhead/winged-helix transcription factor expressed
in developing pulmonary and renal epithelium. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
L351-L359, 1998.

7. Srivatsan, S.; Peng, S. L.: Cutting edge: Foxj1 protects against
autoimmunity and inhibits thymocyte egress. J. Immun. 175: 7805-7809,
2005.

8. Stubbs, J. L.; Oishi, I.; Belmonte, J. C. I.; Kintner, C.: The
forkhead protein Foxj1 specifies node-like cilia in Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos. Nature Genet. 40: 1454-1460, 2008.

9. Venugopalan, S. R.; Amen, M. A.; Wang, J.; Wong, L.; Cavender,
A. C.; D'Souza, R. N.; Akerlund, M.; Brody, S. L.; Hjalt, T. A.; Amendt,
B. A.: Novel expression and transcriptional regulation of FoxJ1 during
oro-facial morphogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3643-3654, 2008.

10. Yu, X.; Ng, C. P.; Habacher, H.; Roy, S.: Foxj1 transcription
factors are master regulators of the motile ciliogenic program. Nature
Genet. 40: 1445-1453, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/31/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/6/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/28/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/10/2010
mgross: 2/16/2009
terry: 2/11/2009
mgross: 9/26/2006
terry: 8/31/2006
wwang: 5/31/2006
ckniffin: 5/24/2006
mgross: 2/19/2004
carol: 10/12/1998
terry: 10/6/1998
carol: 2/2/1998
alopez: 1/28/1998

609503	TITLE *609503 TESTICULAR HAPLOID EXPRESSED GENE, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; THEG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to mouse Theg,
followed by 5-prime RACE and RT-PCR of a testis cDNA library, Mannan et
al. (2000) cloned 2 variants of human THEG. The deduced proteins,
THEG-major and THEG-minor, contain 379 and 355 amino acids and have
calculated molecular masses of 43.3 and 40.6 kD, respectively. Compared
with THEG-major, THEG-minor lacks 24 amino acids encoded by exon 3. Both
proteins contain several nuclear localization signals. RNA dot blot and
Northern blot analyses detected a 1.5-kb THEG transcript only in testis.
Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse testis sections detected Theg in
the nucleus of round spermatids, but not in other germ cell stages or in
somatic cells of testis. Transfected mouse fibroblasts expressed
fluorescence-tagged Theg predominantly in the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Yanaka et al. (2000) determined that mouse
Theg interacted with Cct-epsilon (CCT5; 610150), suggesting that THEG
functions as a regulatory factor in protein assembly.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mannan et al. (2000) determined that the THEG gene contains 8 exons and
spans 14 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Mannan et al. (2000) mapped the
THEG gene to chromosome 19pter-p13.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yanaka et al. (2000) found that the Theg gene was disrupted in an
insertional transgenic mouse mutant, termed kisimo, characterized by
male sterility. Mutant males showed abnormal germ cell development, with
elongated spermatids in the lumina of seminiferous tubules.

In contrast to the findings of Yanaka et al. (2000), Mannan et al.
(2003) found that Theg knockout did not affect the fertility of mutant
male mice. Theg-null males appeared normal, with no gross abnormalities
in testicular morphology or sperm properties.

REFERENCE 1. Mannan, A.; Lucke, K.; Dixkens, C.; Neesen, J.; Kamper, M.; Engel,
W.; Burfeind, P.: Alternative splicing, chromosome assignment and
subcellular localization of the testicular haploid expressed gene
(THEG). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 91: 171-179, 2000.

2. Mannan, A. U.; Nayernia, K.; Mueller, C.; Burfeind, P.; Adham,
I. M.; Engel, W.: Male mice lacking the Theg (testicular haploid
expressed gene) protein undergo normal spermatogenesis and are fertile. Biol.
Reprod. 69: 788-796, 2003.

3. Yanaka, N.; Kobayashi, K.; Wakimoto, K.; Yamada, E.; Imahie, H.;
Imai, Y.; Mori, C.: Insertional mutation of the murine kisimo locus
caused a defect in spermatogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 14791-14794,
2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/26/2005

EDITED mgross: 05/30/2006
mgross: 7/26/2005

603769	TITLE *603769 T-CELL LYMPHOMA/LEUKEMIA 1B; TCL1B
;;TML1
DESCRIPTION The TCL1A oncogene (186960) on 14q32.1 is involved in the development of
T-cell leukemia. Its expression in these leukemias is activated by
chromosomal translocations and inversions at 14q32.1. By searching an
EST database for sequences homologous to TCL1A and MTCP1 (300116), a
member of the TCL1 gene family that is located on Xq28 and is activated
in rare cases of mature T-cell leukemia with a t(X;14) translocation,
Pekarsky et al. (1999) isolated TCL1B, a novel member of the TCL1 gene
family. The approximately 1.2-kb TCL1B cDNA encodes a 14-kD protein that
contains 128 amino acids and shows 60% sequence similarity to the TCL1A
protein. By PCR analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, they mapped the
TCL1B gene to chromosome 14q32.1. Pulse-field analysis of a positive BAC
clone revealed that the TCL1B gene is located approximately 16 kb
centromeric of the TCL1A gene. Expression profiles of the 2 genes are
very similar: both genes are expressed at very low levels in normal bone
marrow and peripheral lymphocytes but are activated in T-cell leukemia
by rearrangement of the 14q32.1 region. Thus, translocations and
inversions at 14q32.1 in T-cell malignancies involve 2 oncogenes.

Hallas et al. (1999) presented cloning, mapping, and expression analysis
of the human and murine TCL1/Tcl1 locus. In addition to TCL1A and TCL1B,
the human locus contains 2 additional genes, TNG1 (TCL1-neighboring
gene-1 and TNG2; 604412), encoding proteins of 141 and 110 amino acids,
respectively. Both genes showed no homology to any known genes, but
their expression profiles were very similar to those of TCL1A and TCL1B.
TNG1 and TNG2 also were activated in T cell leukemias with
rearrangements at 14q32.1. To aid in the development of the mouse model,
Hallas et al. (1999) characterized the murine Tcl1a locus and found 5
genes homologous to human TCL1B. The 5 Tcl1b proteins ranged in size
from 117 to 123 amino acids and were 65 to 80% similar, but they showed
only a 30 to 40% similarity to human TCL1B. All murine Tcl1b and Tcl1a
mRNAs were abundant in mouse oocytes and 2-cell embryos but rare in
various adult tissues and lymphoid cell lines. These data suggested a
similar or complementary function of these proteins in early
embryogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Hallas, C.; Pekarsky, Y.; Itoyama, T.; Varnum, J.; Bichi, R.; Rothstein,
J. L.; Croce, C. M.: Genomic analysis of human and mouse TCL1 loci
reveals a complex of tightly clustered genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
14418-14423, 1999.

2. Pekarsky, Y.; Hallas, C.; Isobe, M.; Russo, G.; Croce, C. M.:
Abnormalities at 14q32.1 in T cell malignancies involve two oncogenes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2949-2951, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/23/1999

EDITED terry: 09/07/2010
alopez: 1/10/2000
terry: 1/3/2000
mgross: 5/5/1999

611089	TITLE *611089 MYOTUBULARIN-RELATED PROTEIN 14; MTMR14
;;C3ORF29;;
EGG-DERIVED TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF;;
HJUMPY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MTMR14 gene encodes a muscle-specific inositide phosphatase that
acts specifically on phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2),
and possibly other targets, and plays a critical role in skeletal muscle
calcium homeostasis and likely other cellular processes (summary by
Romero-Suarez et al., 2010).

CLONING

From a database screen for protein sequences similar to human
myotubularin (300415), which is mutated in a form of centronuclear
myopathy (CNMX; 310400), Tosch et al. (2006) identified a novel protein,
MTMR14, with high homology to Drosophila egg-derived tyrosine
phosphatase (EDTP). The authors called this protein hJUMPY because
disruption of EDTP protein function in Drosophila causes a phenotype
termed JUMPY: a muscle defect and a progressive loss of muscle control
together with shaky and slower movements. The deduced 650-amino acid
MTMR14 protein contains a predicted protein tyrosine phosphatase and
dual-specificity phosphatase (PTP/DSP) domain and the canonical C(X)5R
consensus present in active PTP/DSPs. The MTMR14 catalytic loop shows
closest resemblance to that of active myotubularins. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2.5-kb MTMR14 transcript with highest expression in
skeletal muscle and heart and lower expression in placenta, kidney,
liver, pancreas, and lung. Immunofluorescence studies showed that MTMR14
localizes to cytoplasmic reticular structures and plasma membrane
ruffles, and displays a concentration near the nucleus of COS-1 cells.
MTMR14 was more concentrated in structures positive for giantin
(602500), a Golgi marker.

Shen et al. (2009) identified the MTMR14 protein as a phosphatase
predominantly expressed in skeletal and heart muscle. The human and
mouse proteins share 90% amino acid sequence homology.

GENE FUNCTION

By quantitative PCR in mice, Tosch et al. (2006) showed that expression
of Mtmr14 increased with C2C12 myotubule formation and differentiation
in culture. Using in vitro and ex vivo approaches, Tosch et al. (2006)
demonstrated that MTMR14 is a PPIn 3-phosphatase that dephosphorylates
the same substrates as myotubularin, PtdIns(3)P and PtdIns(3,5)P2.

Shen et al. (2009) also demonstrated that MTMR14 dephosphorylates a
variety of PtdInsPs, particularly PtdIns(3,5)P2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tosch et al. (2006) determined that the MTMR14 gene contains 19 exons;
EST database analysis indicated that exons 17 and 18 are alternatives.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Tosch et al. (2006) mapped the MTMR14 gene
to chromosome 3p25.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tosch et al. (2006) described 2 sporadic cases of centronuclear myopathy
in which each proband carried a heterozygous missense mutation in the
MTMR14 gene. The first proband and his unaffected father carried an
R336Q substitution (611089.0001). A second mutant allele was postulated,
but not identified. The other proband carried a Y462C substitution in
MTMR14 (611089.0002) and an additional missense mutation in DYN2 (E368K;
602378.0007), consistent with autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy
(160150). The Y462C mutation was also found in a control individual.
Both variants impaired enzymatic function, the R336Q mutation strongly
and the Y462C mutation to a lesser extent. Tosch et al. (2006) remarked
that myotubular myopathy patients with other characterized mutations in
DYN2 usually have an age of onset in childhood or adulthood, whereas the
age of onset in their patient was neonatal. The report raised the
possibility of MTMR14 being a modifier of the phenotype in some cases of
centronuclear myopathy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Shen et al. (2009) found that Mtmr14-null mice had muscle weakness and
increased fatigue with exercise. Isolated muscles from mutant mice
showed decreased contractile force, exacerbated fatigue, and prolonged
relaxation compared to muscle from wildtype mice. Mtmr14 deficiency
resulted in increased elevated resting calcium levels in myotubes due to
spontaneous calcium leakage from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This
leakage was attributed to decreased activity of Mtmr14 phosphatase
activity and accumulation of substrates, especially PtdIns(3,5)P2 and
PtdIns(3,4)P2. In addition, PtdIns(3,5)P2 and PtdIns(3,4)P2 bound to and
directly activated the RYR1 (180901) calcium release channel in the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The findings indicated that fine control of
PtdInsP levels in muscle cells is essential for maintaining calcium
homeostasis and muscle performance.

Normal aging is associated with sarcopenia, or a decrease in muscle mass
and function. Romero-Suarez et al. (2010) found that Mtmr14-null mice
manifested features of sarcopenia much earlier (12 to 14 months)
compared to wildtype mice (22 to 24 months). In particular, young and
mature mutant mice behaved like old wildtype mice, indicating earlier
onset of locomotor dysfunction in mutant mice. These changes were
associated with muscle atrophy and a decrease in contractile force and
power in the muscles of mutant mice. Wildtype mice showed downregulation
of Mtmr14 during normal aging, and muscle tissue from both old wildtype
and mutant mature mice showed dysfunctional calcium homeostasis, with
increased resting calcium levels and decreased calcium release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum when triggered. The findings indicated that
Mtmr14 is a potent regulator of skeletal muscle function under normal
conditions and that its downregulation may contribute to age-related
sarcopenia. Romero-Suarez et al. (2010) concluded that loss of Mtmr14
results in altered PtdIns(3,5)P2 signaling, as well as altered calcium
signaling, which can affect a variety of cell processes.

Dowling et al. (2010) examined zebrafish MTMR14 using gene dosage
manipulation. As with MTM1 (300415) knockdown, morpholino-mediated
knockdown of MTMR14 resulted in morphologic abnormalities, a
developmental motor phenotype characterized by diminished spontaneous
contractions and abnormal escape response, and impaired
excitation-contraction coupling. In contrast to MTM1 knockdown, however,
muscle ultrastructure was unaffected. Double knockdown of MTM1 and
MTMR14 significantly impaired motor function and altered skeletal muscle
ultrastructure. The combined effect of reducing levels of both MTMR14
and MTM1 was significantly more severe than either knockdown alone, an
effect which may be mediated by increased autophagy. The authors
concluded that MTMR14 is required for motor function and, in combination
with MTM1, is required for myocyte homeostasis and normal embryonic
development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, MODIFIER OF
MTMR14, ARG336GLN

Tosch et al. (2006) reported a 12-year old Brazilian boy with
centronuclear myopathy (160150) who presented with neonatal hypotonia,
proximal muscle weakness, and ophthalmoparesis. Both he and his
clinically unaffected father were heterozygous for a 1007G-A transition
in exon 11 of the MTMR14 gene. The mutation was predicted to result in
an arg336-to-gln (R336Q) substitution in a highly conserved region of
the active site of the protein. The mutation was not found in 820
control chromosomes. Immunoprecipitation assays detected a strong
decrease in the phosphatase activity of the R336Q mutant, 22% of the
level of wildtype. A second mutation in MTMR14 was not identified, and
the patient did not have a mutation in exons or splice sites of the DNM2
gene (602378). Tosch et al. (2006) hypothesized that another mutant
allele in either the MTMR14 gene or in another gene must be present.

.0002
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, MODIFIER OF
MTMR14, TYR462CYS

Tosch et al. (2006) reported a 36-year-old woman with centronuclear
myopathy-1 (160150) caused by a heterozygous missense mutation in the
DNM2 gene (E368K; 602378.0007) who also carried a heterozygous 1385A-G
transition in exon 16 of the MTMR14 gene, resulting in a tyr462-to-cys
(Y462C) substitution in a semiconserved region outside of the active
site of the protein. The Y462C mutation was found in 1 of 700 Brazilian
control chromosomes. The Y462C mutant displayed 80% of the phosphatase
activity of the wildtype protein in immunoprecipitation assays. Both
mutations occurred de novo. The patient presented with neonatal
hypotonia, muscle weakness, and ophthalmoparesis. The report raised the
possibility of MTMR14 being a modifier of the phenotype in some cases of
centronuclear myopathy.

REFERENCE 1. Dowling, J. J.; Low, S. E.; Busta, A. S.; Feldman, E. L.: Zebrafish
MTMR14 is required for excitation-contraction coupling, developmental
motor function and the regulation of autophagy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
2668-2681, 2010.

2. Romero-Suarez, S.; Shen, J.; Brotto, L.; Hall, T.; Mo, C.; Valdivia,
H. H.; Andresen, J.; Wacker, M.; Nosek, T. M.; Qu, C.-K.; Brotto,
M.: Muscle-specific inositide phosphatase (MIP/MTMR14) is reduced
with age and its loss accelerates skeletal muscle aging process by
altering calcium homeostasis. Aging 2: 504-513, 2010.

3. Shen, J.; Yu, W.-M.; Brotto, M.; Scherman, J. A.; Guo, C.; Stoddard,
C.; Nosek, T. M.; Valdivia, H. H.; Qu, C.-K.: Deficiency of MIP/MTMR14
phosphatase induces a muscle disorder by disrupting Ca(2+) homeostasis. Nature
Cell Biol. 11: 769-776, 2009.

4. Tosch, V.; Rohde, H. M.; Tronchere, H.; Zanoteli, E.; Monroy, N.;
Kretz, C.; Dondaine, N.; Payrastre, B.; Mandel, J.-L.; Laporte, J.
: A novel PtdIns3P and PtdIns(3,5)P2 phosphatase with an inactivating
variant in centronuclear myopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 3098-3106,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 8/23/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/25/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/19/2007

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/6/2007

EDITED tpirozzi: 08/23/2013
tpirozzi: 8/23/2013
joanna: 1/25/2013
carol: 12/29/2011
ckniffin: 12/22/2011
joanna: 7/27/2010
ckniffin: 3/12/2010
wwang: 12/16/2009
ckniffin: 11/25/2009
alopez: 7/19/2007
carol: 6/6/2007

600303	TITLE *600303 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 1; RAPGEF1
;;GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR 2; GRF2;;
CRK SH3-BINDING GNRP; C3G
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By Far Western screening of a human spleen lambda-gt11 expression
library using the SH3 domain of CRK (164762) as probe, Tanaka et al.
(1994) isolated a cDNA clone corresponding to RAPGEF1, which they called
C3G. Additional clones from human spleen and placenta cDNA libraries
were obtained by plaque hybridization with the (32)P-labeled spleen cDNA
clone. The deduced 1,077-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular
mass of 121 kD and contains a central proline-rich SH3-binding domain
and a C-terminal region homologous to guanine nucleotide-releasing
proteins (GNRP) for RAS, such as RASGRF1 (606600) and SOS1 (182530).
Northern blot analysis of human adult and fetal tissues detected a
7.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined with highest expression in
skeletal muscle, placenta, and fetal heart and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Tanaka et al. (1994) showed that CRK and C3G coimmunoprecipitated in
transfected rabbit kidney cells. Deletion analysis showed that the CRK
SH3 domain interacted with a 50-amino acid proline-rich sequence in C3G.
The authors suggested that the complex of C3G and CRK or C3G and
GRB2/ASH (108355) transduces signals from tyrosine kinases to RAS in a
number of different tissues.

The RAS-CRK-RAP1 (179520) cellular signal transduction system is
regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Transcription
of C3G is activated by the CRK adaptor protein. Hirata et al. (2004)
documented the amplification of C3G in 5 of 18 primary nonsmall cell
lung cancers examined and its increased expression in 18 of 28 tumors in
comparison to corresponding noncancerous lung tissues. The data were
interpreted as indicating that amplification and increased expression of
the C3G gene may play some role in human lung carcinogenesis through
derangement of the CRK-RAP1 signaling pathway.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Takai et al. (1994) mapped the
RAPGEF1 gene to chromosome 9q34.3, where chromosomal changes have been
reported in human hematopoietic malignancies.

REFERENCE 1. Hirata, T.; Nagai, H.; Koizumi, K.; Okino, K.; Harada, A.; Onda,
M.; Nagahata, T.; Mikami, I.; Hirai, K.; Haraguchi, S.; Jin, E.; Kawanami,
O.; Shimizu, K.; Emi, M.: Amplification, up-regulation and over-expression
of C3G (CRK SH3 domain-binding guanine nucleotide-releasing factor)
in non-small cell lung cancers. J. Hum. Genet. 49: 290-295, 2004.

2. Takai, S.; Tanaka, M.; Sugimura, H.; Yamada, K.; Naito, Y.; Kino,
I.; Matsuda, M.: Mapping of the human C3G gene coding a guanine nucleotide
releasing protein for Ras family to 9q34.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 94: 549-550, 1994.

3. Tanaka, S.; Morishita, T.; Hashimoto, Y.; Hattori, S.; Nakamura,
S.; Shibuya, M.; Matsuoka, K.; Takenawa, T.; Kurata, T.; Nagashima,
K.; Matsuda, M.: C3G, a guanine nucleotide-releasing protein expressed
ubiquitously, binds to the Src homology 3 domains of CRK and GRB2/ASH
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 3443-3447, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/9/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/11/1995

EDITED wwang: 08/17/2010
carol: 10/16/2006
tkritzer: 7/20/2004
terry: 7/9/2004
carol: 9/20/1999
mark: 9/15/1996
carol: 1/17/1995
carol: 1/11/1995

100650	TITLE +100650 ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 2 FAMILY; ALDH2
;;ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 2;;
ALDH, LIVER MITOCHONDRIAL;;
ACETALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 2
SUBLINGUAL NITROGLYCERIN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO POOR RESPONSE TO, INCLUDED;;
ALDH2/HMGIC FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER, ALCOHOL-RELATED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.3) is the next enzyme after alcohol
dehydrogenase (see 103700) in the major pathway of alcohol metabolism.
There are 2 major ALDH isozymes in the liver: cytosolic ALDH1 (ALDH1A1;
100640) and mitochondrial ALDH2.

CLONING

Hsu et al. (1985) isolated partial cDNA clones of ALDH1 and ALDH2 from a
human liver cDNA library. Hsu et al. (1988) isolated and characterized
ALDH2 genomic clones. The deduced ALDH2 protein contains 517 amino
acids, including a 17-amino acid signal peptide.

GENE FUNCTION

Using an unbiased proteomic search, Chen et al. (2008) identified
mitochondrial ALDH2 as an enzyme whose activation correlated with
reduced ischemic heart damage in rodent models. A high-throughput screen
identified a small molecule activator of ALDH2, which they called
Alda-1, that, when administered to rats before an ischemic event,
reduced infarct size by 60%, most likely through its inhibitory effect
on the formation of cytotoxic aldehydes. In vitro, Alda-1 was a
particularly effective activator of ALDH2*2 (100650.0001), an inactive
mutant form of the enzyme that is found in 40% of East Asian
populations. Chen et al. (2008) concluded that the pharmacologic
enhancement of ALDH2 activity may be useful for patients with wildtype
or mutant ALDH2 who are subjected to cardiac ischemia, such as during
coronary bypass surgery.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hsu et al. (1988) determined that the ALDH2 gene contains at least 13
exons and spans approximately 44 kb.

MAPPING

Hsu et al. (1985) assigned the ALDH2 locus to chromosome 12 by means of
a cDNA probe and Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrids. With a
cDNA fragment corresponding to the 3-prime coding part of human ALDH1
mRNA, Braun et al. (1986) studied human-rodent somatic cell hybrids and
confirmed the assignment to chromosome 12. The mitochondrial and
cytosolic forms of ALDH are coded by mouse chromosomes 4 and 19,
respectively (Mather and Holmes, 1984). Comparative mapping in man,
mouse, and bovine led Womack (1990) to suggest that ALDH2 is in the
distal part of 12q, distal to IFNG (147570), a conclusion consistent
with other information on the mapping of these 2 loci.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

The ALDH2 alleles encoding the active and inactive subunits are termed
'ALDH2*1' and 'ALDH2*2,' respectively; see 100650.0001. It had been
thought that the 2 alleles were expressed codominantly, and that only
individuals homozygous for ALDH2*2 were ALDH2-deficient. However,
studies of the inheritance of alcohol-induced flushing (610251) in
families suggested that the trait is dominant (Schwitters et al., 1982).

- Early Studies of ALDH Isoforms

Harada et al. (1980) presented evidence that ALDH is polymorphic in
Japanese. They identified 2 major isozymes: a faster migrating (low Km
for acetaldehyde) and a slower migrating isozyme (high Km for
acetaldehyde). The unusual slower-migrating phenotype, which had less
enzymatic activity, was found in 52% of the specimens; the
fast-migrating isozyme was absent in these specimens. Harada et al.
(1980) postulated that initial intoxicating symptoms after alcohol
drinking in these individuals may be due to delayed oxidation of
acetaldehyde due to variant or absent ALDH. The slow-migrating ALDH
isoform was strongly inactivated by disulfiram, whereas the
faster-migrating isoform was relatively insensitive to disulfiram. These
isoforms were later identified as ALDH1 and ALDH2, respectively.

Agarwal et al. (1981) performed a population genetic study in East
Asians of several different extractions using hair root lysates to
investigate ALDH isozymes. Between 40 and 80% of the several East Asian
groups were found to be deficient in the faster migrating isozyme,
termed ALDH2, whereas not a single European individual was deficient.
The deficiency was invariably associated with sensitivity to alcohol.
Family studies suggested autosomal recessive inheritance of the
deficiency. Harada et al. (1981) found deficiency of the
fast-metabolizing isoform in 43% of Japanese; all deficient persons had
flushing symptoms and, after alcohol drinking, showed an increased mean
acetaldehyde concentration of 37.3 micromoles as compared with 2.1
micromoles in nondeficient persons. Impraim et al. (1982) investigated
the basis of the lack in about 50% of East Asians of 1 of the 2 major
liver ALDH isozymes. Consistent with a convention of nomenclature
adopted by the worldwide workshops, ALDH1 is cytosolic and ALDH2 is
mitochondrial. Impraim et al. (1982) confirmed that it was the ALDH2
isozyme that was missing in persons of Asian descent. The unusual ALDH2
isozyme in Japanese liver was enzymatically inactive but immunologically
cross-reactive. Thus, a structural mutation at the ALDH2 locus was
presumed to be the genetic basis.

Goedde et al. (1983) noted the existence of 4 isozymes of ALDH, which
differed in electrophoretic mobility and isoelectric point. In a
population study, they found that the frequency of deficiency of the
more active isoform was 69% in Indians of the Ecuador Highlands, 44% in
Japanese, and 35% in Chinese. This deficiency was not seen in Egyptians,
Liberians, Kenyans, or Europeans. The authors suggested that deficiency
is related to flushing and a slower metabolism of acetaldehyde, which
could in turn result in a lower frequency of alcoholism and
alcohol-related problems. (Note that the nomenclature used by some of
these authors is confused: ALDH1 is actually ALDH2).

- Molecular Basis

Hsu et al. (1987) developed a method for distinguishing the 2 main
alleles by means of allele-specific 21-base synthetic oligonucleotides.
Using a pair of synthetic oligonucleotides, one complementary to the
ALDH2*1 allele and the other complementary to the ALDH2*2 allele,

Shibuya and Yoshida (1988) determined the genotypes of 49 unrelated
Japanese persons and 12 Caucasians. The frequency of the atypical allele
was found to be 0.35 in the Japanese samples examined. The atypical
allele was not found in the Caucasians.

Crabb et al. (1989) did genotyping on the liver from 24 Japanese
individuals, using the PCR technique for amplification of genomic DNA.
In correlating genotype with phenotype, they found that both
heterozygotes and homozygotes for ALDH2*2 are deficient in ALDH2
activity; that is, the ALDH2*2 allele is dominant. Since ALDH2 is a
homotetrameric enzyme, random association of active and inactive
subunits, equally expressed, should generate about 6% normal tetramers;
the remainder would contain at least 1 mutant subunit. Thus, if all
tetramers containing at least 1 mutant subunit were inactive, there
would be only 6% activity in heterozygotes. This low amount of activity
is likely to be below the detection limit of activity staining of the
gels.

Using allele-specific oligonucleotides for ALDH2*2, Singh et al. (1989)
studied phenotypically deficient individuals in the Chinese, Japanese,
and South Korean families to determine heterozygous or homozygous
status. All individuals with a heterozygous genotype were found to be
deficient, thus demonstrating that only the normal homotetrameric enzyme
is catalytically active.

Oota et al. (2004) used the ALDH2*2 allele, which is responsible for
catalytic deficiency of ALDH2, and 4 noncoding SNPs to study ALDH2
haplotype frequency and linkage disequilibrium in 37 worldwide
populations. Only 4 major SNP-defined haplotypes were found to account
for almost all chromosomes in all populations. A fifth haplotype
harbored the functional variant and was found only in East Asians.

- ALDH2 and Alcoholism

Crabb (1990) pointed out that the single base mutation in ALDH2
responsible for acute alcohol-flushing reaction in Asians, glu504-to-lys
(ALDH2*2; 100650.0001), is the best-characterized genetic factor
influencing alcohol drinking behavior.

Shibuya et al. (1988) studied 23 Japanese with alcoholic liver disease.
No difference was found in the genotypes at the ADH2 (103720) locus;
however, at the ALDH2 locus, 20 of the 23 patients were homozygous for
ALDH2*1, only 3 were heterozygous, and none of the patients was
homozygous for ALDH2*2. The results were interpreted as indicating that
Japanese with the atypical allele are at a much lower risk for alcoholic
liver disease, presumably due to their sensitivity to alcohol
intoxication.

Thomasson et al. (1991) hypothesized that the polymorphisms of both of
the liver enzymes responsible for the oxidative metabolism of ethanol
may modify the predisposition to development of alcoholism (103780).
Using leukocyte DNA amplified by PCR and allele-specific
oligonucleotides in a study of Chinese men living in Taiwan, they
demonstrated that alcoholics had significantly lower frequencies not
only of ALDH2*2 but also of ADH1B*2 (103720.0001) and ADH1C*1 (see
103730.0002). Goedde et al. (1992) gave extensive population frequency
data on ALDH2 as well as on ADH1B. They again showed that the atypical
ALDH2 gene (ALDH2*2) is extremely rare in Caucasians, Blacks, Papua New
Guineans, Australian Aborigines, and Aurocanians (South Chile), but
widely prevalent among East Asians. They cited evidence indicating that
individuals possessing the ALDH2*2 allele show alcohol-related
sensitivity responses such as facial flushing, are usually not habitual
drinkers, and appear to suffer less from alcoholism and alcohol-related
liver disease.

Muramatsu et al. (1995) used the PCR/RFLP method to determine the
genotypes of the ADH2 and ALDH2 loci of alcoholic and nonalcoholic
Chinese living in Shanghai. They found that the alcoholics had
significantly lower frequencies of the ADH2*2 and ALDH2*2 alleles than
did the nonalcoholics, suggesting the inhibitory effects of these
alleles for the development of alcoholism. In the nonalcoholic subjects,
ADH2*2 had little, if any, effect, despite the significant effect of the
ALDH2*2 allele in decreasing the alcohol consumption of the individual.
Taken together, these results were considered consistent with the
proposed hypothesis for the development of alcoholism, i.e., drinking
behavior is greatly influenced by the individual's genotype of
alcohol-metabolizing enzymes and the risk of becoming alcoholic is
proportionate with the ethanol consumption of the individual.

To investigate possible interactions among the variant alleles ADH2*2,
ADH3*1, and ALDH2*2, Chen et al. (1999) genotyped 340 alcoholic and 545
control Han Chinese living in Taiwan at the ADH2, ADH3, and ALDH2 loci.
After the influence of ALDH2*2 was controlled for, multiple logistic
regression analysis indicated that allelic variation at ADH3 exerts no
significant effect on the risk of alcoholism. Any presumed affect could
be accounted for by linkage disequilibrium between ADH3*1 and ADH2*2;
the 2 genes are located on 4q22. ALDH2*2 homozygosity, regardless of the
ADH2 genotype, was fully protective against alcoholism; no individual
showing such homozygosity was found among the alcoholics. Logistic
regression analyses of the remaining 6 combinatorial genotypes of the
polymorphic ADH2 and ALDH2 loci indicated that individuals carrying 1 or
2 copies of ADH2*2 and a single copy of ALDH2*2 had the lowest risk
(odds ratios = 0.04-0.05) for alcoholism, as compared with the ADH2*1/*1
and ALDH2*1/*1 genotypes. The disease risk associated with the
ADH2*2/*2-ALDH2*1/*1 genotype appeared to be about half of that
associated with the ADH2*1/*2-ALDH2*1/*1 genotype. These results
suggested that protection afforded by the ADH2*2 allele may be
independent of that afforded by ALDH2*2.

Chai et al. (2005) examined ADH2, ADH3, and ALDH2 polymorphisms in 72
alcoholic and 38 nonalcoholic healthy Korean men. Forty-eight of the
alcoholic men had Cloninger type 1 and 24 had Cloninger type 2
alcoholism. The frequency of ADH2*1 (103720.0001) and ADH3*2
(103730.0002) alleles was significantly higher in men with type 2
alcoholism than in men with type 1 alcoholism and in healthy men. The
frequency of the ALDH2*1 allele was significantly higher in men with
alcohol dependence than in healthy men. Chai et al. (2005) suggested
that the genetic characteristics of alcohol metabolism in type 1
alcoholism falls between nonalcoholism and type 2 alcoholism.

Luo et al. (2006) genotyped 16 markers within the ADH gene cluster, 4
markers within the ALDH2 gene, and 38 unlinked ancestry-informative
markers in a case-control sample of 801 individuals. Associations
between markers and disease were analyzed by a Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium test, a conventional case-control comparison, a structured
association analysis, and a novel diplotype trend regression (DTR)
analysis. All markers were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in
controls, but some markers showed Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium in cases
of alcohol dependence. Genotypes of many markers were associated with
alcohol dependence. DTR analysis showed that the ADH5 (103710) genotypes
and diplotypes of ADH1A (103700), ADH1B (103720), ADH7 (600086), and
ALDH2 were associated with alcohol dependence in European Americans
and/or African Americans. The risk-influencing alleles were fine mapped
from among the markers studied and were found to coincide with some well
known functional variants. They demonstrated that DTR was more powerful
than many other conventional association methods. They also found that
several ADH genes and the ALDH2 gene were susceptibility loci for
alcohol dependence, and the associations were best explained by several
independent risk genes.

Although the ALDH2*2 allele is considered to be a genetic deterrent for
alcoholism, Muramatsu et al. (1996) found that 80 of 655 Japanese
alcoholics had the mutant allele. The authors postulated that these
alcoholics had some other factor that overcame the adverse effects of
acetaldehydemia and that such a factor might reside in the brain's
'reward system,' in which dopamine plays a crucial role. Muramatsu et
al. (1996) studied variation at the DRD4 locus (126452) and found a
higher frequency of a 5-repeat allele of the DRD4 receptor 48-bp repeat
polymorphism in alcoholics with ALDH2*2 than in 100 other alcoholics and
144 controls. They found that alcoholics with the 5-repeat allele also
abused other drugs more often.

- ALDH2/HMGIC Fusion Gene

Kazmierczak et al. (1995) found that the ALDH2 gene was a translocation
partner of the HMGIC gene (HMGA2; 600698) in a uterine leiomyoma. Fusion
genes involving HMGIC are found in pleomorphic adenomas of salivary
glands and in a variety of benign mesenchymal tumors.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO-9) containing the
5-prime-TCCC-3-prime motif, which acts by greatly reducing mRNA levels,
Garver et al. (2001) showed that rat hepatoma cells had reduced Aldh2
mRNA levels and activity, resulting in more than 90% inhibition of Aldh2
synthesis, probably mediated by RNase H hydrolysis. Mismatches in the
TCCC motif, in particular, reduced the efficacy of ASO-9, which
specifically reduced mRNA levels of Aldh2 but not of a control
mitochondrial enzyme, glutamate dehydrogenase (GLUD1; 138130). Treatment
of rats with ASO-9 specifically reduced Aldh2 activity by approximately
40% and increased plasma acetaldehyde levels 4-fold after ethanol
administration. Behavioral analysis indicated that ASO-9 treatment
induced an aversion to ethanol. After initial consumption, a reduction
of 61% in ethanol consumption was observed in treated rats, a level
comparable to that achieved with disulfiram (Antabuse). Garver et al.
(2001) concluded that the specificity and lack of side effects of an ASO
that inhibits ALDH2 expression and mimics the Asian phenotype would be
advantageous when compared with disulfiram.

Nitroglycerin, or glyceryl trinitrate (GTN), elicits nitric oxide
(NO)-based signaling to dilate blood vessels. Chen et al. (2005) found
that mitochondrial bioconversion of GTN to NO was absent in mitochondria
obtained from Aldh2-null mice. Vasoactivity from alternative
nitro(so)vasodilators was unaffected. GTN bioactivity could still be
generated in mutant mice and their isolated vascular tissue, but only at
substantially higher concentrations of GTN. Chen et al. (2005) concluded
that ALDH2 is necessary and sufficient for vasoactivity derived from
therapeutic levels of GTN.

Yao et al. (2010) found that a selective ALDH2 inhibitor (CVT-10216),
suppressed cocaine self-administration in rats and prevented cocaine- or
cue-induced reinstatement in a rat model of cocaine relapse-like
behavior. Inhibition of ALDH2 was found to decrease cocaine-stimulated
dopamine production in neurons in the primary ventral tegmental area by
increasing the formation of tetrahydropapaveroline (THP). THP was found
to selectively inhibit phosphorylated (activated) tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH; 191290), and thus reduce dopamine production via negative feedback.
Yao et al. (2010) concluded that reducing cocaine- and
craving-associated increases in dopamine release appears to be the
mechanism by which ALDH2 inhibition suppresses cocaine-seeking behavior.

Langevin et al. (2011) found that the Fanconi anemia DNA repair pathway
counteracts acetaldehyde-induced genotoxicity in mice. Their results
showed that the acetaldehyde-catabolizing enzyme Aldh2 is essential for
the development of Fancd2 (613984)-null embryos. Nevertheless,
acetaldehyde-catabolism-competent mothers (Aldh2 heterozygotes) could
support the development of double-mutant Aldh2-null/Fancd2-null mice.
However, these embryos were unusually sensitive to ethanol exposure in
utero, and ethanol consumption by postnatal double-deficient mice
rapidly precipitated bone marrow failure. Lastly, Aldh2-null/Fancd2-null
mice spontaneously developed acute leukemia. Langevin et al. (2011)
concluded that acetaldehyde-mediated DNA damage may critically
contribute to the genesis of fetal alcohol syndrome in fetuses, as well
to normal development, hematopoietic failure, and cancer predisposition
in Fanconi anemia (see 227650) patients.

Garaycoechea et al. (2012) reported that aged Aldh2-null/Fancd2-null
mutant mice that do not develop leukemia spontaneously develop aplastic
anemia, with the concomitant accumulation of damaged DNA within the
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) pool. Unexpectedly, they
found that only HSPCs, and not more mature blood precursors, require
Aldh2 for protection against acetaldehyde toxicity. Additionally, the
aldehyde-oxidizing activity of HSPCs, as measured by Aldefluor stain, is
due to Aldh2 and correlates with this protection. Finally, there is more
than a 600-fold reduction in the HSC pool of mice deficient in boh
Fanconi anemia pathway-mediated DNA repair and acetaldehyde
detoxification. Therefore, Garaycoechea et al. (2012) concluded that the
emergence of bone marrow failure in Fanconi anemia is probably due to
aldehyde-mediated genotoxicity restricted to the HSPC pool.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ALCOHOL SENSITIVITY, ACUTE
ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE, PROTECTION AGAINST, INCLUDED;;
HANGOVER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
SUBLINGUAL NITROGLYCERIN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO POOR RESPONSE TO, INCLUDED;;
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER, ALCOHOL-RELATED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
ALDH2, GLU504LYS (dbSNP rs671)

The designation for the ALDH2*2 polymorphism has been changed from
GLU487LYS to GLU504LYS. The numbering change includes the N-terminal
mitochondrial leader peptide of 17 amino acids (Li et al., 2006).

The ALDH2*2-encoded protein was first reported to have a change from
glutamic acid (glutamate) to lysine at residue 487 (Yoshida et al.,
1984). Hempel et al. (1985) and Hsu et al. (1985) also showed that the
catalytic deficiency in mitochondrial ALDH in East Asians that manifests
as acute alcohol sensitivity (610251) can be traced to a structural
point mutation at amino acid position 487 of the polypeptide. The
substitution of lysine for glutamic acid results from a G-A transition.

About 50% of East Asians are missing the ALDH2 isozyme. Impraim et al.
(1982) found that the livers of East Asians lacking the ALDH2 isozyme
show an enzymatically inactive but immunologically cross-reactive
material (CRM) corresponding to the ALDH2 isozyme.

To study the mechanism by which the ALDH2*2 allele exerts its dominant
effect in decreasing ALDH2 activity in liver extracts and producing
cutaneous flushing when the subject drinks alcohol, Xiao et al. (1995)
cloned ALDH2*1 cDNA and generated the ALDH2*2 allele by site-directed
mutagenesis. These cDNAs were transduced using retroviral vectors into
HeLa and CV1 cells, which do not express ALDH2. The normal allele
directed synthesis of immunoreactive ALDH2 protein with the expected
isoelectric point and increased aldehyde dehydrogenase activity. The
ALDH2*2 allele directed synthesis of mRNA and immunoreactive protein,
but the protein lacked enzymatic activity. When ALDH2*1-expressing cells
were transduced with ALDH2*2 vectors, both mRNAs were expressed and
immunoreactive proteins with isoelectric points ranging between those of
the 2 gene products were present, indicating that the subunits formed
heteromers. ALDH2 activity in these cells was reduced below that of the
parental ALDH2*1-expressing cells. Thus, the authors concluded that
ALDH2*2 allele is sufficient to cause ALDH2 deficiency in vitro.

Xiao et al. (1996) referred to the ALDH2 enzyme encoded by the ALDH2*1
allele (the wildtype form) as ALDH2E and the enzyme subunit encoded by
ALDH2*2 as ALDH2K. They found that the ALDH2E enzyme was very stable,
with a half-life of at least 22 hours. ALDH2K, on the other hand, had an
enzyme half-life of only 14 hours. In cells expressing both subunits,
most of the subunits assemble as heterotetramers, and these enzymes had
a half-life of 13 hours. Thus, the effect of ALDH2K on enzyme turnover
is dominant. Their studies indicated that ALDH2*2 exerts its dominant
effect both by interfering with the catalytic activity of the enzyme and
by increasing its turnover.

Because genetic epidemiologic studies have suggested a mechanism by
which homozygosity for the ALDH2*2 allele inhibits the development of
alcoholism (103780) in Asians, Peng et al. (1999) recruited 18 adult Han
Chinese men, matched by age, body-mass index, nutritional state, and
homozygosity at the ALDH2 gene loci from a population of 273 men. Six
individuals were chosen for each of the 3 ALDH2 allotypes, i.e., 2
homozygotes and 1 heterozygote. Following a low dose of ethanol,
homozygous ALDH2*2 individuals were found to be strikingly responsive
with pronounced cardiovascular hemodynamic effects as well as subjective
perception of general discomfort for as long as 2 hours following
ingestion.

Among 71 Japanese nondrinkers and 268 drinkers of alcohol, Liu et al.
(2005) found that drinkers had a significantly higher frequency of the
504glu allele. Individuals with the 504lys allele had an increased risk
of alcohol-induced flushing (odds ratio of 33.0).

In a study of 140 men and women of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean
heritage, Wall et al. (2000) found that those with ALDH2*2 alleles
experienced more severe hangovers (see 610251) and suggested that this
may contribute, in part, to protection against the development of
excessive or problematic drinking in Asian Americans. Yokoyama et al.
(2005) found that inactive heterozygous ALDH2, alcohol flushing, and
increased mean corpuscular volume (MCV) were positively associated with
hangover susceptibility in Japanese workers, suggesting that
acetaldehyde is etiologically linked to the development of hangover.

In 80 Han Chinese patients with arteriography-confirmed coronary artery
disease who used only sublingual nitroglycerin, or glyceryl trinitrate
(GTN) for angina relief, Li et al. (2006) found that the ALDH2*2 allele
was associated with lack of efficacy of sublingual GTN. Enzyme kinetic
analysis revealed that the catalytic efficiency of GTN metabolism of the
glu504 protein is approximately 10-fold higher than that of the lys504
enzyme. Li et al. (2006) concluded that the presence of the ALDH2*2
allele contributes, in large part, to the lack of an efficacious
clinical response to GTN and recommended that this genetic factor be
considered when administering GTN, particularly to Asian patients, 30 to
50% of whom possess the inactive ALDH2*2 mutant allele.

In a study of 32 adult Han Chinese male students with no personal or
family history of alcoholism, Peng et al. (2007) found that
heterozygosity for the ALDH2*2 allele resulted in higher acetaldehyde
levels after alcohol ingestion compared to wildtype homozygotes. After
ingestion, heterozygotes also had faster heart rates, faster blood flow
in the facial and carotid arteries, and more subjective discomfort
compared to wildtype homozygotes. Overall, the findings indicated that
acetaldehyde, rather than ethanol or acetate, are responsible for
observed alcohol sensitivity reactions. Peng et al. (2007) postulated
that ALDH2*2 heterozygotes have decreased aversion to the adverse
effects of alcohol, and thus increased risk of drinking, compared to
those who are homozygous for ALDH2*2.

Among 1,032 Korean individuals, Kim et al. (2008) found that the
combination of the ADH1B his48 allele (dbSNP rs1229984; 103720.0001) and
the ALDH2 lys504 allele offered protection against alcoholism.
Individuals who carried both susceptibility alleles (arg48 and glu504,
respectively) had a significantly increased risk for alcoholism (OR,
91.43; p = 1.4 x 10(-32)). Individuals with 1 protective and 1
susceptibility allele had a lesser increased risk for alcoholism (OR,
11.40; p = 3.5 x 10(-15)) compared to those with both protective
alleles. Kim et al. (2008) calculated that alcoholism in the Korean
population is 86.5% attributable to the detrimental effect of the ADH1B
arg48 and the ALDH2 glu504 alleles.

In a case-control study with 221 Chinese patients with esophageal cancer
and 191 controls, Ding et al. (2010) found that alcohol drinkers with
the ALDH2 A allele showed a significantly increased risk of esophageal
cancer compared to drinkers with the ALDH2 G/G genotype (OR, 3.08) or
compared to nondrinkers with any genotype (OR, 3.05). There was a
significantly higher risk of esophageal cancer in those with higher
alcohol consumption (OR, 11.93), and a dose-dependent positive effect
was observed. Drinkers with high cumulative lifetime consumption
(greater than 2.5 kg*year calculated as grams of alcohol consumed per
day multiplied by number of years of consumption) carrying both the
ALHD2 A allele and the G allele of ADH1B (his48 allele) had an even
higher risk of esophageal cancer (OR, 53.15) compared to individuals
with the ALDH2 G/G and ADH1B A/A genotypes. Ding et al. (2010)
hypothesized that increased acetaldehyde in drinkers with these
susceptibility alleles has a carcinogenic effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Agarwal et al. (1981); Bennion and Li (1976); Goedde et al. (1986);
Goedde et al. (1979); Harada et al. (1981); Harada et al. (1978);
Reed  (1977); Yoshida  (1984); Yoshida et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, D. P.; Harada, S.; Goedde, H. W.: Racial differences
in biological sensitivity to ethanol: the role of alcohol dehydrogenase
and aldehyde dehydrogenase isozymes. Alcoholism 5: 12-16, 1981.

2. Agarwal, D. P.; Meier-Tackmann, D.; Harada, S.; Goedde, H. W.;
Du, R.: Mechanism of biological sensitivity to alcohol: inherited
deficiency of aldehyde dehydrogenase isoenzyme I in Mongoloids. (Abstract) Sixth
Int. Cong. Hum. Genet., Jerusalem 102 only, 1981.

3. Bennion, L. J.; Li, T.-K.: Alcohol metabolism in American Indians
and whites: lack of racial differences in metabolic rate and liver
alcohol dehydrogenase. New Eng. J. Med. 294: 9-13, 1976.

4. Braun, T.; Grzeschik, K. H.; Bober, E.; Singh, S.; Agarwal, D.
P.; Goedde, H. W.: The structural gene for the mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase maps to human chromosome 12. Hum. Genet. 73: 365-367,
1986.

5. Chai, Y.-G.; Oh, D.-Y.; Chung, E. K.; Kim, G. S.; Kim, L.; Lee,
Y.-S.; Choi, I.-G.: Alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase polymorphisms
in men with type I and type II alcoholism. Am. J. Psychiat. 162:
1003-1005, 2005.

6. Chen, C.-C.; Lu, R.-B.; Chen, Y.-C.; Wang, M.-F.; Chang, Y.-C.;
Li, T.-K.; Yin, S.-J.: Interaction between the functional polymorphisms
of the alcohol-metabolism genes in protection against alcoholism. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 795-807, 1999.

7. Chen, C.-H.; Budas, G. R.; Churchill, E. N.; Disatnik, M.-H.; Hurley,
T. D.; Mochly-Rosen, D.: Activation of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 reduces
ischemic damage to the heart. Science 321: 1493-1495, 2008.

8. Chen, Z.; Foster, M. W.; Zhang, J.; Mao, L.; Rockman, H. A.; Kawamoto,
T.; Kitagawa, K.; Nakayama, K. I.; Hess, D. T.; Stamler, J. S.: An
essential role for mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase in nitroglycerin
bioactivation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 12159-12164, 2005.

9. Crabb, D. W.: Biological markers for increased risk of alcoholism
and for quantitation of alcohol consumption. J. Clin. Invest. 85:
311-315, 1990.

10. Crabb, D. W.; Edenberg, H. J.; Bosron, W. F.; Li, T.-K.: Genotypes
for aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency and alcohol sensitivity: the
inactive ALDH2*2 allele is dominant. J. Clin. Invest. 83: 314-316,
1989.

11. Ding, J.; Li, S.; Cao, H.; Wu, J.; Gao, C.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, J.;
Chang, J.; Yao, G.: Alcohol dehydrogenase-2 and aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
genotypes, alcohol drinking and the risk for esophageal cancer in
a Chinese population. J. Hum. Genet. 55: 97-102, 2010.

12. Garaycoechea, J. I.; Crossan, G. P.; Langevin, F.; Daly, M.; Arends,
M. J.; Patel, K. J.: Genotoxic consequences of endogenous aldehydes
on mouse haematopoietic stem cell function. Nature 489: 571-575,
2012.

13. Garver, E.; Tu, G.; Cao, Q.-N.; Aini, M.; Zhou, F.; Israel, Y.
: Eliciting the low-activity aldehyde dehydrogenase Asian phenotype
by an antisense mechanism results in an aversion to ethanol. J. Exp.
Med. 194: 571-580, 2001.

14. Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Fritze, G.; Meier-Tackmann, D.;
Singh, S.; Beckmann, G.; Bhatia, K.; Chen, L. Z.; Fang, B.; Lisker,
R.; Paik, Y. K.; Rothhammer, F.; Saha, N.; Segal, B.; Srivastava,
L. M.; Czeizel, A.: Distribution of ADH-2 and ALDH2 genotypes in
different populations. Hum. Genet. 88: 344-346, 1992.

15. Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Harada, S.; Meier-Tackmann, D.;
Ruofu, D.; Bienzle, U.; Kroeger, A.; Hussein, L.: Population genetic
studies on aldehyde dehydrogenase isozyme deficiency and alcohol sensitivity. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 35: 769-772, 1983.

16. Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Harada, S.; Rothhammer, F.; Whittaker,
J. O.; Lisker, R.: Aldehyde dehydrogenase polymorphism in North American,
South American, and Mexican Indian populations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38:
395-399, 1986.

17. Goedde, H. W.; Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.: Racial differences
in alcohol sensitivity: a new hypothesis. Hum. Genet. 51: 331-334,
1979.

18. Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
deficiency as cause of facial flushing reaction to alcohol in Japanese.
(Letter) Lancet 317: 982 only, 1981. Note: Originally Volume II.

19. Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Aldehyde metabolism
and polymorphism of aldehyde dehydrogenase in Japanese. (Abstract) Sixth
Int. Cong. Hum. Genet., Jerusalem 103 only, 1981.

20. Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Isozyme variations
in acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (E.C. 1.2.1.3) in human tissues. Hum.
Genet. 44: 181-185, 1978.

21. Harada, S.; Misawa, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Liver
alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase in the Japanese:
isozyme variation and its possible role in alcohol intoxication. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 32: 8-15, 1980.

22. Hempel, J.; Kaiser, R.; Jornvall, H.: Mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase from human liver: primary structure, differences in
relation to the cytosolic enzyme and functional correlations. Europ.
J. Biochem. 153: 13-28, 1985.

23. Hsu, L. C.; Bendel, R. E.; Yoshida, A.: Direct detection of usual
and atypical alleles on the human aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2)
locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41: 996-1001, 1987.

24. Hsu, L. C.; Bendel, R. E.; Yoshida, A.: Genomic structure of
the human mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase gene. Genomics 2:
57-65, 1988.

25. Hsu, L. C.; Tani, K.; Fujiyoshi, T.; Kurachi, K.; Yoshida, A.
: Cloning of cDNAs for human aldehyde dehydrogenases 1 and 2. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 3771-3775, 1985.

26. Hsu, L. C.; Yoshida, A.; Mohandas, T.: Chromosomal assignment
of the genes for human aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) and aldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40: 656-657,
1985.

27. Impraim, C.; Wang, G.; Yoshida, A.: Structural mutation in a
major human aldehyde dehydrogenase gene results in loss of enzyme
activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 34: 837-841, 1982.

28. Kazmierczak, B.; Hennig, Y.; Wanschura, S.; Rogalla, P.; Bartnitzke,
S.; van de Ven, W. J. M.; Bullerdiek, J.: Description of a novel
fusion transcript between HMGI-C, a gene encoding for a member of
the high mobility group proteins, and the mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase
gene. Cancer Res. 55: 6038-6039, 1995.

29. Kim, D.-J.; Choi, I.-G.; Park, B. L.; Lee, B.-C.; Ham, B.-J.;
Yoon, S.; Bae, J. S.; Cheong, H. S.; Shin, H. D.: Major genetic components
underlying alcoholism in Korean population. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
854-858, 2008.

30. Langevin, F.; Crossan, G. P.; Rosado, I. V.; Arends, M. J.; Patel,
K. J.: Fancd2 counteracts the toxic effects of naturally produced
aldehydes in mice. Nature 475: 53-58, 2011.

31. Li, Y.; Zhang, D.; Jin, W.; Shao, C.; Yan, P.; Xu, C.; Sheng,
H.; Liu, Y.; Yu, J.; Xie, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Lu, D.; Nebert, D. W.; Harrison,
D. C.; Huang, W.; Jin, L.: Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
(ALDH2) glu504lys polymorphism contributes to the variation in efficacy
of sublingual nitroglycerin. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 506-511, 2006.

32. Liu, Y.; Yoshimura, K.; Hanaoka, T.; Ohnami, S.; Ohnami, S.; Kohno,
T.; Yoshida, T.; Sakamoto, H.; Sobue, T.; Tsugane, S.: Association
of habitual smoking and drinking with single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in 40 candidate genes: data from random population-based Japanese
samples. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 62-68, 2005.

33. Luo, X.; Kranzler, H. R.; Zuo, L.; Wang, S.; Schork, N. J.; Gelernter,
J.: Diplotype trend regression analysis of the ADH gene cluster and
the ALDH2 gene: multiple significant associations with alcohol dependence. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 78: 973-987, 2006.

34. Mather, P. B.; Holmes, R. S.: Biochemical genetics of aldehyde
dehydrogenase isoenzymes in the mouse: evidence for stomach and testis-specific
isoenzymes. Biochem. Genet. 22: 981-995, 1984.

35. Muramatsu, T.; Higuchi, S.; Murayama, M.; Matsushita, S.; Hayashida,
M.: Association between alcoholism and the dopamine D4 receptor gene. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 113-115, 1996.

36. Muramatsu, T.; Zu-Cheng, W.; Yi-Ru, F.; Kou-Bao, H.; Heqin, Y.;
Yamada, K.; Higuchi, S.; Harada, S.; Kono, H.: Alcohol and aldehyde
dehydrogenase genotypes and drinking behavior of Chinese living in
Shanghai. Hum. Genet. 96: 151-154, 1995.

37. Oota, H.; Pakstis, A. J.; Bonne-Tamir, B.; Goldman, D.; Grigorenko,
E.; Kajuna, S. L. B.; Karoma, N. J.; Kungulilo, S.; Lu, R.-B.; Odunsi,
K.; Okonofua, F.; Zhukova, O. V.; Kidd, J. R.; Kidd, K. K.: The evolution
and population genetics of the ALDH2 locus: random genetic drift,
selection, and low levels of recombination. Ann. Hum. Genet. 68:
93-109, 2004.

38. Peng, G.-S.; Chen, Y.-C.; Tsao, T.-P.; Wang, M.-F.; Yin, S.-J.
: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic basis for partial protection
against alcoholism in Asians, heterozygous for the variant ALDH2*2
gene allele. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 17: 845-855, 2007.

39. Peng, G.-S.; Wang, M.-F.; Chen, C.-Y.; Luu, S.-U.; Chou, H.-C.;
Li, T.-K.; Yin, S.-J.: Involvement of acetaldehyde for full protection
against alcoholism by homozygosity of the variant allele of mitochondrial
aldehyde dehydrogenase gene in Asians. Pharmacogenetics 9: 463-476,
1999.

40. Reed, T. E.: Three heritable responses to alcohol in a heterogeneous
randomly mated mouse strain: inferences for humans. J. Studies Alcohol 38:
618-632, 1977.

41. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

42. Schwitters, S. Y.; Johnson, R. C.; Johnson, S. B.; Ahern, F. M.
: Familial resemblances in flushing following alcohol use. Behav.
Genet. 12: 349-352, 1982.

43. Shibuya, A.; Ikuta, T.; Hsu, L. C.; Yoshida, A.: Genotypes of
alcohol metabolizing enzymes in Japanese with alcoholic liver diseases:
a strong association of the usual Caucasian type aldehyde dehydrogenase
allele (ALDH2) with the disease. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
A201, 1988.

44. Shibuya, A.; Yoshida, A.: Frequency of the atypical aldehyde
dehydrogenase-2 gene (ALDH2/2) in Japanese and Caucasians. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 43: 741-743, 1988.

45. Singh, S.; Fritze, G.; Fang, B.; Harada, S.; Paik, Y. K.; Eckey,
R.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Inheritance of mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase: genotyping in Chinese, Japanese and South Korean families
reveals dominance of the mutant allele. Hum. Genet. 83: 119-121,
1989.

46. Thomasson, H. R.; Edenberg, H. J.; Crabb, D. W.; Mai, X.-L.; Jerome,
R. E.; Li, T.-K.; Wang, S.-P.; Lin, Y.-T.; Lu, R.-B.; Yin, S.-J.:
Alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase genotypes and alcoholism in Chinese
men. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 677-681, 1991.

47. Wall, T. L.; Horn, S. M.; Johnson, M. L.; Smith, T. L.; Carr,
L. G.: Hangover symptoms in Asian Americans with variations in the
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) gene. J. Stud. Alcohol 61: 13-17,
2000.

48. Womack, J. E.: Personal Communication. College Station, Texas
2/26/1990.

49. Xiao, Q.; Weiner, H.; Crabb, D. W.: The mutation in the mitochondrial
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) gene responsible for alcohol-induced
flushing increases turnover of the enzyme tetramers in a dominant
fashion. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 2027-2032, 1996.

50. Xiao, Q.; Weiner, H.; Johnston, T.; Crabb, D. W.: The aldehyde
dehydrogenase ALDH2*2 allele exhibits dominance over ALDH2*1 in transduced
HeLa cells. J. Clin. Invest. 96: 2180-2186, 1995.

51. Yao, L.; Fan, P.; Arolfo, M.; Jiang, Z.; Olive, M. F.; Zablocki,
J.; Sun, H.-L.; Chu, N.; Lee, J.; Kim, H.-Y.; Leung, K.; Shryock,
J.; Blackburn, B.; Diamond, I.: Inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
suppresses cocaine seeking by generating THP, a cocaine use-dependent
inhibitor of dopamine synthesis. Nature Med. 16: 1024-1028, 2010.
Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 17: 229 only, 2011.

52. Yokoyama, M.; Yokoyama, A.; Yokoyama, T.; Funazu, K.; Hamana,
G.; Kondo, S.; Yamashita, T.; Nakamura, H.: Hangover susceptibility
in relation to aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 genotype, alcohol flushing,
and mean corpuscular volume in Japanese workers. Alcohol Clin. Exp.
Res. 29: 1165-1171, 2005.

53. Yoshida, A.: Determination of aldehyde dehydrogenase phenotypes
using hair roots: re-examination. Hum. Genet. 66: 296-299, 1984.

54. Yoshida, A.; Huang, I.-Y.; Ikawa, M.: Molecular abnormality of
an inactive aldehyde dehydrogenase variant commonly found in Orientals. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 258-261, 1984.

55. Yoshida, A.; Wang, G.; Dave, V.: Determination of genotypes of
human aldehyde dehydrogenase ALDH-2 locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35:
1107-1116, 1983.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Metabolic:
Increased intoxicating symptoms after alcohol drinking

Skin:
Facial flushing after alcohol intake

Misc:
Oriental type alcohol flushing with abnormal ALDH2

Lab:
Mitochondrial acetaldehyde dehydrogenase;
Delayed oxidation of acetaldehyde;
High Km for NAD;
Low Km foracetaldehyde;
Disulfiram insensitive

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/10/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/25/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/24/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/19/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/30/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/10/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/28/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/1/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/16/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/30/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 6/12/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
alopez: 10/24/2012
terry: 10/10/2012
alopez: 9/7/2011
terry: 9/6/2011
carol: 2/22/2011
wwang: 12/6/2010
ckniffin: 12/3/2010
wwang: 6/21/2010
ckniffin: 3/25/2010
ckniffin: 3/24/2010
wwang: 1/27/2010
ckniffin: 1/19/2010
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/30/2009
ckniffin: 10/27/2009
alopez: 9/30/2008
terry: 9/29/2008
carol: 7/17/2008
wwang: 7/13/2006
terry: 7/10/2006
carol: 6/21/2006
alopez: 6/13/2006
terry: 6/6/2006
alopez: 5/19/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
carol: 4/4/2006
mgross: 10/6/2005
terry: 9/28/2005
wwang: 9/1/2005
ckniffin: 9/1/2005
wwang: 8/10/2005
terry: 8/8/2005
tkritzer: 6/8/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
cwells: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/16/2004
mgross: 12/5/2001
terry: 11/29/2001
carol: 4/3/2001
carol: 11/8/1999
terry: 11/4/1999
alopez: 10/26/1999
terry: 9/24/1999
carol: 9/4/1998
dkim: 7/17/1998
dholmes: 5/12/1998
carol: 5/5/1998
terry: 4/30/1998
terry: 12/6/1996
mark: 6/12/1996
mark: 2/26/1996
terry: 2/20/1996
mark: 2/2/1996
terry: 1/26/1996
mark: 10/15/1995
warfield: 3/31/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 1/26/1994
carol: 6/9/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

612087	TITLE *612087 C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 2, MEMBER A; CLEC2A
;;PROLIFERATION-INDUCED LYMPHOCYTE-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR; PILAR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CLEC2A belongs to the CLEC2 family of activation-induced, natural killer
gene complex-encoded C-type lectin-like receptors (Spreu et al., 2007).

CLONING

By database analysis and PCR of a premonocytic leukemia cell line cDNA
library, Spreu et al. (2007) obtained cDNAs for 4 CLEC2A splice
variants. The principal variants, CLEC2A1 and CLEC2A2, contain distinct
terminal exons (exons 5A and 5B, respectively) and encode predicted 174-
and 160-amino acid proteins, respectively. Both contain an N-terminal
cytoplasmic tail, a transmembrane domain, a short stalk region, and a
C-terminal C-type lectin domain (CTLD) with 3 potential N-glycosylation
sites. The CTLD of CLEC2A1 shares 40 to 50% identity with the CTLDs of
other CLEC2 proteins, whereas the final 23 amino acids of the CLEC2A2
CTLD lack homology to other CLEC2 proteins. The 2 shorter CLEC2A
variants, sCLEC2A1 and sCLEC2A2, lack exon 2, which encodes the
transmembrane domain, suggesting they may encode soluble isoforms.
However, sCLEC2A1 and sCLEC2A2 were not detected in supernatants of
transfected 293T or COS-7 cells. RT-PCR analysis revealed CLEC2A
expression predominantly in myeloid cell lines, but not epithelial cell
lines, and in skin and bone marrow. FACS analysis showed surface
expression of CLEC2A1, but not CLEC2A2, on transfected 293T and COS-7
cells.

By sequence analysis of genes encoding C-type lectin domain-containing
proteins on chromosome 12p12-p13, followed by RACE-PCR of spleen cDNA,
Huarte et al. (2008) cloned CLEC2A, which they called PILAR. The deduced
174-amino acid protein contains a transmembrane domain and a truncated
C-type lectin domain in its extracellular region. RT-PCR analysis showed
PILAR expression in thymus, small intestine, uterus, testis, and ovary.
PILAR was expressed in B cells and T cells, particularly naive CD8 (see
186910) T cells, but not in natural killer cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Western blot and immunoprecipitation analysis, Huarte et al.
(2008) showed that PILAR interacted with CD161 (KLRB1; 602890). RT-PCR
analysis showed that T-cell activation induced transient expression of
PILAR in CD8 T cells, and flow cytometric analysis demonstrated
expression of PILAR on activated CD4 (186940) T cells. Increased
expression of PILAR on antigen-presenting cells enhanced T-cell
proliferation by increasing survival through enhanced expression of
antiapoptotic proteins (e.g., BCLXL; 600039) in a CD161-dependent
manner. PILAR was expressed by 7 to 10% of CD4 T cells from 2 samples of
inflammatory synovial fluid, suggesting a role in joint inflammation
pathogenesis. Huarte et al. (2008) concluded that PILAR has a central
role in modulating the extent of T-cell expansion.

Martick et al. (2008) showed that highly active hammerhead ribozymes are
present in the 3-prime UTRs of rodent Clec2 genes. Using a hammerhead
RNA motif search with relaxed delimitation of the nonconserved regions,
Martick et al. (2008) detected ribozyme sequences in which the invariant
regions, in contrast to the previously identified continuous
hammerheads, occurred as 2 fragments separated by hundreds of
nucleotides. Notably, a fragment pair could assemble to form an active
hammerhead ribozyme structure between the translation termination and
the polyadenylation signals within the 3-prime UTR. Martick et al.
(2008) demonstrated that this hammerhead structure could self-cleave
both in vitro and in vivo, and it was able to reduce protein expression
in mouse cells. Martick et al. (2008) concluded that an unrecognized
mechanism of postranscriptional gene regulation involving association of
discontinuous ribozyme sequences within an mRNA may be modulating the
expression of several CLEC2 proteins that function in bone remodeling
and the immune response of several mammals.

GENE STRUCTURE

Spreu et al. (2007) determined that the CLEC2A gene contains 6 exons,
including 2 alternative terminal exons (exons 5A and 5B), and spans 33.7
kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Spreu et al. (2007) mapped the CLEC2A gene
to chromosome 12p13, between the CLEC2B (603242) and CLEC12A (612088)
genes. Huarte et al. (2008) mapped the CLEC2A gene to chromosome
12p13.31 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Huarte, E.; Cubillos-Ruiz, J. R.; Nesbeth, Y. C.; Scarlett, U.
K.; Martinez, D. G.; Engle, X. A.; Rigby, W. F.; Pioli, P. A.; Guyre,
P. M.; Conejo-Garcia, J. R.: PILAR is a novel modulator of human
T-cell expansion. Blood 112: 1259-1268, 2008.

2. Martick, M.; Horan, L. H.; Noller, H. F.; Scott, W. G.: A discontinuous
hammerhead ribozyme embedded in a mammalian messenger RNA. Nature 454:
899-902, 2008.

3. Spreu, J.; Kienle, E. C.; Schrage, B.; Steinle, A.: CLEC2A: a
novel, alternatively spliced and skin-associated member of the NKC-encoded
AICL-CD69-LLT1 family. Immunogenetics 59: 903-912, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/12/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/29/2008

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2009
terry: 1/8/2009
alopez: 9/12/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008

141800	TITLE +141800 HEMOGLOBIN--ALPHA LOCUS 1; HBA1
;;3-PRIME @ALPHA-GLOBIN GENE;;
MINOR ALPHA-GLOBIN LOCUS
METHEMOGLOBINEMIA, ALPHA-GLOBIN TYPE, INCLUDED;;
ERYTHREMIA, ALPHA-GLOBIN TYPE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The alpha and beta loci determine the structure of the 2 types of
polypeptide chains in the tetrameric adult hemoglobin, Hb A,
alpha-2/beta-2. The alpha locus also determines a polypeptide chain, the
alpha chain, in fetal hemoglobin (alpha-2/gamma-2), in hemoglobin
A2(alpha-2/delta-2), and in embryonic hemoglobin (alpha-2/epsilon-2).
The number of normal alpha genes (3, 2, 1 or none) in Asian cases of
alpha-thalassemia (604131) results in 4 different alpha-thalassemia
syndromes (Kan et al., 1976). Three normal alpha genes gives a silent
carrier state. Two normal alpha genes results in microcytosis (so-called
heterozygous alpha-thalassemia). One normal alpha gene results in
microcytosis and hemolysis (so-called Hb H disease, 613978). No normal
alpha gene results in 'homozygous alpha-thalassemia' manifested as fatal
hydrops fetalis.

MAPPING

By studies of somatic cell hybrids, Deisseroth et al. (1976) showed that
the alpha and beta loci are on different chromosomes.

Deisseroth et al. (1977) combined the methods of somatic cell
hybridization and DNA-cDNA hybridization to establish assignment of the
alpha-globin locus to chromosome 16. This represents an extension of the
cell hybridization method permitting mapping of genes that are not
functional in the cultured cell. Deisseroth and Hendrick (1978)
confirmed the assignment of the alpha locus to chromosome 16 by means of
cotransfer of this gene with the human APRT gene, known to be on 16 (see
102600), into mouse erythroleukemia cells. (The APRT gene is on the long
arm of chromosome 16.)

Weitkamp et al. (1977) presented data concerning linkage of the alpha
and beta loci to 34 marker loci. Data on alpha-thalassemia, combined
with those on the Hopkins-2 variant, excluded linkage of alpha and
haptoglobin (140100) at a recombination fraction less than 0.15.

On the basis of findings in a case of partial trisomy 16, Wainscoat et
al. (1981) concluded that the alpha-globin genes are on segment
16pter-p12. By combining somatic cell hybridization with a cDNA probe in
the study of a cell line with reciprocal translocation between 16q and
11q, Koeffler et al. (1981) showed that the alpha-globin genes are on
the short arm of 16. Gerhard et al. (1981) used an improved method of in
situ hybridization to confirm the assignment of the alpha-globin cluster
to chromosome 16p. The evidence on the precise location of HBAC was
conflicting, with assignments from 16p13.33 to 16p13.11 (Reeders, 1986).
The fact that adult polycystic kidney disease (APKD; 173900) is proximal
to HBAC and is on the 5-prime side of HBAC appeared to indicate that the
order is 16cen--APKD--5-prime HBZ1--HBA1--3-prime HVR--pter. (3-prime
HVR is the hypervariable region used in mapping APKD to 16p.)

On the basis of the findings in a fetus with an unbalanced translocation
involving 16p, Breuning et al. (1987) concluded that the HBA cluster is
distal to PGP (172280).

By a combination of in situ hybridization, Southern blot analysis, and
linkage analysis using the fragile site 16p12.3 and translocation
breakpoints within band 16p13.1, Simmers et al. (1987) mapped the
alpha-globin gene complex to 16pter-p13.2.

CYTOGENETICS

Buckle et al. (1988) described a child in whom cytogenetic analysis
indicated monosomy for 16pter-p13.3. DNA studies showed that the patient
had not inherited either maternal alpha-globin allele. The child had the
alpha-thalassemia trait as well as moderate mental retardation and
dysmorphic features. They determined that the gene is located in the
16pter-p13.3 segment. After reviewing earlier data placing the
alpha-globin cluster slightly more proximal, they concluded that the
findings in this child may be more reliable.

GENE STRUCTURE

Orkin (1978) identified alpha-globin gene fragments in restriction
endonuclease digests of total DNA after electrophoresis by hybridization
with P32-labeled cDNA probes. The data indicated that the alpha genes
occur in duplicate and that the 2 copies lie close together. Thus direct
physical evidence was provided for the duplication deduced from the
findings with mutant alpha chains and with the alpha-thalassemias and
the kinetics of hybridization in solution. The 2 alpha chains lie about
3.7 kilobases apart.

Leder et al. (1978) presented evidence that the alpha and beta genes of
all adult mammalian hemoglobins have 2 intervening sequences at
analogous positions.

GENE FUNCTION

Straub et al. (2012) reported a model for the regulation of nitric oxide
(NO) signaling by demonstrating that hemoglobin alpha, encoded by the
HBA1 and HBA2 (141850) genes, is expressed in human and mouse arterial
endothelial cells and enriched at the myoendothelial junction, where it
regulates the effects of NO on vascular reactivity. Notably, this
function is unique to hemoglobin alpha and is abrogated by its genetic
depletion. Mechanistically, endothelial hemoglobin alpha heme iron in
the Fe(3+) state permits NO signaling, and this signaling is shut off
when hemoglobin alpha is reduced to the Fe(2+) state by endothelial
cytochrome b5 reductase 3 (CYB5R3; 613213). Genetic and pharmacologic
inhibition of CYB5R3 increased NO bioactivity in small arteries. Straub
et al. (2012) concluded that their data revealed a mechanism by which
the regulation of the intracellular hemoglobin alpha oxidation state
controls nitric oxide synthase (NOS; see 163729) signaling in
nonerythroid cells. The authors suggested that this model may be
relevant to heme-containing globins in a broad range of NOS-containing
somatic cells.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Andersen et al. (2012) presented the crystal structure of the dimeric
porcine haptoglobin (140100)-hemoglobin complex determined at
2.9-angstrom resolution. This structure revealed that haptoglobin
molecules dimerize through an unexpected beta-strand swap between 2
complement control protein (CCP) domains, defining a new fusion CCP
domain structure. The haptoglobin serine protease domain forms extensive
interactions with both the alpha- and beta-subunits of hemoglobin,
explaining the tight binding between haptoglobin and hemoglobin. The
hemoglobin-interacting region in the alpha-beta dimer is highly
overlapping with the interface between the 2 alpha-beta dimers that
constitute the native hemoglobin tetramer. Several hemoglobin residues
prone to oxidative modification after exposure to heme-induced reactive
oxygen species are buried in the haptoglobin-hemoglobin interface, thus
showing a direct protective role of haptoglobin. The haptoglobin loop
previously shown to be essential for binding of haptoglobin-hemoglobin
to the macrophage scavenger receptor CD163 (605545) protrudes from the
surface of the distal end of the complex, adjacent to the associated
hemoglobin alpha-subunit. Small-angle x-ray scattering measurements of
human haptoglobin-hemoglobin bound to the ligand-binding fragment of
CD163 confirmed receptor binding in this area, and showed that the rigid
dimeric complex can bind 2 receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wilson et al. (1977) described a possible nucleotide polymorphism in the
untranslated 3-prime region of the alpha-globin gene and suggested that
the heterogeneity is related to the existence of 2 alpha gene loci.

Musumeci et al. (1978) pointed out that the combination of
alpha-thalassemia and beta-thalassemia leads to less severe clinical
expression of homozygous beta-thalassemia. The rarity of a chromosome 16
with both alpha loci deleted (as demonstrated by the restriction
endonuclease mapping technique of Southern) explains the rarity of
severe forms of alpha-thalassemia in Africans, e.g., Hb H disease, which
requires loss of 3 alpha loci and homozygous alpha-thalassemia which
requires loss of 4 alpha loci (Dozy et al., 1979).

By restriction endonuclease mapping, Goossens et al. (1980) identified
12 persons heterozygous for a chromosome carrying 3 alpha genes. There
were no hematologic abnormalities. The frequency was 0.0036 in American
Blacks and 0.05 in Greek Cypriots. They had previously shown a frequency
of 0.16 for the single alpha-globin locus in black Americans. The single
locus had a frequency of 0.18 in Sardinians, but none of 125 Sardinians
had a triple alpha locus, suggesting that the former had a selective
advantage. Greek Cypriots have a frequency of 0.07 for the single alpha
locus. Among 645 Japanese subjects studied, Nakashima et al. (1990)
found 10 persons heterozygous for a chromosome with the triplicated
alpha-globin locus. Thus, the frequency of the triplicate alpha locus
was 0.008 in this population, while that of the single alpha-locus,
i.e., the alpha-thalassemia-2 gene, may be lower than 0.0008. Analysis
of haplotypes suggested that the triple alpha loci may have had multiple
origins. Nakashima et al. (1990) commented on the fact that in Melanesia
the frequency of the triplicated genotype is about the same (Flint et
al., 1986) as in Japan, whereas the frequency of the single alpha gene
is much higher, compatible with a selective advantage vis-a-vis malaria.
Liebhaber et al. (1981) found identity of the alpha-1-globin genes from
an Asian and a Caucasian. Furthermore, the alpha-1 and alpha-2 genes
have a much higher degree of homology than would be predicted from the
timing of the duplication before the bird-mammal divergence (about 300
Myr ago). Liebhaber et al. (1981) presented this as evidence for the
existence of mechanisms for suppression of allelic polymorphisms and for
exchange of genetic information within the alpha-globin gene complex.
See 142200 for a discussion of gene conversion in relation to a
comparably surprising homology of the 2 gamma-globin genes.

Lehmann and Carrell (1984) suggested the use of the following
nomenclature for alpha-thalassemias based on the number of alpha-globin
genes that are missing or abnormal: 1-alpha-thalassemia (silent type);
2-alpha-thalassemia, trans or cis (thalassemia trait);
3-alpha-thalassemia (Hb H disease); and 4-alpha-thalassemia (Hb Bart's
hydrops fetalis). In this scheme, homozygous Hb Constant Spring is a
2-alpha-thalassemia which, if combined with a cis 2-alpha-thalassemia
heterozygous Hb Constant Spring, gives a 3-alpha-thalassemia and results
in Hb H disease. Lehmann and Carrell (1984) also proposed that the 2
alpha-globin genes be designated as 5-prime (now alpha-2) and 3-prime
(now alpha-1). Liebhaber and Cash (1985) described a method for
identifying whether the alpha-1 or alpha-2 locus is the site of
particular alpha-globin mutations. Rubin and Kan (1985) described a
sensitive method for determining how many alpha-globin genes are
present. It had the advantages of not requiring restriction enzyme
digestion and gel electrophoresis and using the much more stable isotope
(35)S rather than 32(P) for labeling. Only a small sample of DNA is
needed. Application of the approach to diagnosis of Down syndrome was
proposed. Assum et al. (1985) added a fourth restriction site
polymorphism in the alpha-globin gene cluster. Compared to the
beta-globin cluster, the alpha-globin cluster seemed to show a poverty
of DNA polymorphism; however, Higgs et al. (1986) demonstrated a
remarkable degree of DNA polymorphism in the alpha-globin gene cluster.
In addition, the RFLP haplotype is associated with hypervariable regions
of DNA.

Pseudo-alpha-1 (HBAP1), a pseudogene, is defective in several respects,
including splice junction mutations and premature termination codons.
Hardison et al. (1986) identified a previously undetected pseudogene in
the alpha-globin cluster. It was not detected by hybridization studies
but was found only on sequence analysis. Hardison et al. (1986)
suggested that 'divergent copies of a large number of genes may comprise
a substantial fraction of the slowly renaturing DNA of mammalian
genomes.' The newly detected pseudogene, which will be symbolized HBAP2,
is only 65 bp 3-prime to the polyadenylation site of zeta-1 (HBZP). The
sequence is: 5-prime--HBZ--HBZP--HBAP2--HBA2--HBA1--3-prime. (The
functional Hba gene of the mouse is on chromosome 11, but pseudogenes
are dispersed to other chromosomes (e.g., Hba-ps3 to mouse chromosome
15) (Popp et al., 1981; Leder et al., 1981; Eicher and Lee, 1991).)

Vandenplas et al. (1987) described a new form of alpha-0 thalassemia in
a South African family ascertained through a case of Hb H disease. A
novel deletion of 22.8-23.7 kb of DNA removed 3 pseudogenes as well as
the alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes. Since the alpha-2-globin gene encodes the
majority of alpha-globin, a thalassemic mutation of the alpha-1-globin
gene would be expected to result in a less severe loss of alpha-chain
synthesis.

Moi et al. (1987) described an initiation codon mutation, AUG-to-GUG, in
the alpha-1-globin gene. As predicted, the degree of interference with
alpha-globin synthesis was less in this mutation than in the mutation in
the initiation codon of the alpha-2-globin gene (see 141850).

Hill et al. (1987) described a unique nondeletion form of Hb H disease
in Papua New Guinea: all 4 alpha genes were intact. Hill et al. (1987)
commented on the striking difference in the hemoglobinopathies that
occur in Southeast Asia and in Melanesia. In the former area, Hb E, Hb
Constant Spring, and the Southeast Asian form of deletion
alpha-0-thalassemia are all common, whereas these forms have never been
found in Melanesians or Polynesians.

Jarman and Higgs (1988) identified a highly polymorphic region
approximately 100 kb upstream of the alpha-globin genes and referred to
it as 5-prime HVR. This is a valuable genetic marker for 16p. Higgs et
al. (1989) gave a comprehensive review of the molecular genetics of the
alpha-globin gene cluster, including its diseases.

Hatton et al. (1990) presented evidence for the existence of an
alpha-locus control region (LCRA; 152422). This would be comparable to
the beta-LCR which controls expression of the beta-like genes; see
152424. Liebhaber et al. (1990) identified an individual with
alpha-thalassemia in whom structurally normal alpha-globin genes were
inactivated in cis by a discrete de novo 35-kb deletion located about 30
kb 5-prime to the alpha-globin gene cluster. They concluded that the
deletion inactivates expression of the alpha-globin genes by removing
one or more of the previously identified upstream regulatory sequences
that are critical to expression of the alpha-globin genes.

Hemoglobinopathies of alpha-globin can result from missense mutations at
either of the 2 alpha-globin loci, HBA1 or HBA2. Since the normal HBA1
and HBA2 genes encode an identical alpha globin, these mutants cannot be
assigned to their specific loci on the basis of protein structural
analysis. A clue to the encoding locus, HBA1 versus HBA2, is provided by
the relative concentration of the alpha-globin mutant in the erythrocyte
based on the 2- to 3-fold higher level of expression of the HBA2 gene
(Liebhaber et al., 1986). However, since variables such as protein
stability, efficiency of hemoglobin tetramer formation, and other
factors can affect the steady-state levels of globin mutants, a
definitive locus assignment must be directly determined. Cash et al.
(1989) quantitated the expression of 2 alpha-globin structural mutants
found in the Caribbean basin, Fort de France and Spanish Town, and
showed that they are HBA1 and HBA2 mutants, respectively, on the basis
of low or high expression.

Wilkie et al. (1991) described major polymorphic length variation in the
terminal region of 16p (16p13.3) by physically linking the alpha-globin
locus with probes to telomere-associated repeats. They found 3 alleles
in which the alpha-globin genes lie 170 kb, 350 kb, or 430 kb from the
telomere. The 2 most common alleles were found to contain different
terminal segments, starting 145 kb distal to the alpha-globin genes.
Beyond this boundary these alleles are nonhomologous, yet each contains
sequences related to other, different chromosome termini. This
chromosome-size polymorphism probably arose by occasional exchanges
between the subtelomeric regions of nonhomologous chromosomes. Wilkie et
al. (1991) raised the possibility that the high frequency of trisomy 16
may be related to this nonhomology of the 2 common 16pter alleles in
their subtelomeric region.

Huisman et al. (1996) found that of the 141 codons of the alpha-globin
genes (there are no sequence differences between the coding regions of
the alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes), as many as 99 have been found to be
mutated; for several, 3 or 4 mutations have been discovered, while 5
mutations are known for codons 23, 75, and 94, and 6 for codon 141. The
mutations appear to occur at random; thus, either one of the 3 bases are
replaced in the 199 known alpha-globin gene mutants.

The suggestion that alpha(+)-thalassemia has achieved a high frequency
in some populations as a result of selection by malaria is based on a
number of epidemiologic studies. In the southwest Pacific region, there
is a striking geographic correlation between the frequency of
alpha(+)-thalassemia and the endemicity of Plasmodium falciparum. Allen
et al. (1997) undertook a prospective case-control study of children
with severe malaria on the north coast of Papua New Guinea, where
malaria transmission is intense and alpha(+)-thalassemia affects more
than 90% of the population (homozygotes comprise approximately 55% and
heterozygotes 37% of the population). Compared with normal children, the
risk of having severe malaria was 0.40 in alpha(+)-thalassemia
homozygotes and 0.66 in heterozygotes. Unexpectedly, the risk of
hospital admission with infections other than malaria also was reduced
to a similar degree in homozygotes (0.36) and heterozygotes (0.63). This
clinical study demonstrated that a malaria resistance gene protects
against disease caused by infections other than malaria. A reduction in
mortality greater than that attributable directly to malaria had been
observed after the prevention of malaria by insecticides,
chemoprophylaxis, and insecticide-impregnated bed nets. Previous
observations that direct malaria mortality cannot account for observed
hemoglobin S gene frequencies suggest that the findings of this study
may apply equally to other malaria resistance genes.

Fung et al. (1999) reported 3 cases of homozygous alpha-thalassemia who
survived beyond the newborn period, all with hypospadias. Review of the
literature identified 2 additional cases. Fung et al. (1999) suggested
that the hypospadias may have been secondary to the in utero edema
leading to failure of fusion of urogenital folds or due to defect or
deletion of another gene at 16p13.3.

For a review of hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassemia, see Chui
and Waye (1998).

From work on the mouse model of alpha-thalassemia, Leder et al. (1999)
demonstrated that a normal beta-globin allele can act as a modifying
gene ameliorating the severity of alpha-thalassemia. They found that the
phenotype of alpha-thalassemia was strongly influenced by the genetic
background in which the mutation resided; when both mutant genes were on
a chromosome derived from strain 129, the phenotype was severe, whereas
it was mild when the gene was on a 129 chromosome and a C57BL/6
chromosome. Linkage mapping indicated that the modifying gene is very
tightly linked to the beta-globin locus (lod score = 13.3). Furthermore,
the severity of the phenotype correlated with the size of
beta-globin-containing inclusion bodies, which accumulate in red blood
cells and likely accelerate their destruction. The beta-major globin
chains encoded by the 2 strains differed by 3 amino acids, one of which
is a glycine-to-cysteine substitution at position 13. The cys13 should
be available for interchain disulfide bridging and consequent
aggregation between excess beta chains. This normal polymorphic
variation between murine beta-globin chains could account for the
modifying action of the unlinked beta-globin locus. Here, the variation
in severity of the phenotype would not depend on a change in the ratio
between alpha and beta chains but on the chemical nature of the normal
beta chain, which is in excess. This work also indicated that modifying
genes can be normal variants that, absent an apparent physiologic
rationale, may be difficult to identify on the basis of structure alone.

De Gobbi et al. (2006) identified a pathogenetic mechanism underlying a
variant form of the inherited blood disorder alpha-thalassemia.
Association studies of affected individuals from Melanesia localized the
disease trait to the telomeric region of human chromosome 16, which
includes the alpha-globin gene cluster, but no molecular defects were
detected by conventional approaches. After resequencing and using a
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression analysis on
a tiled oligonucleotide array, De Gobbi et al. (2006) identified a
gain-of-function regulatory single-nucleotide polymorphism (rSNP)
(141800.0218) in a nongenic region between the alpha-globin genes and
their upstream regulatory elements. The rSNP creates a new promoter-like
element that interferes with normal activation of all downstream
alpha-like globin genes. De Gobbi et al. (2006) concluded that their
work illustrates a strategy for distinguishing between neutral and
functionally important rSNPs, and it also identifies a pathogenetic
mechanism that could potentially underlie other genetic diseases.

Schoenfelder et al. (2010) found that mouse Hbb and Hba associated with
hundreds of active genes from nearly all chromosomes in nuclear foci
that they called 'transcription factories.' The 2 globin genes
preferentially associated with a specific and partially overlapping
subset of active genes. Schoenfelder et al. (2010) also noted that
expression of the Hbb locus is dependent upon Klf1 (600599), while
expression of the Hba locus is only partially dependent on Klf1.
Immunofluorescence analysis of mouse erythroid cells showed that most
Klf1 localized to the cytoplasm and that nuclear Klf1 was present in
discrete sites that overlapped with RNAII foci. Klf1 knockout in mouse
erythroid cells specifically disrupted the association of Klf1-regulated
genes within the Hbb-associated network. Klf1 knockout more weakly
disrupted interactions within the specific Hba network. Schoenfelder et
al. (2010) concluded that transcriptional regulation involves a complex
3-dimensional network rather than factors acting on single genes in
isolation.

N.B.: Alpha-globin variants for which it is unknown whether HBA1 or HBA2
is involved have arbitrarily been included in this entry. Carver and
Kutlar (1995) listed 191 alpha-globin variants as of January 1995. The
syllabus by Huisman et al. (1996) listed 199 alpha-chain hemoglobin
variants as of January 1996. These included single-base mutations in the
alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes as well as 2-base mutations. Not included in
their syllabus were deletions in mutations that result in
alpha-thalassemia, even if such a change (point mutation or frameshift)
occurred in one of the coding regions of the gene. Information about the
alpha-thalassemias was provided by Higgs et al. (1989).

HISTORY

Gandini et al. (1977) concluded, incorrectly as it turned out, that the
alpha loci are on the long arm of chromosome 4 (4q28-q34). The
conclusion was based on a finding of excessive synthesis of alpha chains
in patients with duplication of this region.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOGLOBIN AICHI
HBA1, HIS50ARG

See Harano et al. (1984) and Baudin et al. (1987).

.0002
HEMOGLOBIN ALBANY-GEORGIA
HEMOGLOBIN ALBANY-SUMA
HBA1, LYS11ASN

This was found in a clinically normal black female in Albany, Georgia
(Webber et al., 1983). See also Shimasaki et al. (1983).

.0003
HEMOGLOBIN ANANTHARAJ
HBA1, LYS11GLU

See Pootrakul et al. (1975).

.0004
HEMOGLOBIN ANN ARBOR
HBA1, LEU80ARG

See Adams et al. (1972) and Adams (1974).

.0005
HEMOGLOBIN ARYA
HBA1, ASP47ASN

See Rahbar et al. (1975).

.0006
HEMOGLOBIN ATAGO
HBA1, ASP85TYR

See Fujiwara (1970) and Fujiwara et al. (1971).

.0007
HEMOGLOBIN ATTLEBORO
HBA1, SER138PRO

See McDonald et al. (1990).

.0008
HEMOGLOBIN AZTEC
HBA1, MET76THR

See Shelton et al. (1985).

.0009
HEMOGLOBIN BARI
HBA1, HIS45GLN

See Marinucci et al. (1980).

.0010
HEMOGLOBIN BEIJING
HBA1, LYS16ASN

See Liang et al. (1982).

.0011
HEMOGLOBIN BIBBA
HBA1, LEU136PRO

See Kleihauer et al. (1968). (This is actually an allelic variant of the
HBA2 gene; see 141850.0030.)

.0012
HEMOGLOBIN BOURMEDES
HBA1, PRO37ARG

See Dahmane-Arbane et al. (1987).

.0014
HEMOGLOBIN BROUSSAIS
HEMOGLOBIN J (BROUSSAIS);;
HEMOGLOBIN TAGAWA I
HBA1, LYS90ASN

See de Traverse et al. (1966), Yanase et al. (1968), Vella et al.
(1970), and Fleming et al. (1978).

.0015
HEMOGLOBIN CATONSVILLE
HBA1, INS GLU, PRO37/GLU/THR38

See Virshup et al. (1988). Moo-Penn et al. (1989) identified insertion
of a glutamic acid residue between proline-37 and threonine-38 in an
unstable hemoglobin variant. The PCR-amplified fragment of the variant
gene showed insertion of a GAA codon. In the normal alpha-globin gene
cluster, GAG is the codon for glutamic acid. Moo-Penn et al. (1989)
suggested that this mutation may have resulted from nonhomologous
nonallelic gene conversion.

.0016
HEMOGLOBIN CHAD
HBA1, GLU23LYS

See Boyer et al. (1968).

.0017
HEMOGLOBIN CHAPEL HILL
HBA1, ASP74GLY

See Orringer et al. (1976).

.0018
HEMOGLOBIN CHESAPEAKE
HBA1, ARG92LEU

See Clegg et al. (1966) and Harano et al. (1983). Polycythemia is the
only clinical feature. This was the first polycythemia-producing variant
to be described (Charache et al., 1966).

.0019
HEMOGLOBIN CHIAPAS
HBA1, PRO114ARG

See Jones et al. (1968).

.0020
HEMOGLOBIN CHICAGO
HBA1, LEU136MET

See Bowman et al. (1986).

.0021
HEMOGLOBIN CHONGQING
HBA1, LEU2ARG

See Zeng et al. (1984).

.0022
HEMOGLOBIN CONTALDO
HBA1, HIS103ARG

Unstable hemoglobin due to disruption of hydrogen bond between alpha 103
(his) and beta 108 (asn) (Sciarratta et al., 1984).

.0023
HEMOGLOBIN CORDELE
HBA1, ASP47ALA

See Nakatsuji et al. (1984).

.0024
HEMOGLOBIN DAGESTAN
HBA1, LYS60GLU

See Spivak et al. (1981) and Lacombe et al. (1987).

.0025
HEMOGLOBIN DALLAS
HBA1, ASN97LYS

See Dysert et al. (1982).

.0026
HEMOGLOBIN DANESHGAH-TEHRAN
HBA1, HIS72ARG

See Rahbar et al. (1973) and de Weinstein et al. (1985).

.0027
HEMOGLOBIN DENMARK HILL
HBA1, PRO95ALA

See Wiltshire et al. (1972).

.0028
HEMOGLOBIN DUAN
HBA1, ASP75ALA

See Liang et al. (1981, 1988).

.0029
HEMOGLOBIN DUNN
HBA1, ASP6ASN

See Jue et al. (1979) and Baklouti et al. (1988).

.0030
HEMOGLOBIN ETOBICOKE
HBA1, SER84ARG

See Crookston et al. (1969) and Headlee et al. (1983).

.0031
HEMOGLOBIN EVANSTON
HBA1, TRP14ARG

Honig et al. (1982) first described Hb Evanston in 2 black families. See
also Moo-Penn et al. (1983).

Harteveld et al. (2004) found this rare variant alone and in the
presence of common alpha-thalassemia deletions in 3 independent Asian
cases.

.0032
HEMOGLOBIN FERNDOWN
HBA1, ASP6VAL

See Lee-Potter et al. (1981).

.0033
HEMOGLOBIN FONTAINEBLEAU
HBA1, ALA21PRO

Wajcman et al. (1989) found this substitution in an Italian family. The
substitution produced no change in the stability or oxygen binding
properties of the hemoglobin molecule. The electrophoretic properties
were, furthermore, identical to those of Hb A, with the exception of
isoelectric focusing in which the variant migrated like Hb A1c. Hb
J(Nyanza), another substitution at position alpha-21, likewise causes no
hematologic disorder.

.0034
HEMOGLOBIN FORT DE FRANCE
HBA1, HIS45ARG

See Braconnier et al. (1977). Cash et al. (1989) confirmed that this is
a mutant of the HBA1 gene.

.0035
HEMOGLOBIN G (AUDHALI)
HBA1, GLU23VAL

See Marengo-Rowe et al. (1968).

.0037
HEMOGLOBIN G (FORT WORTH)
HEMOGLOBIN FORT WORTH
HBA1, GLU27GLY

This variant was described in 2 black families. Unusually low (5%)
concentration was found in heterozygotes, perhaps because of decreased
ability of the abnormal alpha chain to form dimers with beta chains. See
Schneider et al. (1971) and Carstairs et al. (1985).

.0038
HEMOGLOBIN G (GEORGIA)
HBA1, PRO95LEU

See Huisman et al. (1970).

.0039
MOVED TO 141850.0054
.0040
HEMOGLOBIN G (NORFOLK)
HBA1, ASP85ASN

See Cohen-Solal et al. (1975) and Lorkin et al. (1975).

.0041
HEMOGLOBIN G (PEST)
HBA1, ASP74ASN

Hb G (Pest) and Hb J (Buda) (141850.0008), both alpha-chain mutants,
occurred together in a Hungarian male with erythrocytosis. The
occurrence of some normal Hb A in this man showed the existence of at
least 2 alpha loci. See Brimhall et al. (1970, 1974) and Hollan et al.
(1972). Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify selectively
alpha-1 and alpha-2-globin cDNAs, Mamalaki et al. (1990) then hybridized
the cDNAs to synthetic oligonucleotides specific for either the normal
or the mutated sequence. Using this approach, the alpha-globin
structural mutants J-Buda and G-Pest were found to be encoded by the
alpha-2 and the alpha-1-globin genes, respectively. The substitution in
G-Pest was a change from GAC to AAC at codon 74.

.0042
HEMOGLOBIN G (TAICHUNG)
HEMOGLOBIN Q;;
HEMOGLOBIN Q (THAILAND);;
HEMOGLOBIN MAHIDOL;;
HEMOGLOBIN ASABARA;;
HEMOGLOBIN KURASHIKI
HBA1, ASP74HIS

See Vella et al. (1958), Gammack et al. (1961), Lie-Injo et al. (1966,
1979); Blackwell and Liu (1970), Pootrakul and Dixon (1970), Lorkin et
al. (1970), Iuchi et al. (1978), and Higgs et al. (1980). Zeng et al.
(1992) demonstrated that the mutation is due to a GAC-to-CAC change in
codon 74 of the HBA1 gene. They developed a simple and accurate method
for diagnosis of the Hb Q (Thailand) variant based on restriction enzyme
analysis.

.0043
HEMOGLOBIN G (WAIMANALO)
HEMOGLOBIN AIDA
HBA1, ASP64ASN

See Blackwell et al. (1973) and Bunn et al. (1978). Schiliro et al.
(1991) found this variant in a Filipino mother and child living in
Sicily. They showed no hematologic abnormalities.

.0044
HEMOGLOBIN GARDEN STATE
HBA1, ALA82ASP

See Winter et al. (1978).

.0045
HEMOGLOBIN GRADY
HEMOGLOBIN DAKAR
HBA1, 3AA INS, 118THR-GLU-PHE119

At the time it was first studied by Huisman et al. (1974), hemoglobin
Grady was unique in having an insertion of threonine-glutamic
acid-phenylalanine between amino acids 118 and 119 of the alpha chain.
Several hemoglobins with deletions were then known (Leiden, Lyon,
Freiburg, Niteroi, Tochigi, St. Antoine, Tours and Gun Hill). Scott et
al. (1981) found no evidence of an extra (fifth) alpha gene. They
argued, therefore, that if, as supposed, Hb Grady arose by unequal
crossing over, the event occurred between alleles rather than between
the separate alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci. The glu-phe-thr insertion is a
repeat of normal residues 116, 117 and 118. See Cleek et al. (1983).
Substitution of glutamine for histidine at alpha 112 was thought to be
the change in hemoglobin Dakar; however, on restudy the hemoglobin was
found to be identical to Hb Grady (Garel et al., 1976).

.0046
HEMOGLOBIN GUANGZHOU
HEMOGLOBIN HANGZHOU
HBA1, ASP64GLY

See Jen and Liu (1987), Zhou et al. (1987), and Li et al. (1990).

.0047
HEMOGLOBIN GUIZHOU
HEMOGLOBIN UTSUNOMIYA
HBA1, PRO77ARG

See Hattori et al. (1985).

.0048
HEMOGLOBIN HANDA
HEMOGLOBIN MUNAKATA
HBA1, LYS90MET

See Harano et al. (1982) and Sugihara et al. (1983).

.0049
HEMOGLOBIN HANDSWORTH
HBA1, GLY18ARG

See Griffiths et al. (1977), Chih-chuan et al. (1981), and Al-Awamy et
al. (1985).

.0050
HEMOGLOBIN HARBIN
HBA1, LYS16MET

See Zeng et al. (1984).

.0051
HEMOGLOBIN HEKINAN
HBA1, GLU27ASP

See Harano et al. (1988). Using dot-blot analysis of amplified DNA with
(32)p-labeled probes, Zhao et al. (1990) located the mutation in codon
27 of the minor alpha-1 globin gene and showed that the change involved
a GAG (glutamic acid)-to-GAT (aspartic acid) mutation. Their patients
were 3 Chinese women from Macau.

In Thailand, Ngiwsara et al. (2004) described 2 unrelated cases of
compound heterozygosity for Hb Hekinan and alpha-thalassemia.

.0052
HEMOGLOBIN HIROSAKI
HBA1, PHE43LEU

See Ohba et al. (1975, 1978).

.0053
HEMOGLOBIN HOBART
HBA1, HIS20ARG

See Fleming et al. (1987).

.0054
HEMOGLOBIN HOPKINS 2
HBA1, HIS112ASP

Fast hemoglobin. See Smith and Torbert (1958), Itano and Robinson
(1960), Bradley et al. (1961), Ostertag et al. (1972), Clegg and
Charache (1978).

.0055
HEMOGLOBIN I
HEMOGLOBIN I (BURLINGTON);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (PHILADELPHIA);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (SKAMANIA);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (TEXAS)
HBA1, LYS16GLU

Fast hemoglobin. Substitution of aspartic acid for lysine at alpha 16
was first reported by Murayama (1962). However, Crick pointed out that
this substitution could not be accomplished by change in one base.
Restudy by Beale and Lehmann (1965) and by Schneider et al. (1966)
showed substitution of glutamic acid for lysine. Hemoglobin I was
thought to show sickling but this has been shown to be due to faulty
technique (Schneider et al., 1967). See Rucknagel et al. (1955),
Schwartz et al. (1957), Itano and Robinson (1959, 1960), Ranney et al.
(1962), O'Brien et al. (1964), Thompson et al. (1965), Schneider et al.
(1966), Bowman and Barnett (1967), Baur (1968), Labossiere and Vella
(1971), Fleming et al. (1978), and Liebhaber et al. (1984). The
hemoglobin I mutation is curious in that the mutation is present in HBA2
(141850.0011) as well as in HBA1.

.0057
HEMOGLOBIN IWATA
HBA1, HIS87ARG

See Shibata et al. (1980) and Liu et al. (1983).

.0058
HEMOGLOBIN J (ABIDJAN)
HBA1, GLY51ASP

See Cabannes et al. (1972).

.0059
HEMOGLOBIN J (ANATOLIA)
HBA1, LYS61THR

See Giordano et al. (1990).

.0060
HEMOGLOBIN J (BIRMINGHAM)
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEERUT)
HBA1, ALA120GLU

See Kamuzora and Lehmann (1974) and Blackwell et al. (1974).

.0062
HEMOGLOBIN J (CAMAGUEY)
HBA1, ARG141GLY

See Martinez et al. (1978). Romero et al. (1995) found this hemoglobin
variant in 3 Spanish families. The original description by Martinez et
al. (1978) was in a Cuban family of Spanish ancestry.

.0063
HEMOGLOBIN J (CAPE TOWN)
HBA1, ARG92GLN

See Botha et al. (1966), Harano et al. (1983), and Lambridis et al.
(1986).

.0064
HEMOGLOBIN J (CUBUJUQUI)
HBA1, ARG141SER

See Saenz et al. (1977) and Moo-Penn et al. (1981).

.0065
HEMOGLOBIN J (HABANA)
HBA1, ALA71GLU

See Colombo et al. (1974) and Ohba et al. (1983).

.0066
HEMOGLOBIN J (KUROSH)
HBA1, ALA19ASP

See Rahbar et al. (1976).

.0067
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEDELLIN)
HBA1, GLY22ASP

See Gottlieb et al. (1964).

.0068
HEMOGLOBIN J (NYANZA)
HBA1, ALA21ASP

See Kendall et al. (1973).

.0070
HEMOGLOBIN J (PARIS 1)
HEMOGLOBIN J (ALJEZUR)
HBA1, ALA12ASP

See Rosa et al. (1966), Trincao et al. (1968), and Marinucci et al.
(1979).

.0071
HEMOGLOBIN J (RAJAPPEN)
HBA1, LYS90THR

See Hyde et al. (1971).

.0072
HEMOGLOBIN J (ROVIGO)
HBA1, ALA53ASP

See Alberti et al. (1974) and Moo-Penn et al. (1978).

.0074
HEMOGLOBIN J (SINGA)
HBA1, ASN78ASP

See Wong et al. (1984).

.0075
HEMOGLOBIN J (SINGAPORE)
HBA1, ASN78ASP AND ALA79GLY

Since no simple frameshift mechanism could be imagined, the possibility
of 2 separate mutations was favored by Blackwell et al. (1972), who
suggested that 2 separate hemoglobins, appropriately called Hb J (Singa)
and Hb J (Pore), will be discovered eventually. Double mutation on the
same chromosome would seem more likely than crossing-over in a compound
heterozygote since the 2 codons involved are contiguous.

.0076
HEMOGLOBIN J (TASHIKUERGAN)
HBA1, ALA19GLU

See Houjun et al. (1984). Li et al. (1990) found this variant in
populations in the Silk Road region of China.

.0077
HEMOGLOBIN J (TONGARIKI)
HBA1, ALA115ASP

See Gajdusek et al. (1967) and Beaven et al. (1972). A homozygous
individual had only anomalous hemoglobin suggesting the existence of
only one alpha locus in Melanesians (Abramson et al., 1970).

.0078
HEMOGLOBIN J (TORONTO)
HBA1, ALA5ASP

See Crookston et al. (1965).

.0079
HEMOGLOBIN JACKSON
HBA1, LYS127ASN

See Moo-Penn et al. (1976).

.0080
HEMOGLOBIN KARACHI
HBA1, ALA5PRO

See Ahmad et al. (1986).

.0081
HEMOGLOBIN KARIYA
HBA1, LYS40GLU

See Harano et al. (1983) and Imai et al. (1989).

.0082
HEMOGLOBIN KAWACHI
HBA1, PRO44ARG

See Harano et al. (1982).

.0083
HEMOGLOBIN KOELLIKER
HEMOGLOBIN F (KOELLIKER)
HBA1, ARG141DEL

Not a genetic change. The C-terminal amino acid, 141, of the alpha chain
(arginine) is missing, probably from the action of a carboxypeptidase
present in normal plasma. This unusual fast hemoglobin is observed in
persons with hemolysis. The change can occur in fetal hemoglobin also
(Kohne et al., 1977). See Marti et al. (1967) and Schiliro et al.
(1982).

.0084
HEMOGLOBIN KOKURA
HEMOGLOBIN BEILINSON;;
HEMOGLOBIN MICHIGAN-I;;
HEMOGLOBIN MICHIGAN-II;;
HEMOGLOBIN L (GASLINI);;
HEMOGLOBIN TAGAWA II;;
HEMOGLOBIN UMI;;
HEMOGLOBIN MUGINO;;
HEMOGLOBIN YUKUHASHI-2
HBA1, ASP47GLY

See Yamaoka et al. (1960), Ooya et al. (1961), Sumida (1975), and Ohba
et al. (1982). The change is in TP IV (DeVries et al., 1963).

.0086
HEMOGLOBIN L (PERSIAN GULF)
HBA1, GLY57ARG

See Rahbar et al. (1969).

.0087
HEMOGLOBIN LEGNANO
HBA1, ARG141LEU

See Mavilio et al. (1978).

.0088
HEMOGLOBIN LE LAMENTIN
HBA1, HIS20GLN

See Sellaye et al. (1982), Harano et al. (1983), and Malcorra-Azpiazu et
al. (1988).

.0089
HEMOGLOBIN LILLE
HBA1, ASP74ALA

See Djoumessi et al. (1981) and Lu et al. (1984).

.0090
HEMOGLOBIN LOIRE
HBA1, ALA88SER

This variant was discovered in a 10-year-old Algerian boy born in Loire.
The child had erythrocytosis and microcytosis, the latter being due to
iron deficiency (Baklouti et al., 1988).

.0091
HEMOGLOBIN LUXEMBOURG
HBA1, TYR24HIS

Groff et al. (1989) found this substitution in association with mild
hemolytic anemia and increased indirect bilirubinemia in a family
originating from the Netherlands.

.0092
HEMOGLOBIN M (BOSTON)
HEMOGLOBIN GOTHENBURG;;
HEMOGLOBIN M (GOTHENBURG);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (OSAKA);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (KISKUNHALAS)
HBA1, HIS58TYR

The aberrant hemoglobins associated with methemoglobinemia are referred
to as hemoglobin M. Most of the hemoglobin M variants have substitutions
of histidine at alpha 58, alpha 87, beta 63, or beta 92. These 4 amino
acids are critical to the binding of the heme group. The exception is
hemoglobin M (Milwaukee-1). See Gerald et al. (1957), Hansen et al.
(1960), Gerald and Efron (1961), Betke (1962), Hayashi et al. (1964),
Shimizu et al. (1965), Suzuki et al. (1965), Hollan et al. (1967), and
Pulsinelli et al. (1973).

.0093
HEMOGLOBIN M (IWATE)
HEMOGLOBIN M (KANKAKEE);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (OLDENBURG);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (SENDAI)
HBA1, HIS87TYR

Hb Iwate was the first variant hemoglobin found in Japan (Shibata et
al., 1960). Familial cyanosis had been recognized for about 200 years in
the prefecture of Iwate in Honshu, where about 70 affected persons were
identified in the 1950s. It was called 'kuchikuro,' or 'blackmouth.' In
each form of methemoglobinemia, the heme iron is stabilized in the
ferric form. Patients with the Hb M alpha forms are cyanotic at birth;
those with the Hb M beta forms are usually not cyanotic until they are 3
months of age. Horst et al. (1987) showed that the Iwate mutation
involves the alpha-1 globin gene. Specifically, they demonstrated a
CAC-to-TAC mutation in codon 87 of that gene. They showed that the Iwate
mutation can be identified directly on RsaI digestion. See Meyering et
al. (1960), Shibata et al. (1961), Gerald and Efron (1961), Miyaji et
al. (1962), Heller (1962), Heller et al. (1962), Tonz et al. (1962),
Shibata (1964), Tamura (1964), Shimizu et al. (1965), Pik and Tonz
(1966), Maggio et al. (1981), and Mayne et al. (1986).

Ameri et al. (1999) likewise determined that the molecular defect in 2
patients with Hb M (Kankakee) was his87 to tyr in the HBA1 gene. The
proportion of Hb M (Kankakee) observed was higher than that predicted
for an alpha-1-globin variant. They presented evidence suggesting that
the greater-than-expected proportion of Hb M (Kankakee) results from
preferential association of the electronegative beta-globin chains with
the alpha-(M)-globin chains that are more electropositive than normal
alpha-globin chains.

.0094
MOVED TO 141850.0047
.0095
HEMOGLOBIN MATSUE-OKI
HBA1, ASP75ASN

See Ohba et al. (1977) and Yi-Tao et al. (1982).

.0096
HEMOGLOBIN MEMPHIS
HBA1, GLU23GLN

Substitution of glutamine for glutamic acid at alpha 23. A hemoglobin S
homozygote who also carries this abnormal hemoglobin has a mild form of
sickle cell anemia. See Kraus et al. (1965, 1967) and Cooper et al.
(1973).

.0097
HEMOGLOBIN MEXICO
HEMOGLOBIN J;;
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEXICO);;
HEMOGLOBIN J (PARIS 2);;
HEMOGLOBIN UPPSALA
HBA1, GLN54GLU

Fast hemoglobin. See Jones et al. (1963, 1968), Beckman et al. (1966),
Labie and Rosa (1966), Quattrin and Ventruto (1967), Fessas et al.
(1969), and Trabuchet et al. (1982).

.0098
HEMOGLOBIN MILLEDGEVILLE
HBA1, PRO44LEU

See Honig et al. (1980).

.0099
HEMOGLOBIN MIYANO
HBA1, THR41SER

See Ohba et al. (1989).

.0100
HEMOGLOBIN MIZUSHI
HBA1, ASP75GLY

No hematologic abnormality. See Iuchi et al. (1980).

.0101
HEMOGLOBIN MOABIT
HBA1, LEU86ARG

See Knuth et al. (1979).

.0104
HEMOGLOBIN NECKER ENFANTS-MALADES
HBA1, HIS20TYR

This variant was detected by chromatography in the course of screening
diabetics for Hb A1c (Wajcman et al., 1980).

.0105
HEMOGLOBIN NIGERIA
HBA1, SER81CYS

See Honig et al. (1978).

.0106
HEMOGLOBIN NOKO
HBA1, MET76LYS

See Shibata et al. (1981).

.0107
HEMOGLOBIN NORFOLK
HEMOGLOBIN J (NORFOLK);;
HEMOGLOBIN KAGOSHIMA;;
HEMOGLOBIN NISHIK
HBA1, GLY57ASP

Fast hemoglobin. See Ager et al. (1958), Baglioni (1962), Huntsman et
al. (1963), Hanada et al. (1964), Imamura (1966), and Lehmann and
Carrell (1969).

.0108
HEMOGLOBIN NOUAKCHOTT
HBA1, PRO114LEU

See Wajcman et al. (1989).

.0109
HEMOGLOBIN NUNOBIKI
HBA1, ARG141CYS

This hemoglobin showed an extremely high oxygen affinity. The patient,
who had 'marginal erythrocytosis,' was shown to have 13.1% Hb Nunobiki
(Shimasaki, 1985).

.0110
HEMOGLOBIN O (INDONESIA)
HEMOGLOBIN O (BUGINESE-X);;
HEMOGLOBIN BUGINESE-X;;
HEMOGLOBIN O (OLIVIERE);;
HEMOGLOBIN OLIVIERE
HBA1, GLU116LYS

See Lie-Injo and Sadono (1958), Baglioni and Lehmann (1962), and Sansone
et al. (1970).

Daud et al. (2001) investigated the occurrence of hemoglobin O
(Indonesia) in related ethnic populations of the Indonesian archipelago.
Nineteen individuals heterozygous for this variant were identified in 4
ethnic populations. The level of Hb O (Indonesia) in 17 of the
individuals was 11.6 +/- 1.0%, significantly lower than the expected 17
to 22%, indicating the instability of Hb O (Indonesia).

.0111
HEMOGLOBIN O (PADOVA)
HBA1, GLU30LYS

See Vettore et al. (1974), Kilinc et al. (1985), and Martin et al.
(1990). Schnedl et al. (1997) showed that the silent hemoglobin O Padova
mutation causes an additional peak on high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and falsely low HbA(1c) values (glycated
hemoglobin) when measured by HPLC. HPLC is the gold standard for
evaluation of glycated hemoglobin in diabetes mellitus.

.0112
HEMOGLOBIN OGI
HEMOGLOBIN QUEENS
HBA1, LEU34ARG

See Sugihara et al. (1982), Moo-Penn et al. (1982), and Yongsuwan et al.
(1987). This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et
al., 1989).

.0113
HEMOGLOBIN OLEANDER
HBA1, GLU116GLN

See Schneider et al. (1980).

.0114
HEMOGLOBIN OTTAWA
HEMOGLOBIN SIAM
HBA1, GLY15ARG

See Vella et al. (1974) and Pootrakul et al. (1974).

Yodsowan et al. (2000) studied this variant in a 21-year-old Thai female
and her mother. Turbpaiboon et al. (2002) reported a fourth case of Hb
Siam in a healthy Thai female and concluded that there is no
alpha-thalassemic effect of the variant.

.0115
HEMOGLOBIN OWARI
HBA1, VAL121MET

This is a neutral-to-neutral change; it was detected in the course of
mass screening by isoelectric focusing (Harano et al., 1986).

.0116
HEMOGLOBIN PERSPOLIS
HBA1, ASP64TYR

See Rahbar et al. (1976).

.0117
HEMOGLOBIN PETAH TIKVA
HBA1, ALA110ASP

See Honig et al. (1981).

.0118
HEMOGLOBIN PONTOISE
HEMOGLOBIN J (PONTOISE)
HBA1, ALA63ASP

See Thillet et al. (1977) and Gonzalez-Redondo et al. (1987).

.0119
HEMOGLOBIN PORT PHILLIP
HBA1, LEU91PRO

See Brennan et al. (1977).

.0120
MOVED TO 141850.0055
.0121
HEMOGLOBIN Q (INDIA)
HBA1, ASP64HIS

See Sukumaran et al. (1972) and Schmidt et al. (1976).

.0122
HEMOGLOBIN Q (IRAN)
HBA1, ASP75HIS

See Lorkin et al. (1970), Lie-Injo et al. (1979), and Higgs et al.
(1980).

.0123
MOVED TO 141850.0052
.0124
HEMOGLOBIN REIMS
HBA1, GLU23GLY

See Bardakdjian-Michau et al. (1989).

.0125
HEMOGLOBIN RUSS
HBA1, GLY51ARG

See Huisman and Sydenstricker (1962) and Reynolds and Huisman (1966).
This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et al.,
1989).

.0126
HEMOGLOBIN SASSARI
HBA1, ASP126HIS

Masala et al. (1987) first described this variant as an
electrophoretically slow-moving hemoglobin in 2 brothers affected by
erythrocytosis with slight microcytosis. In a large screening program
involving 20,000 people in the city of Sassari and its surrounding area
in Sardinia, Masala (1992) found the variant in 3 other apparently
unrelated subjects. A male of German origin was identified by
Bardakdjian-Michau et al. (1990) as a carrier of the same mutation.
Sanna et al. (1994) demonstrated that the adult variant has increased
oxygen affinity, a dramatic reduction of homotropic interactions, and a
significant decrease of the effect of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (35% lower
than that observed for Hb A). The fetal variant also showed increased
oxygen affinity compared with normal Hb F and an almost abolished
heme-heme interaction.

Paglietti et al. (1998) demonstrated that Hb Sassari results from a GAC
(asp)-to-CAC (his) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0127
HEMOGLOBIN SAVARIA
HBA1, SER49ARG

See Szelenyi et al. (1980), Juricic et al. (1985), Ojwang et al. (1985),
and Suarez et al. (1985).

.0128
HEMOGLOBIN SAWARA
HBA1, ASP6ALA

No pathologic effects were observed (Sumida et al., 1973; Sumida, 1975).

.0130
HEMOGLOBIN SETIF
HBA1, ASP94TYR

See Wajcman et al. (1972), Nozari et al. (1977), Al-Awamy et al. (1985),
and Abdo (1989). Schiliro et al. (1991) found this hemoglobin variant in
Sicily.

Dincol et al. (2003) stated that Hb Setif was first described in an
Algerian family (Wajcman et al., 1972) and subsequently in Iranian,
African, Saudi Arabian, and Maltese populations. They identified the
variant in a Turkish family. Heterozygotes were asymptomatic.

.0131
HEMOGLOBIN SHAARE ZEDEK
HBA1, LYS56GLU

See Abramov et al. (1980).

.0132
HEMOGLOBIN SHENYANG
HBA1, ALA26GLU

See Zeng et al. (1982) and Yi et al. (1989).

.0133
HEMOGLOBIN SHIMONOSEKI
HEMOGLOBIN HIKOSHIMA
HBA1, GLN54ARG

See Yamaoka et al. (1960) and Hanada and Rucknagel (1964).

.0134
HEMOGLOBIN SHUANGFENG
HBA1, GLU27LYS

See Liang et al. (1981).

.0135
HEMOGLOBIN SINGAPORE
HBA1, ARG141PRO

See Clegg et al. (1969).

.0137
HEMOGLOBIN ST. CLAUDE
HBA1, LYS127THR

See Vella et al. (1974).

.0138
HEMOGLOBIN ST. LUKE'S
HBA1, PRO95ARG

See Bannister et al. (1972).

Felice (2003) cited evidence that Hb St. Luke's is a mutation of the
HBA1 gene.

.0139
HEMOGLOBIN STANLEYVILLE-II
HBA1, ASN78LYS

See Van Ros et al. (1968), North et al. (1980), and Rhoda et al. (1983).
Costa et al. (1991) described a family with 1 homozygote and 3
heterozygotes for Hb Stanleyville II. The pattern of restriction
fragments demonstrated an associated 3.7-kb alpha-globin gene deletion.

.0140
HEMOGLOBIN STRUMICA
HEMOGLOBIN SERBIA
HBA1, HIS112ARG

See Niazi et al. (1975) and Beksedic et al. (1975).

.0143
HEMOGLOBIN SUNSHINE SETH
HBA1, ASP94HIS

See Schroeder et al. (1979).

.0144
HEMOGLOBIN SURESNES
HBA1, ARG141HIS

See Poyart et al. (1976) and Saenz et al. (1978).

.0145
HEMOGLOBIN SWAN RIVER
HBA1, ASP6GLY

See Moo-Penn et al. (1987). Harano et al. (1996) observed this variant
in a Japanese man with mild polycythemia.

.0147
HEMOGLOBIN THAILAND
HBA1, LYS56THR

See Pootrakul et al. (1977).

.0148
HEMOGLOBIN TITUSVILLE
HBA1, ASP94ASN

See Schneider et al. (1975).

.0149
HEMOGLOBIN TOKONAME
HBA1, LYS139THR

See Harano et al. (1983).

.0150
HEMOGLOBIN TORINO
HBA1, PHE43VAL

See Beretta et al. (1968) and Prato et al. (1970).

.0151
HEMOGLOBIN TOTTORI
HBA1, GLY59VAL

See Nakatsuji et al. (1981).

.0152
HEMOGLOBIN TOYAMA
HEINZ BODY HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
HBA1, LEU136ARG

This hemoglobin variant is associated with congenital Heinz body anemia
(Ohba et al., 1987).

.0153
HEMOGLOBIN TWIN PEAKS
HBA1, LEU113HIS

See Guis et al. (1985). This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1
gene (Cash et al., 1989).

.0154
HEMOGLOBIN UBE-2
HBA1, ASN68ASP

See Miyaji et al. (1967). In Turkey, Bilginer et al. (1984) found the
first instance of Hb Ube-2 outside Japan. It occurred in other members
of the family.

Cotton et al. (2000) found this rare variant during universal neonatal
screening. The patients had normal hematologic parameters. The variant
was found in twins and an older sister and in the father; both parents
were of Belgian ancestry.

Shin et al. (2002) described the disorder in a Taiwanese subject.

.0155
HEMOGLOBIN UBE-4
HBA1, GLU116ALA

See Ohba et al. (1978).

.0156
HEMOGLOBIN WESTMEAD
HBA1, HIS122GLN

This variant was found in a Chinese woman (Fleming et al., 1980). See
Liang et al. (1988).

.0157
HEMOGLOBIN WINNIPEG
HBA1, ASP75TYR

See Vella et al. (1973) and Nakatsuji et al. (1983). This has been shown
to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et al., 1989).

.0158
HEMOGLOBIN WOODVILLE
HBA1, ASP6TYR

Since alpha-6 asp is involved in salt linkage with alpha-127 lys of the
same chain, the increased oxygen affinity of hemoglobin variants at this
position probably reflects loss of this salt bridge in the deoxy state.
Similar changes have been observed for Hb St. Claude which also cannot
form the salt bridge because of substitution of threonine for lysine at
alpha-127. See Como et al. (1986).

.0159
HEMOGLOBIN WUMING
HEMOGLOBIN J (WENCHANG-WUMING)
HBA1, LYS11GLN

See Zeng et al. (1981). Qualtieri et al. (1995) found this
fast-migrating hemoglobin variant in a pregnant woman living in Italy.

.0160
HEMOGLOBIN ZAMBIA
HBA1, LYS60ASN

See Barclay et al. (1969).

.0161
HEMOGLOBIN BELLIARD
HBA1, LYS56ASN

See Wajcman et al. (1990).

.0162
HEMOGLOBIN TONOSHO
HBA1, ALA110THR

In the course of measuring hemoglobin A1c by automated cation exchange
high performance liquid chromatography, Ohba et al. (1990) detected a
new alpha-chain variant: substitution of alanine by threonine at
position 110. The abnormal alpha chain comprised about 14% of the total
alpha chain.

.0163
HEMOGLOBIN FUKUTOMI
HBA1, ASP126VAL

This hemoglobin, which has a high affinity for oxygen, was detected in a
Japanese male during a screening survey. The proband was a 53-year-old
man with liver cirrhosis and hemorrhagic gastritis (Hidaka et al.,
1990).

.0164
HEMOGLOBIN PORT HURON
HBA1, LYS56ARG

Zwerdling et al. (1991) investigated the structural abnormality of a
putative Hb E detected in an African American family with no apparent
Asian ancestry. The tryptic peptide map formed by high performance
liquid chromatography showed that the electrophoretic variant was indeed
the beta glu26-to-lys mutation of Hb E. In addition, however, the
tryptic map showed an abnormal alpha peptide. The second mutation was a
substitution of arginine for lysine at residue 56 of the alpha chain.
The variant was clinically silent.

.0166
HEMOGLOBIN PAVIE
HBA1, VAL135GLU

See Wajcman et al. (1990).

.0167
HEMOGLOBIN QUESTEMBERT
HBA1, SER131PRO

See Wajcman et al. (1990, 1993).

.0168
HEMOGLOBIN THIONVILLE
HBA1, NH2 EXTENSION, VAL1GLU

See Vasseur et al. (1990). Substitution of glutamic acid for valine as
the first residue in the mature protein is accompanied by retention of
the initiator methionine residue. This may be the only known hemoglobin
variant with an NH2-extension in the alpha-globin chain. Hb Marseille
(141900.0171), Hb Doha (141900.0069), and Hb South Florida (141900.0266)
are examples of hemoglobin variants with an NH2-extension due to
retention of the initiator methionine in the beta-globin chain. Each is
due to mutation in the first or second residue of the mature protein.
Vasseur et al. (1992) found that elongation of the NH2-terminus of the
alpha-chain, due to inhibition of cleavage of the initiator methionine
which is then acetylated, modifies the 3-dimensional structure of
hemoglobin at a region that is known to have an important role in the
allosteric regulation of oxygen binding. Hb Thionville has a lowered
affinity for oxygen. In contrast, response to 2,3-diphosphoglycerate is
normal.

.0169
HEMOGLOBIN KANAGAWA
HBA1, LYS40MET

In the course of a high performance liquid chromatography survey of Hb
A1c, Miyashita et al. (1992) detected a new hemoglobin in a 70-year-old
Japanese male with cerebral infarction and erythremia. Further studies
revealed a lys40-to-met mutation. The variant showed increased oxygen
affinity, decreased heme-heme interaction, and a lowered
2,3-diphosphoglycerate effect.

(Erythemia, a now almost obsolete synonym for polycythemia and
erythrocytosis, means increased red blood cell mass.)

.0170
HEMOGLOBIN TURRIFF
HBA1, LYS99GLU

In a diabetic woman of Scottish ancestry, Langdown et al. (1992)
detected a new hemoglobin variant in the course of determining Hb A1c by
high performance liquid chromatography. The abnormal hemoglobin
chromatographed with the Hb A1c fraction. Family studies showed that a
lys99-to-glu mutation, which was not associated with any hematologic
disturbance, had occurred de novo. An AAG-to-GAG mutation was presumed
and was not assigned to either the alpha-2- or alpha-1-globin chain.

The Hb A(1c) level in the patient of Langdown et al. (1992) was found to
be very high. In a Japanese individual, Harano et al. (2003) likewise
found an unexpectedly high Hb A(1c) level as measured by an automatic Hb
A(1c) analyzer and found by DNA sequencing a change in the first
nucleotide of codon 99 (AAG-GAG) of the Hb A1 gene.

.0171
HEMOGLOBIN ZAIRE
HBA1, 15-BP TANDEM REPEAT

Hemoglobin Zaire was found in a 36-year-old patient from Zaire during a
systematic hemoglobin study. Wajcman et al. (1992) demonstrated that the
abnormality was the insertion of 5 amino acids--his, leu, pro, ala,
glu--between glu116 and phe117 of the alpha-globin chain. This sequence
represented a tandem repeat of the 5 amino acid residues from 112
through 116, located at the end of the GH corner of the molecule.
Hemoglobin Grady (141800.0045) involves the insertion of 3 amino acids
as repeats of residues 116, 117 and 118. Unequal crossing over between
alleles rather than between the separate alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci was
thought to be the mechanism in that case and possibly in the case of Hb
Zaire as well.

.0172
HEMOGLOBIN LUTON
HBA1, HIS89LEU

In a newborn infant and the father, a 35-year-old Pakistani man,
Williamson et al. (1992) described a new hemoglobin with high oxygen
affinity. The high affinity hemoglobin mutation was identified by HPLC
peptide mapping and amino acid sequencing; leucine was substituted for
histidine at amino acid position 89. The mutation occurred at the end of
the F helix (FG1), a part of the hemoglobin structure critical in
determining oxygen affinity since it is directly linked to the heme iron
through the proximal histidine residue F8. This was the first example of
a mutation at this position of the alpha chain of hemoglobin, although
there were 2 high affinity mutants that involved the structurally
equivalent amino acid (beta94 asp) of the beta chain: Hb Barcelona
(beta94 his; 141900.0016) and Hb Bunbury (beta94 asn; 141900.0035). The
new hemoglobin was called Hb Luton for the name of the hospital where
the proband was originally treated. The proband was a neonate in whom 2
abnormal hemoglobin bands were found, the 2 bands being the mutant forms
of fetal and adult hemoglobins containing the anomalous alpha globin.
The father had microcytosis as well as mild polycythemia and was shown
to have an accompanying alpha-thalassemia trait due to deletion of a
single alpha-globin gene.

.0173
HEMOGLOBIN OZIERI
HBA1, ALA71VAL

During a screening for hemoglobinopathies in Sardinia, Ferranti et al.
(1993) found a new 'silent' hemoglobin variant in 5 apparently unrelated
newborn babies. The variant was detected by means of isoelectric
focusing (IEF), and further study revealed a valine for alanine
substitution at position 71 of the alpha-globin chain. The substitution
indicated that a C-to-T transition had occurred in the GCG codon for
alanine which contains one of the 35 unmethylated CpG dinucleotides of
the HBA1 gene. This observation brought to 13 the number of variants due
to mutation in the CpGs of the HBA1 gene and raised the possibility that
unmethylated CpGs, like methylated ones, may be hotspots for mutations.

.0174
HEMOGLOBIN ADANA
HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL, INCLUDED
HBA1, GLY59ASP

In 3 Turkish children with severe thalassemia, Curuk et al. (1992) found
a GGC-to-GAC mutation in codon 59 of the HBA1 gene resulting in a
replacement of glycine by aspartic acid. The combination of an
alpha-thal-1 deletion with the unstable Hb Adana resulted in a severe
type of Hb H disease (613978).

.0175
HEMOGLOBIN AL-AIN ABU DHABI
HBA1, GLY18ASP

During a routine program of hemoglobin screening performed in the United
Arab Emirates, Abbes et al. (1992) found an electrophoretically
fast-moving variant in a 9-month-old girl and in several members of her
family. Amino acid sequencing demonstrated that the new variant had a
gly18-to-asp substitution. Its functional properties were normal.

.0176
HEMOGLOBIN POITIERS
HBA1, HIS45ASP

Hb Poitiers was discovered by Bardakdjian et al. (1994) in a 9-year-old
French Caucasian boy who suffered from chronic anemia. The molecular
defect consists of a missense mutation at codon 45 of the HBA1 gene,
changing histidine to aspartate. Hb Poitiers displays a 2-fold increased
oxygen affinity, a slightly decreased heme-heme interaction, and a
slightly faster autooxidation rate. In adult hemoglobin (Hb A), the
histidine residue at position 45 of the alpha-globin gene is the only
polar contact between the heme group and globin. This position, however,
seems to allow for moderate variation without dramatic consequences on
the function of hemoglobin. His45 is replaced by glutamine in Hb Bari
(141800.0009) and by arginine in Hb Fort de France (141800.0034).

.0177
MOVED TO 141850.0062
.0178
HEMOGLOBIN CAEN
HBA1, VAL132GLY

Wajcman et al. (1993) discovered the Hb Caen variant in a 25-year-old
French Caucasian woman suffering from a mild chronic hemolytic anemia.
Trypsin degradation of the isolated hemoglobin alpha chain followed by
high performance liquid chromatography indicated that the valine residue
at position 132 was replaced by glycine.

.0179
HEMOGLOBIN YUDA
HBA1, ALA130ASP

Hb Yuda was discovered in a 65-year-old Japanese female with
noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Fujisawa et al., 1992). Gas
phase Edman degradation indicated that the abnormal hemoglobin alpha
chain has a substitution of aspartic acid for alanine at residue 130. Hb
Yuda has a very low oxygen affinity and slightly decreased cooperative
subunit interaction.

.0180
HEMOGLOBIN CAPA
HBA1, ASP94GLY

Hb Capa was discovered in a 28-year-old female in Turkey who was being
treated for chronic iron deficiency anemia. The hemoglobin showed
abnormal electrophoretic mobility and was mildly unstable in a heat
denaturation test. The molecular change was a GAC-to-GGC transition in
codon 94, resulting in substitution of glycine for aspartic acid. Three
other substitutions of asp-94 are known: Hb Setif (141800.0130), Hb
Titusville (141800.0148), and Hb Sunshine Seth (141800.0143). All 4
variants exhibit mild instability.

.0181
HEMOGLOBIN MONTEFIORE
HBA1, ASP126TYR

Wajcman et al. (1992) demonstrated an asp126-to-tyr change in the HBA1
gene in an individual of Puerto Rican descent. At physiologic pH (7.4),
the oxygen binding of the patient's red blood cells revealed a 40%
reduction. Hb Montefiore appears to have lower cooperativity than other
characterized alpha-126 mutants: aspartic acid is replaced by asparagine
in Hb Tarrant (141800.0146), by histidine in Hb Sassari (141800.0126),
and by valine in Hb Fukutomi (141800.0163).

.0182
HEMOGLOBIN ROUEN
HEMOGLOBIN ETHIOPIA
HBA1, TYR140HIS

A tyr140-to-his mutation in the HBA1 gene was discovered and
characterized in a French patient with polycythemia vera by Wajcman et
al. (1992) and in a newborn baby of Ethiopian descent by Webber et al.
(1992). This mutation provides an example of an alteration of the
C-terminus of the alpha chain, a region involved in the mechanisms of
allosteric regulation. Hb Rouen has increased oxygen affinity and
decreased cooperativity. A complementary tyr145-to-his mutation (Hb
Bethesda; 141900.0022) in the hemoglobin beta chain has more dramatic
effects, suggesting that the alpha and beta chains play unequal roles in
the overall function of hemoglobin.

.0183
HEMOGLOBIN MELUSINE
HBA1, PRO114SER

Hb Melusine was found in an Algerian patient during a systematic
screening for hemoglobinopathies in Luxembourg. Using isoelectric
focusing and reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography
(RP-HPLC), Wajcman et al. (1993) determined that the molecular mutation
at amino acid position 114 of the HBA1 gene changed the residue from
proline to serine.

.0184
HEMOGLOBIN TAYBE
HBA1, THR38DEL OR THR39DEL

Girodon et al. (1992) reported the characterization of Hb Taybe, a
hemoglobin variant discovered in a young Arabic woman suffering since
birth from a severe and highly regenerative hemolytic anemia. DNA
amplification and sequencing of the HBA1 gene indicated a 3-bp deletion
(encoding threonine) at amino acid position 38 or 39. This variant
increases the hydrophobicity of the amino acid chain, and it is quite
unstable.

.0185
HEMOGLOBIN CEMENELUM
HBA1, ARG92TRP

Wajcman et al. (1994) described a missense mutation involving the same
codon as that involved in Hb Chesapeake (141800.0018), the first high
oxygen affinity hemoglobin variant to be described in association with
polycythemia (Charache et al., 1966). Hb Chesapeake has an arg92-to-leu
substitution; Hb Cemenelum has an arg92-to-trp substitution. Hb J (Cape
Town) (141800.0063) has a substitution (arg92-to-gln) in the same codon.
Hb Cemenelum was discovered in a French diabetic patient with no
hematologic abnormalities. The purified abnormal hemoglobin, like Hb J
(Cape Town), displayed only a 1.5- to 2-fold increased oxygen affinity.
The findings demonstrate that the degree to which the functional
properties are altered by changes in key residues at the alpha-beta
interface depends upon the specific residue occupying this position.

.0186
HEMOGLOBIN RAMONA
HBA1, TYR24CYS

Hb Ramona was accidentally detected by isoelectrofocusing in a pregnant
woman of part Spanish descent; its mobility was slightly faster than
that of Hb A. A TAT-to-TGT change was found at codon 24, corresponding
to a replacement of tyrosine by cysteine.

.0187
HEMOGLOBIN TATRAS
HBA1, LYS7ASN

In a 72-year-old woman born in Czechoslovakia, Wajcman et al. (1994)
found a lys7-to-asn mutation when investigating the basis for an
abnormal level of Hb A1c. No abnormal hematologic features were
observed.

.0188
HEMOGLOBIN LISBON
HBA1, GLU23ASP

In a 31-year-old man of Portuguese origin who had suffered from diabetes
mellitus since the age of 15 years, Wajcman et al. (1994) found an
abnormal hemoglobin during measurement of Hb A1c by an
isoelectrofocusing study. There were no abnormal hematologic features.

.0189
HEMOGLOBIN ROANNE
HBA1, ASP94GLU

Kister et al. (1995) described a new hemoglobin variant in a 73-year-old
woman from Roanne in central France. She suffered from mild chronic
hemolytic anemia. An asp94-to-glu substitution was found in the alpha-1
chain. Aspartate-94 is involved in several contacts, both in the deoxy-
and oxy-structures of the hemoglobin.

.0190
HEMOGLOBIN MALHACEN
HBA1, ALA123SER

Kazanetz et al. (1995) observed this variant hemoglobin in an adult male
in Granada, Spain, who was evaluated because of severe iron deficiency
anemia. Sequencing of the HBA1 gene showed 2 nucleotide changes. One was
a simple polymorphism, as both GCG and GCT code for alanine (at codon
120). The second mutation was a GCC-to-TCC change at codon 123 resulting
in replacement of alanine by serine. The replacement caused slight
differences in the IEF and reversed-phase HPLC experiments, but the
stability of the hemoglobin was normal. Family studies were not
performed; thus, whether the 2 mutations were in coupling or repulsion
was not known.

.0191
HEMOGLOBIN TUNIS-BIZERTE
HBA1, LEU129PRO

In 3 members of a Tunisian family, Darbellay et al. (1995) identified a
leu129-to-pro substitution in the HBA1 gene by sequencing the entirety
of the HBA2 and HBA1 genes. In the heterozygous state, the variant was
manifested by microcytosis, whereas the homozygous state showed moderate
anemia with marked microcytosis.

.0192
MOVED TO 141850.0068
.0193
HEMOGLOBIN BOIS GUILLAUME
HBA1, ALA65VAL

By tiny abnormalities observed during isoelectrofocusing, Wajcman et al.
(1995) identified this electrophoretically silent variant in 3 members
of a Caucasian-French family. This hemoglobin was the first alpha-chain
variant that involved position 64. In the beta chain, the corresponding
position, E14, is also occupied by an alanine residue; in Hb Seattle
(141900.0256), it is replaced by aspartic acid (ala70-to-asp).

.0194
HEMOGLOBIN MANTES-LA-JOLIE
HBA1, ALA79THR

Wajcman et al. (1995) found this variant hemoglobin during a systematic
study of the iron status in a 6-month-old baby and his mother who
originated from Chad in North Central Africa.

.0195
HEMOGLOBIN MOSELLA
HBA1, ALA111THR

Wajcman et al. (1995) found this variant in a 35-year-old pregnant woman
of Caucasian origin who lived in Luxembourg. The abnormal Hb was also
found in one of her daughters.

.0196
HEMOGLOBIN FUCHU-I
HBA1, HIS72TYR

At the Fuchu Municipal Medical Center in Tokyo, Harano et al. (1995)
identified 2 Hb variants in the course of assaying glycated hemoglobin,
Hb A(1c), of the peripheral blood by cation exchange HPLC. Structural
analyses demonstrated that 1 patient had a his72-to-tyr substitution and
the other an asn97-to-his substitution (141800.0197) of the alpha-globin
chain. These were named Hb Fuchu-I and Hb Fuchu-II, respectively. Both
were healthy adults.

.0197
HEMOGLOBIN FUCHU-II
HBA1, ASN97HIS

See 141800.0196.

.0198
HEMOGLOBIN GOUDA
HBA1, HIS72GLN

In a 54-year-old Dutch woman under treatment for diabetes mellitus,
Giordano et al. (1996) incidentally found a silent alpha-chain variant
on testing for glycated hemoglobin. A CAC-to-CAA transversion was
predicted to result in substitution of glutamine for histidine at
residue 72 in the HBA1 gene.

.0199
HEMOGLOBIN J (BISKRA)
HBA1, 24-BP DEL

Wajcman et al. (1998) described Hb J-Biskra, a variant hemoglobin
consisting of deletion of 24 nucleotides from the HBA1 gene and 8 amino
acid residues from the alpha-globin chain: residues 50-57, 51-58, or
52-59. This variant was mildly unstable in vitro only, and there was no
hematologic or biochemical evidence of hemolysis in affected family
members. Wajcman et al. (1998) stated that this was the largest deletion
reported to that time in a hemoglobin molecule that is expressed at an
almost normal level in the red blood cell.

.0200
HEMOGLOBIN GODAVARI
HBA1, PRO95THR

Hb Godavari is the fourth example of a substitution involving neutral
residues at position 95 of the alpha-1 chain. In all of these variants,
the electrophoretic pattern suggested that the structural modification
unmasks a charged residue in the alpha-1/beta-2 contact area. The other
examples are Hb Denmark Hill, pro95 to ala (141800.0027); Hb G
(Georgia), and pro95 to leu (141800.0038). Hb Godavari shared the same
electrophoretic properties as these variants, but displayed minimal
alterations of the oxygen-binding properties. Wajcman et al. (1998)
identified Hb Godavari in 2 families of different ethnic origin. The
first case, found in the Netherlands, involved an Indian patient. The
second case was identified a few months later in an African family from
Mali, living in France.

.0201
HEMOGLOBIN OITA
HBA1, HIS45PRO

Hamaguchi et al. (1998) reported a neutral (silent) hemoglobin variant,
designated Hb Oita, in which a change from CAC to CCC caused a
his45-to-pro substitution. In Hb Bari (141800.0009), his45 is replaced
by gln. In Hb Fort de France (141800.0034), his45 is replaced by arg. In
Hb Portiers (141800.0176), his45 is replaced by asp.

.0202
HEMOGLOBIN AGHIA SOPHIA
HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL, INCLUDED
HBA1, VAL62DEL

In a Greek child with Hb H disease (613978), Traeger-Synodinos et al.
(1999) found deletion of codon 62 of the alpha-1 gene, leading to
alpha-plus-thalassemia. Codon 62 encodes a valine residue at the E11
alpha helix, which is located in the interior of the heme pocket.
Substitutions of this valine with other amino acid residues in the alpha
as well as beta polypeptide chains lead, in the heterozygous carrier,
either to Hb M disease or to congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia.
Traeger-Synodinos et al. (1999) assumed that deletion of val at position
62 disrupted the conformation of the alpha chain to such an extent that
the mutated subunit was rapidly removed by proteolysis. The final result
was an alpha-thalassemia phenotype rather than an unstable hemoglobin
syndrome. This conclusion was supported by the apparent absence of an
abnormal alpha chain in the peripheral blood of the patient. Hb Evans
(141850.0006) is a val62-to-met mutation of the HBA2 gene and was found
in a patient with mild hemolytic anemia. Four amino acid substitutions
at position 67(E11)val of the beta chain lead to instability of the Hb
tetramer and an anemia of variable degrees in the heterozygotes. One of
these substitutions, val67 to glu (141900.0163), results in the stable
Hb M-Milwaukee-I.

.0203
HEMOGLOBIN CHAROLLES
HBA1, HIS103TYR

Lacan et al. (1999) detected Hb Charolles in a 46-year-old patient who
presented with microcytosis and hypochromia. It was easily detected by
isoelectrofocusing and high performance liquid chromatography. It
accounted for 11% of the total hemoglobin. The amino acid change
resulted from a CAC-to-TAC change in codon 103.

.0204
HEMOGLOBIN ROUBAIX
HBA1, VAL55LEU

In a French family from the north of France, Prehu et al. (1999) found a
new HBA1 variant in 5 members. The variant was initially detected during
measurement of glycated hemoglobin in a woman originating from Roubaix.
Codon 55 in exon 2 was found to have a heterozygous change from GTT
(val) to CTT (leu). This was a neutral variant.

.0205
HEMOGLOBIN DOUALA
HBA1, SER3PHE

In a woman from Cameroon, Prehu et al. (2001) identified a new
hemoglobin variant, designated Hb Douala, with a C-to-T transition
(TCT-TTT) in the HBA1 gene, resulting in a ser3-to-phe (S3F) amino acid
substitution. The patient was also heterozygous for Hb S (141900.0243)
and for a 3.7-kb deletional alpha-thalassemia.

.0206
THALASSEMIA, ALPHA-PLUS
HBA1, 21-BP INS-DUP

In a patient of Iranian descent with the hematologic profile of
alpha-plus-thalassemia characterized by mild microcytosis, Waye et al.
(2001) found a 21-bp insertion/duplication that gave rise to a predicted
alpha-globin chain containing a duplication of amino acid residues
93-99.

.0207
THALASSEMIA, ALPHA-PLUS
HBA1, 33-BP DEL

In a patient of Greek descent with the hematologic profile of
alpha-plus-thalassemia characterized by mild microcytosis, Waye et al.
(2001) found a 33-bp deletion in the HBA1 gene resulting in a predicted
alpha-globin chain missing amino acid residues 64-74.

.0208
HEMOGLOBIN DELFZICHT
HBA1, ASN9LYS

Harteveld et al. (2002) reported a 69-year-old Dutch woman monitored for
diabetes mellitus in whom Hb A(L1c) analysis revealed a clinically
silent hemoglobin variant, asn9 to lys (N9K), due to an AAC-to-AAG
transversion in heterozygous state. The mutation was identical to that
found at the same position in the HBA2 gene that leads to a variant
named Hb Park Ridge (141850.0048).

.0209
HEMOGLOBIN SARATOGA SPRINGS
HBA1, LYS40ASN

In a 34-year-old Caucasian male of Swedish ancestry who lived in
Saratoga Springs, New York, Hoyer et al. (2003) identified a hemoglobin
variant with abnormal oxygen affinity, designated Hb Saratoga Springs.
There was no family history of erythrocytosis. The patient had no
smoking history. A change of codon 40 of the HBA1 gene from AAG to AAC
resulted in a lys40-to-asn (K40N) change. Lys40 is replaced by glu in Hb
Kariya (141800.0081), and by met in Hb Kanagawa (141800.0169). Both of
these hemoglobins had been shown to have increased oxygen affinity, but
neither was associated with erythrocytosis.

.0210
HEMOGLOBIN DIE
HBA1, VAL93ALA

In a 7-year-old girl living near the town of Die in southeast France,
Lacan et al. (2004) identified a val93-to-ala (V93A) mutation in the
HBA1 gene. The family was of French Caucasian origin.

.0211
HEMOGLOBIN BEZIERS
HBA1, LYS99ASN

In a 72-year-old woman of French Caucasian origin living in the city of
Beziers in the south of France, Lacan et al. (2004) identified a
lys99-to-asn (K99N) mutation in the HBA1 gene. The variant was found
during the determination of Hb A(1c) by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) in this diabetic patient. Hematologic data were
normal, without hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.

.0212
HEMOGLOBIN BUFFALO
HBA1, HIS89GLN

In a 32-year-old Somali male living in the Netherlands who was being
monitored for diabetes mellitus, Harteveld et al. (2004) identified Hb S
(141900.0243) in heterozygous state and a heterozygous C-to-G
transversion in the HBA1 gene, resulting in a his89-to-gln (H89Q)
substitution. The H89Q mutation had previously been described in a
Yemenite woman and 2 apparently unrelated Somali males (Hoyer et al.,
2002), and had been designated Hb Buffalo. No hematologic abnormality
had been associated with the allelic variant in this or other cases. In
addition to Hb Buffalo, 4 amino acid substitutions had been reported at
codon 89: Hb Luton (his89 to leu; 141800.0172), Hb Villeurbanne (his89
to tyr; 141800.0213), Hb Tokyo (his89 to pro; 141800.0214), and Hb
Tamano (his89 to arg; 141800.0215).

.0213
HEMOGLOBIN VILLEURBANNE
HBA1, HIS89TYR

Deon et al. (1997) identified a his89-to-tyr (H89Y) mutation in the HBA1
gene as the defect in Hb Villeurbanne.

.0214
HEMOGLOBIN TOKYO
HBA1, HIS89PRO

Harteveld et al. (2004) stated that Hb Tokyo carries a his89-to-pro
(H89P) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0215
HEMOGLOBIN TAMANO
HBA1, HIS89ARG

Harteveld et al. (2004) stated that Hb Tamano carries a his89-to-arg
(H89R) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0216
HEMOGLOBIN RICCARTON
HBA1, GLY51SER

In a 4-year-old Caucasian boy investigated for fatigue and microcytosis,
Brennan et al. (2005) found a GGC-to-AGC transition at codon 51 in the
HBA1 gene, resulting in a gly51-to-ser substitution (G51S). The mutation
was thought not to be the cause of the microcytosis as it was detected
also in the boy's father who had normal red cell indices.

.0217
HEMOGLOBIN OEGSTGEEST
HBA1, CYS104SER

In an 8-year-old black female of Surinamese origin with a mild
alpha-thalassemia phenotype, Harteveld et al. (2005) identified
homozygosity for a TGC-to-AGC transversion in the HBA1 gene, resulting
in a cys104-to-ser substitution. Cysteine-104 is involved in alpha/beta
globin contact and had been described as a critical amino acid of the
HBA2 chain when substituted by a tyrosine (cys104 to tyr) in Hb
Sallanches (141850.0031).

.0218
HEMOGLOBIN LAMEN ISLAND
HBA1, 149709T-C

De Gobbi et al. (2006) studied 148 individuals from Melanesia with
alpha-thalassemia, including 5 with HbH disease, in whom none of the
theretofore described molecular defects could be found. The pattern of
inheritance suggested that individuals with HbH disease were homozygous
for a codominant defect, referred to as (alpha-alpha)T, causing
alpha-thalassemia with a predicted genotype of
(alpha-alpha)T/(alpha-alpha)T. In situ RNA hybridization in erythroid
cells from an affected individual from Lamen Island (Vanuatu) detected
substantially fewer nuclear transcripts from the alpha-globin genes than
from the beta-globin genes. DNA FISH in 2 affected individuals showed
that the alpha-globin cluster was present at its normal location of
chromosome 16, and no deletions or chromosomal rearrangements were
detected in any of these individuals. Linkage analysis showed that the
disease phenotype in individuals was derived from telomeric chromosome
16 T. Only the C allele of SNP195 (C or T, located at coordinate 149709)
segregated with thalassemia in the affected families and showed complete
association with the (alpha-alpha)T haplotype. This allele was not found
in a separate analysis of 131 nonthalassemic Melanesian individuals.
SNP195 changes the sequence 5-prime-TAATAA-3-prime (T allele) to
5-prime-TGATAA-3-prime (C allele), potentially creating a new binding
site for the key erythroid transcription factor GATA1. GATA1 binds at
the C allele of SNP195 in vivo. SNP195 creates a new promoter-like
element between the upstream regulatory elements and their cognate
promoters. This element, when activated, causes significant
downregulation of the alpha-D, alpha-2, and alpha-1 genes that lie
downstream, thereby causing alpha-thalassemia.

.0219
ALPHA-THALASSEMIA
HBA1, 1-BP DEL, 354C

In a newborn of mixed black and Chinese descent who carried the
Southeast Asian alpha-0-thal deletion, Eng et al. (2006) also found a
1-bp deletion of cysteine from codon 78 in exon 2 of the HBA1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination at codon 83.

.0220
HEMOGLOBIN AUCKLAND
HBA1, HIS87ASN

In a 27-year-old woman with mild compensated hemolytic anemia, Brennan
and Matthews (1997) identified Hb Auckland, a his87-to-asn substitution
in the HBA1 gene.

.9999
HEMOGLOBIN ALPHA VARIANTS, MOLECULAR DEFECT UNKNOWN

HEMOGLOBIN J (INDIA). See Raper (1957).

HEMOGLOBIN J (MALAYA). See Lehmann (1962).

HEMOGLOBIN K (CALCUTTA). Fast hemoglobin. See Lehmann (1962).

HEMOGLOBIN K (MADRAS). See Ager and Lehmann (1957).

HEMOGLOBIN KARAMOJO. See Allbrook et al. (1965).

HEMOGLOBIN L (BOMBAY). See Sukumaran and Pik (1965).

HEMOGLOBIN M (RESERVE). Reduced oxygen affinity and decreased reversible
oxygen-binding capacity (Overly et al., 1967).

HEMOGLOBIN N, ALPHA TYPE. An alpha chain anomaly was deduced from
molecular hybridization experiments with canine hemoglobin (Silvestroni
et al., 1963). Other hemoglobin N variants have a beta change.

HEMOGLOBIN NICOSIA. See Fessas et al. (1965).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Al-Awamy et al. (1985); Baklouti et al. (1988); Barg et al. (1982);
Barton et al. (1982); Brittenham et al. (1980); Davis et al. (1979);
Dincol et al. (1994); Dozy et al. (1979); Embury et al. (1979); Harano
et al. (1983); Harano et al. (1983); Harano et al. (1983); Harano
et al. (1984); Harano et al. (1982); Hess et al. (1983); Higgs et
al. (1981); Hill et al. (1985); Huisman and Miller (1976); Kan et
al. (1979); Kielman et al. (1993); Li et al. (1990); Liang et al.
(1981); Liebhaber et al. (1980); Marinucci et al. (1979); Meloni et
al. (1980); Ohba et al. (1978); Phillips et al. (1979); Phillips et
al. (1980); Pobedimskaya et al. (1994); Priest et al. (1989); Proudfoot
and Maniatis (1980); Romao et al. (1992); Schroeder and Jones (1965);
Shimizu et al. (1965); Southern  (1975); Vella et al. (1974); Wainscoat
et al. (1983); Wajcman et al. (1989); Wajcman et al. (1990); Wajcman
et al. (1992); Wajcman et al. (1992); Wajcman et al. (1993); Wajcman
et al. (1990); Weatherall and Clegg (1979); Zimmer et al. (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Abbes, S.; M'Rad, A.; Fitzgerald, P. A.; Dormer, P.; Blouquit,
Y.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Al-Ain Abu Dhabi
[alpha-18 (A16) gly-to-asp]: a new hemoglobin variant discovered in
an Emiratee family. Hemoglobin 16: 355-362, 1992.

2. Abdo, M. Z.: Hb Setif (alpha94(G1)asp-to-tyr) in a Saudi Arabian
family. Hemoglobin 13: 737-742, 1989.

3. Abramov, A.; Lehmann, H.; Robb, L.: Hb Shaare Zedek (alpha56 E5
lys-to-glu). FEBS Lett. 113: 235-237, 1980.

4. Abramson, R. K.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Shreffler, D. C.; Saave, J.
J.: Homozygous Hb J Tongariki: evidence for only one alpha chain
structural locus in Melanesians. Science 169: 194-196, 1970.

5. Adams, J. G., III: Hemoglobin Ann Arbor: disturbance in the coordinated
biosynthesis of globin chains? Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 241: 232-241,
1974.

6. Adams, J. G., III; Winter, W. P.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Spencer, H.
H.: Biosynthesis of hemoglobin Ann Arbor: evidence for catabolic
and feedback regulation. Science 176: 1427-1429, 1972.

7. Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin K in an East Indian and
his family. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1449-1450, 1957.

8. Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.; Vella, F.: Haemoglobin 'Norfolk':
a new haemoglobin found in an English family. Brit. Med. J. 2: 539-541,
1958.

9. Ahmad, A.; Naqvi, S.; Ehsanullah, S.; Zaidi, Z. H.: Abnormal hemoglobins-11
= Hb (Karachi), an alpha chain abnormality at position 5 ala-to-pro. J.
Pakistan Med. Assoc. 36: 206-208, 1986.

10. Al-Awamy, B.; Niazi, G. A.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hb Setif or alpha94(G1)asp-to-tyr observed in a Saudi Arabian family. Hemoglobin 9:
87-90, 1985.

11. Al-Awamy, B. H.; Niazi, G. A.; Naeem, M. A.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Handsworth or alpha18(A16)gly-to-arg in a Saudi
newborn. Hemoglobin 9: 183-186, 1985.

12. Alberti, R.; Mariuzzi, G. M.; Artibani, L.; Bruni, E.; Tentori,
L.: A new haemoglobin variant: J-Rovigo alpha 53 (E-2) alanine to
aspartic acid. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 342: 1-4, 1974.

13. Allbrook, D.; Barnicot, N. A.; Dance, N.; Lawler, S. D.; Marshall,
R.; Mungai, J.: Blood groups, haemoglobin and serum factors of the
Karamojo. Hum. Biol. 37: 217-237, 1965.

14. Allen, S. J.; O'Donnell, A.; Alexander, N. D. E.; Alpers, M. P.;
Peto, T. E. A.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Alpha(+)-thalassemia
protects children against disease caused by other infections as well
as malaria. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14736-14741, 1997.

15. Ameri, A.; Fairbanks, V. F.; Yanik, G. A.; Mahdi, F.; Thibodeau,
S. N.; McCormick, D. J.; Boxer, L. A.; McDonagh, K. T.: Identification
of the molecular genetic defect of patients with methemoglobin M Kankakee
(M-Iwate), alpha-87 (F8) his-to-tyr: evidence for an electrostatic
model of alpha-M hemoglobin assembly. Blood 94: 1825-1826, 1999.

16. Andersen, C. B. F.; Torvund-Jensen, M.; Nielsen, M. J.; de Oliveira,
C. L. P.; Hersleth, H.-P.; Andersen, N. H.; Pedersen, J. S.; Andersen,
G. R.; Moestrup, S. K.: Structure of the haptoglobin-haemoglobin
complex. Nature 489: 456-459, 2012.

17. Assum, G.; Griese, E.-U.; Horst, J.: Detection of a restriction
site polymorphism within the human alpha-globin gene complex. Hum.
Genet. 69: 144-146, 1985.

18. Baglioni, C.: A chemical study of hemoglobin-Norfolk. J. Biol.
Chem. 237: 69-74, 1962.

19. Baglioni, C.; Lehmann, H.: Chemical heterogeneity of haemoglobin
O. Nature 196: 229-231, 1962.

20. Baklouti, F.; Baudin-Chich, V.; Kister, J.; Marden, M.; Teyssier,
G.; Poyart, C.; Delaunay, J.; Wajcman, H.: Increased oxygen affinity
with normal heterotropic effects in hemoglobin Loire (alpha88 (F9)
ala-to-ser). Europ. J. Biochem. 177: 307-312, 1988.

21. Baklouti, F.; Francina, A.; Dorleac, E.; Baudin-Chich, V.; Gombaud-Saintonge,
G.; Plauchu, H.; Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.; Godet, J.: Asymptomatic
association of hemoglobin Dunn (alpha-6(A4)asp-to-asn) and hemoglobin
O-Arab (beta-121[GH4]glu-to-lys) in a Moroccan man. Am. J. Hemat. 27:
253-256, 1988.

22. Bannister, W. H.; Grech, J. L.; Plese, C. F.; Smith, L. L.; Barton,
B. P.; Wilson, J. B.; Reynolds, C. A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin
St. Luke's or alpha 95 arg (G2). Europ. J. Biochem. 29: 301-307,
1972.

23. Barclay, G. P. T.; Charlesworth, D.; Lehmann, H.: Abnormal haemoglobins
in Zambia: a new hemoglobin Zambia alpha 60 (E9) lysine to asparagine. Brit.
Med. J. 2: 595-596, 1969.

24. Bardakdjian, J.; Kister, J.; Wajcman, H.; Boulard, P.; Bohn, B.;
Blouquit, Y.; Galacteros, F.: Hb Poitiers [alpha45 (CE3) his-to-asp]:
a new hemoglobin variant with a two-fold increase in oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 18:
1-9, 1994.

25. Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Galacteros, F.; Craescu, C. T.: Functional
and NMR studies of Hb Sassari (asp126-alpha-to-his): role of the inter-subunit
contacts in the affinity control of human hemoglobin. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1041: 250-253, 1990.

26. Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros, F.; Lancelot, M.;
Marquart, F. X.: Hb Reims (alpha23(B4)glu-to-gly): a new alpha chain
variant with slightly decreased stability. Hemoglobin 13: 733-735,
1989.

27. Barg, R.; Barton, P.; Caine, A.; Clements, R. L.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Malcolm, S.; Morrison, N.; Murphy, C. S.: Regional localization
of the human alpha-globin gene to the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p12-pter)
using both somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 32: 252-253, 1982.

28. Barton, P.; Malcolm, S.; Murphy, C.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Localization
of the human alpha-globin gene cluster to the short arm of chromosome
16 (16p12-16pter) by hybridization in situ. J. Molec. Biol. 156:
269-278, 1982.

29. Baudin, V.; Baklouti, F.; Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.: Hemoglobin
Aichi (alpha50 (CE8) his-to-arg) in a French Caucasian patient. Hemoglobin 11:
145-149, 1987.

30. Baur, E. W.: Hb alpha 2 glu beta 2(Hb I) in a Caucasian family:
independent mutation or common origin? Humangenetik 6: 368-372,
1968.

31. Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Abnormal haemoglobins and the genetic
code. Nature 207: 259-261, 1965.

32. Beaven, G. H.; Hornabrook, R. W.; Fox, R. H.; Huehns, E. R.:
Occurrence of heterozygotes and homozygotes for the alpha-chain haemoglobin
variant Hb-J (Tongariki) in New Guinea. Nature 235: 46-47, 1972.

33. Beckman, L.; Christodoulou, C.; Fessas, P.; Loukopoulos, D.; Kaltsoya,
A.; Nilsson, L.-O.: A Swedish haemoglobin variant. Acta Genet. Statist.
Med. 16: 362-370, 1966.

34. Beksedic, D.; Rajevska, T.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hb Serbia
(alpha112 his-to-arg), a new haemoglobin variant from Yugoslavia. FEBS
Lett. 58: 226-229, 1975.

35. Beretta, A.; Prato, V.; Gallo, E.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Torino--alpha
43 (CD 1) phenylalanine replaced by valine. Nature 217: 1016-1018,
1968.

36. Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-M: Typen und ihre Differenzierung (Uebersicht).In:
Lehmann, H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg
Thieme Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 39-47.

37. Bilginer, A.; Lehmann, H.; Arcasoy, A.: Hemoglobin Ube-2 (alpha68
asn-to-asp) observed in a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 8: 189-191,
1984.

38. Blackwell, R. Q.; Boon, W. H.; Liu, C. S.; Weng, M. I.: Hemoglobin
J Singapore: alpha-78 asn to asp; alpha-79 ala to gly. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 278: 482-490, 1972.

39. Blackwell, R. Q.; Jim, R. T. S.; Tan, T. G. H.; Weng, M. I.; Liu,
C. S.; Wang, C. L.: Hemoglobin G Waimanalo: alpha 64 asp-to-asn. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 322: 27-33, 1973.

40. Blackwell, R. Q.; Liu, C. S.: Hemoglobin G Taichung: alpha74
asp-to-his. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 200: 70-75, 1970.

41. Blackwell, R. Q.; Wong, H. B.; Wang, C.-L.; Weng, M. I.; Liu,
C.-S.: Hemoglobin J-Meerut: alpha 120 ala-to-glu. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 351: 7-12, 1974.

42. Botha, M. C.; Beale, D.; Issacs, W. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
J Cape Town. Nature 212: 792-794, 1966.

43. Bowman, B. H.; Barnett, D. R.: Amino-acid substitution in haemoglobin
I (Texas variant). Nature 214: 499, 1967.

44. Bowman, J. E.; Bloom, R.; Chen, S. S.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Kutlar, F.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Chicago or alpha136
(H19) leu-to-met and a G-gamma-G-gamma-globin gene arrangement in
a black family. Hemoglobin 10: 495-505, 1986.

45. Boyer, S. H.; Crosby, E. F.; Fuller, G. F.; Ulenurm, L.; Buck,
A. A.: A survey of hemoglobins in the Republic of Chad and characterization
of hemoglobin Chad: alpha 23 glu-to-lys. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 20:
570-578, 1968.

46. Braconnier, F.; Gacon, G.; Thillet, J.; Wajcman, H.; Soria, J.;
Maigret, P.; Labie, D.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin Fort de France (alpha
45(CD3) his-to-arg): a new variant with increased oxygen affinity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 477: 223-234, 1977.

47. Bradley, T. B., Jr.; Boyer, S. H.; Allen, F. H., Jr.: Hopkins-2
hemoglobin: a revised pedigree with data on blood and serum groups. Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 108: 75-79, 1961.

48. Brennan, S. O.; Chan, T.; Obele, M.; George, P. M.: Hb Riccarton
(alpha-51(CE9)gly-to-ser): a variant arising from a novel mutation
in the alpha-1 gene. Hemoglobin 29: 61-64, 2005.

49. Brennan, S. O.; Matthews, J. R. D.: Hb Auckland (alpha87(F8)his-to-asn):
a new mutation of the proximal histidine identified by electrospray
mass spectrometry. Hemoglobin 21: 393-403, 1997.

50. Brennan, S. O.; Tauro, G. P.; Melrose, W.; Carrell, R. W.: Haemoglobin
Port Phillip: alpha 91 (FG3) leu-to-pro, a new unstable hemoglobin. FEBS
Lett. 81: 115-117, 1977.

51. Breuning, M. H.; Madan, K.; Verjaal, M.; Wijnen, J. T.; Meera
Khan, P.; Pearson, P. L.: Human alpha-globin maps to pter-p13.3 in
chromosome 16 distal to PGP. Hum. Genet. 76: 287-289, 1987.

52. Brimhall, B.; Duerst, M.; Hollan, S. R.; Stenzel, P.; Szelenyi,
J.; Jones, R. T.: Structural characterizations of hemoglobins J-Buda
(alpha 61 (E10) lys-to-asn) and G-Pest (alpha 74 (EF3) asp-to-asn). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 336: 344-360, 1974.

53. Brimhall, B.; Hollan, S.; Jones, R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Stocklen,
Z.; Szelenyi, J. G.: Multiple alpha-chain loci for human hemoglobin.
(Abstract) Clin. Res. 18: 184, 1970.

54. Brittenham, G.; Lozoff, B.; Harris, J. W.; Kan, Y. W.; Dozy, A.
M.; Nayudu, N. V. S.: Alpha globin gene number: population and restriction
endonuclease studies. Blood 55: 706-708, 1980.

55. Buckle, V. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Super, M.; Weatherall,
D. J.: Localisation of human alpha globin to 16p13.3-pter. J. Med.
Genet. 25: 847-849, 1988.

56. Bunn, H. F.; Altman, A. J.; Stangland, K.; Firshein, S. I.; Forget,
B.; Schmidt, G. J.; Jones, R. T.: Hemoglobins Aida (alpha 64 asp-to-asn)
and D-Los Angeles (beta 121 glu-to-gln) in an Asian-Indian family. Hemoglobin 2:
531-540, 1978.

57. Cabannes, R.; Renaud, R.; Mauran, A.; Pennors, H.; Charlesworth,
D.; Price, B. G.; Lehmann, H.: Two fast haemoglobins in Ivory-Coast:
Hb K Woolwich and a new haemoglobin Hb J Abidjan (alpha 51 gly-to-asp). Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 12: 289-300, 1972.

58. Carstairs, K. C.; Raulfs, A.; Kutlar, A.; Chen, S. S.; Webber,
B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Fort Worth or alpha(2)27(B8)glu-to-gly
in a black family from Canada. Hemoglobin 9: 201-205, 1985.

59. Carver, M. F. H.; Kutlar, A.: International Hemoglobin Information
Center: variant list. Hemoglobin 19: 37-149, 1995.

60. Cash, F. E.; Monplaisir, N.; Goossens, M.; Liebhaber, S. A.:
Locus assignment of two alpha-globin structural mutants from the Caribbean
Basin: alpha Fort de France (alpha(45-arg)) and alpha Spanish Town
(alpha(27-val)). Blood 74: 833-835, 1989.

61. Charache, S.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: Polycythemia associated
with a hemoglobinopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 45: 813-822, 1966.

62. Chih-chuan, L.; Hai-nan, T.; Kuo-feng, C.: Hemoglobin Handsworth
(alpha 18 (A16) gly-to-arg) in a Chinese. Hemoglobin 5: 191-193,
1981.

63. Chui, D. H. K.; Waye, J. S.: Hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassemia:
an emerging health care problem. Blood 91: 2213-2222, 1998.

64. Cleek, M. P.; Gardiner, M. B.; Reese, A. L.; Harris, H. F.; Felice,
A. E.; Huisman, T. H. J.: The Atlanta family with hemoglobin Grady
revisited. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35: 1314-1316, 1983.

65. Clegg, J. B.; Charache, S.: The structure of hemoglobin Hopkins-2. Hemoglobin 2:
85-88, 1978.

66. Clegg, J. B.; Naughton, M. A.; Weatherall, D. J.: Abnormal human
haemoglobins: separation and characterization of the alpha and beta
chains by chromatography, and the determination of two new variants,
Hb Chesapeake and Hb J (Bangkok). J. Molec. Biol. 19: 91-108, 1966.

67. Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.; Boon, W. H.; Mustafa, D.: Two
new haemoglobin variants involving proline substitutions. Nature 222:
379-380, 1969.

68. Cohen-Solal, M.; Manesse, B.; Thillet, J.; Rosa, J.: Haemoglobin
G Norfolk alpha-85 (F6) asp-to-asn: structural characterization by
sequenator analysis and functional properties of a new variant with
high oxygen affinity. FEBS Lett. 50: 163-167, 1975.

69. Colombo, B.; Vidal, H.; Kamuzora, H.; Lehmann, H.: A new haemoglobin
J-Habana--alpha 71 (E20) alanine-to-glutamic acid. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 351: 1-6, 1974.

70. Como, P. F.; Barber, S.; Sage, R. E.; Kronenberg, H.: Hemoglobin
Woodville: alpha6 (A4) aspartic acid-to-tyrosine. Hemoglobin 10:
135-141, 1986.

71. Cooper, M. R.; Kraus, A. P.; Felts, J. H.; Myers, R.; Kraus, L.
M.: A third case of hemoglobin Memphis: sickle cell disease. Am.
J. Med. 55: 535-541, 1973.

72. Costa, F. F.; Sonati, M. F.; Zago, M. A.: Hemoglobin Stanleyville
II (alpha-78 asn-to-lys) is associated with a 3.7-kb alpha-globin
gene deletion. Hum. Genet. 86: 319-320, 1991.

73. Cotton, F.; Hansen, V.; Lin, C.; Parma, J.; Cochaux, P.; Damis,
E.; Vertongen, F.; Gulbis, B.: Hb Ube-2 [alpha-68(E17)asn-asp] and
Hb Hafnia [beta-116(G18)his-gln] observed during neonatal screening
in Brussels. Hemoglobin 24: 65-69, 2000.

74. Crookston, J. H.; Beale, D.; Irvine, D.; Lehmann, H.: A new haemoglobin,
J Toronto (alpha-5 alanine to aspartic acid). Nature 208: 1059-1060,
1965.

75. Crookston, J. H.; Farquharson, H. A.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.:
Hemoglobin Etobicoke: alpha 84(F5) serine replaced by arginine. Canad.
J. Biochem. 47: 143-146, 1969.

76. Curuk, M. A.; Altay, C.; Fei, Y.-J.; Kutlar, F.; Baysal, E.; Gu,
L.-H.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Severe Hb H disease due to a combination
of the -(alpha)20 kb deletion and Hb Adana, an unstable alpha-1 variant
with gly-to-asp at alpha-59 (GGC-to-GAC). (Abstract) Blood 80: 81a,
1992.

77. Dahmane-Arbane, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Arous, N.; Bardakdjian, J.;
Benamani, M.; Riou, J.; Benabadji, M.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros, F.:
Hemoglobine Boumerdes alpha-37 (C2) pro-to-arg: un nouveau variant
de la chaine alpha associe a l'hemoglobine S dans une famille algerienne. Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 29: 317-320, 1987.

78. Darbellay, R.; Mach-Pascual, S.; Rose, K.; Graf, J.; Beris, Ph.
: Haemoglobin Tunis-Bizerte: a new alpha-1 globin 129 leu-to-pro unstable
variant with thalassaemic phenotype. Brit. J. Haemat. 90: 71-76,
1995.

79. Daud, D.; Harahap, A.; Setianingsih, I.; Nainggolan, I.; Tranggana,
S.; Pakasi, R.; Marzuki, S.: The hemoglobin O mutation in Indonesia:
distribution and phenotypic expression. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 499-505,
2001.

80. Davis, J. R., Jr.; Dozy, A. M.; Lubin, B.; Koenig, H. M.; Pierce,
H. I.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Kan, Y. W.: Alpha-thalassemia in blacks
is due to gene deletion. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 569-573, 1979.

81. De Gobbi, M.; Viprakasit, V.; Hughes, J. R.; Fisher, C.; Buckle,
V. J.; Ayyub, H.; Gibbons, R. J.; Vernimmen, D.; Yoshinaga, Y.; de
Jong, P.; Cheng, J.-F.; Rubin, E. M.; Wood, W. G.; Bowden, D.; Higgs,
D. R.: A regulatory SNP causes a human genetic disease by creating
a new transcriptional promoter. Science 312: 1215-1217, 2006.

82. Deisseroth, A.; Hendrick, D.: Human alpha-globin gene expression
following chromosomal dependent gene transfer into mouse erythroleukemia
cells. Cell 15: 55-63, 1978.

83. Deisseroth, A.; Nienhuis, A.; Turner, P.; Velez, R.; Anderson,
W. F.; Ruddle, F. H.; Lawrence, J.; Creagan, R. P.; Kucherlapati,
R. S.: Localization of the human alpha globin structural gene to
chromosome 16 in somatic cell hybrids by molecular hybridization assay. Cell 12:
205-218, 1977.

84. Deisseroth, A.; Velez, R.; Nienhuis, A. W.: Hemoglobin synthesis
in somatic cell hybrids: independent segregation of the human alpha-
and beta-globin genes. Science 191: 1262-1263, 1976.

85. Deon, C.; Prome, J. C.; Prome, D.; Francina, A.; Groff, P.; Kalmes,
G.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Combined mass spectrometric methods
for the characterization of human hemoglobin variants localized within
alpha-T9 peptide: identification of Hb Villeurbanne alpha-89 (FG1)
his-to-tyr. J. Mass Spectrom. 32: 880-887, 1997.

86. de Traverse, P. M.; Lehmann, H.; Coquelet, M. L.; Beale, D.; Isaacs,
W. A.: Etude d'une hemoglobine J-alpha non encore decrite, dans une
famille francaise. Comp. Rend. Soc. Biol. 160: 2270-2272, 1966.

87. DeVries, A.; Joshua, H.; Lehmann, H.; Hill, R. L.; Fellows, R.
E.: The first observation of an abnormal hemoglobin in a Jewish family:
hemoglobin Beilinson. Brit. J. Haemat. 9: 484-486, 1963.

88. de Weinstein, B. I.; Kutlar, A.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.;
Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Daneshgah-Tehran or alpha72(EF1)his-to-arg
in an Argentinean family. Hemoglobin 9: 409-411, 1985.

89. Dincol, G.; Dincol, K.; Erdem, S.; Pobedimskaya, D. D.; Molchanova,
T. P.; Ye, Z.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Capa or alpha-94(G1)asp-to-gly, a mildly unstable variant with an
A-to-G (GAC-to-GGC) mutation in codon 94 of the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 18:
57-60, 1994.

90. Dincol, G.; Elam, D.; Kutlar, A.; Kutlar, F.: Hb Setif [alpha-94(G1)asp-to-tyr
(alpha-2)] detected in a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 27: 249-252,
2003.

91. Djoumessi, S.; Rousseaux, J.; Descamps, J.; Goudemand, M.; Dautrevaux,
M.: Hemoglobin Lille, alpha-2(74(EF3) asp-to-ala)beta-2. Hemoglobin 5:
475-479, 1981.

92. Dozy, A. M.; Forman, E. N.; Abuelo, D. N.; Barsel-Bowers, G.;
Mahoney, M. J.; Forget, B. G.; Kan, Y. W.: Prenatal diagnosis of
hemizygous alpha-thalassemia. JAMA 241: 1610-1613, 1979.

93. Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Embury, S. H.; Mentzer, W. C.; Wang,
W. C.: Alpha-globin gene organisation in blacks precludes the severe
form of alpha-thalassaemia. Nature 280: 605-607, 1979.

94. Dysert, P. A., II; Head, C. G.; Shih, T. B.; Jones, R. T.; Schneider,
R. G.: Hb Dallas, alpha 97(G4) asn-to-lys: a new abnormal hemoglobin
with high oxygen affinity. (Abstract) Blood 60: 53a, 1982.

95. Eicher, E. M.; Lee, B. K.: Growth hormone receptor (Ghr) and
hemoglobin alpha-chain pseudogene 3 (Hba-ps3) map proximal to the
myelocytomatosis oncogene (Myc) on mouse chromosome 15. Mammalian
Genome 1: 57-58, 1991.

96. Embury, S. H.; Lebo, R. V.; Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.: Organization
of the alpha-globin genes in the Chinese alpha-thalassemia syndromes. J.
Clin. Invest. 63: 1307-1310, 1979.

97. Eng, B.; Patterson, M.; Walker, L.; Hoppe, C.; Azimi, M.; Lee,
H.; Giordano, P. C.; Waye, J. S.: Three new alpha-thalassemia point
mutations ascertained through newborn screening. Hemoglobin 30:
149-153, 2006.

98. Felice, A. E.: Hb St. Luke's (alpha-95(G2)pro-to-arg (alpha-1)).
(Letter) Hemoglobin 27: 137 only, 2003.

99. Ferranti, P.; Parlapiano, A.; Malorni, A.; Pucci, P.; Marino,
G.; Cossu, G.; Manca, L.; Masala, B.: Hemoglobin Ozieri: a new alpha-chain
variant (alpha-71(E20)ala-to-val): characterization using FAB- and
electrospray-mass spectrometric techniques. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1162:
203-208, 1993.

100. Fessas, C.; Karaklis, A.; Loukopoulos, D.; Stamatoyannopoulos,
G.; Fessas, P.: Hemoglobin Nicosia: an alpha-chain variant and its
combination with beta-thalassaemia. Brit. J. Haemat. 11: 323-330,
1965.

101. Fessas, P.; Kaltsoya, A.; Loukopoulos, D.; Nilsson, L.-O.: On
the chemical structure of haemoglobin Uppsala. Hum. Hered. 19: 152-158,
1969.

102. Fleming, P. J.; Arnold, B. J.; Thompson, E. O. P.; Hughes, W.
G.; Morgan, L.: Hb I alpha 16 lys-to-glu and Hb Broussais alpha 90
lys-to-asn in Australian families. Pathology 10: 317-327, 1978.

103. Fleming, P. J.; Hughes, W. G.; Farmilo, R. K.; Wyatt, K.; Cooper,
W. N.: Hemoglobin Westmead (alpha 122(H5) his-to-gln): a new hemoglobin
variant with the substitution in the alpha-beta contact area. Hemoglobin 4:
39-52, 1980.

104. Fleming, P. J.; Sumner, D. R.; Wyatt, K.; Hughes, W. G.; Melrose,
W. D.; Jupe, D. M. D.; Baikie, M. J.: Hemoglobin Hobart or alpha20
(B1) his-to-arg: a new alpha chain hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 11:
211-220, 1987.

105. Flint, J.; Hill, A. V. S.; Bowden, D. K.; Oppenheimer, S. J.;
Sill, P. R.; Serjeantson, S. W.; Bonna-Kori, J.; Bhatia, K.; Alpers,
M. P.; Boyce, A. J.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: High frequencies
of alpha-thalassemia are the result of natural selection by malaria. Nature 321:
744-751, 1986.

106. Fujisawa, K.; Hattori, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Ando, S.: Hb Yuda or alpha130
(H13) ala-to-asp; a new alpha chain variant with low oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 16:
435-439, 1992.

107. Fujiwara, N.: An amino acid substitution in Hb Atago, an abnormal
human hemoglobin. J. Jpn. Biochem. Soc. 42: 341-349, 1970.

108. Fujiwara, N.; Maekawa, T.; Matsuda, G.: Hemoglobin Atago (alpha
85 tyr): a new abnormal human hemoglobin found in Nagasaki. Int.
J. Protein Res. 3: 35-39, 1971.

109. Fung, T. Y.; Kin, L. T.; Kong, L. C.; Keung, L. C.: Homozygous
alpha-thalassemia associated with hypospadias in three survivors. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 82: 225-227, 1999.

110. Gajdusek, D. C.; Guiart, J.; Kirk, R. L.; Carrell, R. W.; Irvine,
D.; Kynoch, P. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin J Tongariki (alpha
115 alanine to aspartic acid): the first new haemoglobin variant found
in a Pacific (Melanesian) population. J. Med. Genet. 4: 1-6, 1967.

111. Gammack, D. B.; Huehns, E. R.; Lehmann, H.; Shooter, E. M.:
The abnormal polypeptide chains in a number of haemoglobin variants. Acta
Genet. Statist. Med. 11: 1-16, 1961.

112. Gandini, E.; Dallapiccola, B.; Laurent, C.; Suerine, E. F.; Forabosco,
A.; Conconi, G.; Del Senno, L.: Evidence for localisation of genes
for human alpha-globin on the long arm of chromosome 4. Nature 265:
65-66, 1977.

113. Garel, M. C.; Goossens, M.; Oudart, J. L.; Blouquit, Y.; Thillet,
J.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin Dakar = Hb Grady: demonstration by a new
approach to the analysis of the tryptic core region of the alpha chain
and oxygen equilibrium properties. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 453: 459-471,
1976.

114. Gerald, P. S.; Cook, C. D.; Diamond, L. K.: Hemoglobin M. Science 126:
300-301, 1957.

115. Gerald, P. S.; Efron, M. L.: Chemical studies of several varieties
of Hb M. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 47: 1758-1767, 1961.

116. Gerhard, D. S.; Kawasaki, E. S.; Bancroft, F. C.; Szabo, P.:
Localization of a unique gene by direct hybridization in situ. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 3755-3759, 1981.

117. Giordano, P. C.; Fodde, R.; Amons, R.; Ploem, J. E.; Bernini,
L. F.: Hb J-Anatolia (alpha61(E10)lys-to-thr): structural characterization
and gene localization of a new alpha chain variant. Hemoglobin 14:
119-128, 1990.

118. Giordano, P. C.; Harteveld, C. L.; Kok, P. J. M. J.; Geenen,
A.; Batelaan, D.; Amons, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Hb Gouda (alpha72(EF1)his-to-gln),
a new silent alpha-chain variant. Hemoglobin 20: 21-29, 1996.

119. Girodon, E.; M'Rad, A.; Martin, J.; Goossens, M.; Galacteros,
F.; Rosa, J.; Gisselbrecht, C.; Boiron, M.; Cohen, I. J.; Jaber, L.;
Tamari, H.; Goshen, J.; Zaizov, R.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Taybe (alpha
38 or 39 THR deleted): a new unstable alpha chain hemoglobin variant.
(Abstract) Blood 80 (suppl. 1): 388a, 1992.

120. Gonzalez Redondo, J. M.; Wilson, J. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman,
T. H. J.; Sicilia, A.; Romero, C.; Fernandes Fuertes, I.: Hb J-Pontoise
or alpha63(E12)ala-to-asp in four members of a Spanish family. Hemoglobin 11:
47-50, 1987.

121. Goossens, M.; Dozy, A. M.; Embury, S. H.; Zachariadis, Z.; Hadjiminas,
M. G.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Kan, Y. W.: Triplicated alpha-globin
loci in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77: 518-521, 1980.

122. Gottlieb, A. J.; Restrepo, A.; Itano, H. A.: Hb J (Medellin).
Chemical and genetic study. Fed. Proc. 23: 172, 1964.

123. Griffiths, K. D.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.; Mann, J. R.; Plowman,
D.; Raine, D. N.: Haemoglobin Handsworth alpha 18 glycine-to-arginine. FEBS
Lett. 75: 93-95, 1977.

124. Groff, P.; Galacteros, F.; Kalmes, G.; Blouquit, Y.; Wajcman,
H.: HB Luxembourg (alpha24(B5)tyr-to-his): a new unstable variant. Hemoglobin 13:
429-436, 1989.

125. Guis, M.; Mentzer, W. C.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey,
J. E.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Twin Peaks: alpha113(GH1) leu-to-his. Hemoglobin 9:
175-177, 1985.

126. Hamaguchi, K.; Harano, K.; Harano, T.; Sakata, T.: Hb Oita (alpha-45(CE3)his-to-pro):
a new silent hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 22: 347-354, 1998. Note:
Erratum: Hemoglobin 22: 539-540, 1998.

127. Hanada, M.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura, T.; Fejimura, T.; Kawasaki, K.;
Kosaka, K.; Yamaoka, K.; Seita, M.: Studies of abnormal hemoglobins
in western Japan. (Abstract) Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 253-254, 1964.

128. Hanada, M.; Rucknagel, D. L.: The characterization of hemoglobin
Shimonoseki. Blood 24: 624-635, 1964.

129. Hansen, H. A.; Jagenburg, O. R.; Johansson, B. G.: Studies on
an abnormal hemoglobin causing hereditary congenital cyanosis. Acta
Paediat. 49: 503-511, 1960.

130. Harano, K.; Harano, T.; Shibata, S.; Mori, H.; Ueda, S.; Imai,
K.; Ohba, Y.; Irimajiri, K.: Hb J Oxford (alpha15 (A13) gly-to-asp)
in Japan. Hemoglobin 8: 197-198, 1984.

131. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Hong, Y.-F.; Than, A. M.; Suetsugu, Y.;
Ohba, K.: The mutation of Hb Turriff (alpha-99(G6)lys-to-glu (AAG-GAG))
is carried by the alpha-1-globin gene in a Japanese (Hb Turriff-I). Hemoglobin 27:
123-127, 2003.

132. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Imai, K.; Terunuma, S.: Hb Swan River
(alpha6(A4)asp-to-gly) observed in a Japanese man. Hemoglobin 20:
75-78, 1996.

133. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Imai, N.; Ueda, S.; Seki, M.: An electrophoretically
silent hemoglobin variant, Hb Hekinan (alpha27 (B8) glu-to-asp) found
in a Japanese. Hemoglobin 12: 61-65, 1988.

134. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Seki,
M.: Hb Handa (alpha90 (FG2) lys-to-met): structure and biosynthesis
of a new slightly higher oxygen affinity variant. Hemoglobin 6:
379-389, 1982.

135. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Seki,
M.: Hemoglobin Tokoname (alpha139 (HC 1) lys-to-thr): a new hemoglobin
variant with a slightly increased oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 7:
85-90, 1983.

136. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Tsuneshige,
A.; Uchida, E.; Horiuchi, K.: Hb Le Lamentin (alpha20 (B1) his-to-gln)
in Japan: structure, function and biosynthesis. Hemoglobin 7: 181-184,
1983.

137. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Tsuneshige,
A.; Yamada, H.; Seki, M.; Fukui, H.: Hemoglobin Kariya (alpha40 (C5)
lys-to-glu) a new hemoglobin variant with an increased oxygen affinity. FEBS
Lett. 153: 332-334, 1983.

138. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Mori, H.; Imai,
K.: Hb Chesapeake (alpha92 (FG4) arg-to-leu) and Hb J Cape Town (alpha92
(FG4) arg-to-gln) first discovered in Japanese. Hemoglobin 7: 461-465,
1983.

139. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Mori, H.; Seki,
M.: Hemoglobin Aichi (alpha50 (CE8) his-to-arg): a new slightly unstable
hemoglobin variant discovered in Japan. FEBS Lett. 169: 297-299,
1984.

140. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Ueda, S.: Hb Owari (alpha121 (H4) val-to-met):
a new hemoglobin variant with a neutral-to-neutral amino acid substitution
detected by isoelectric focusing. Hemoglobin 10: 127-134, 1986.

141. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Imai, K.; Ohba,
Y.; Shinohara, T.; Horio, S.; Nishioka, K.; Shirotani, H.: Hemoglobin
Kawachi (alpha 44 (CE2) pro-to-arg): a new hemoglobin variant of high
oxygen affinity with amino acid substitution at alpha(1)-beta(2) contact. Hemoglobin 6:
43-49, 1982.

142. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Uehara, S.; Matsushita, K.: Two new
alpha chain variants: Hb Fuchu-I (alpha-72(EF1)his-to-tyr) and Hb
Fuchu-II (alpha-97(G4)asn-to-his). Hemoglobin 19: 389-395, 1995.

143. Hardison, R. C.; Sawada, I.; Cheng, J.-F.; Shen, C.-K. J.; Schmid,
C. W.: A previously undetected pseudogene in the human alpha globin
gene cluster. Nucleic Acids Res. 14: 1903-1911, 1986.

144. Harteveld, C. L.; Rozendaal, L.; Blom, N. A.; Lo-A-Njoe, S.;
Akkerman, N.; Arkestijn, S.; Van Delft, P.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Oegstgeest
(alpha-104(G11)cys-to-ser(alpha-1)): a new hemoglobin variant associated
with a mild alpha-thalassemia phenotype. Hemoglobin 29: 165-169,
2005.

145. Harteveld, C. L.; Van Delft, P.; Akkermans, N.; Arkesteijn, S.;
Van Rooijen-Nijdam, I. H.; Kok, P. J. M. J.; Versteegh, F. G. A.;
Giordano, P. C.: Hb Buffalo [alpha-89(FG1)his-to-gln (alpha-1)],
observed solely and in the presence of an Hb S [beta-6(A3)glu-to-val]
heterozygosity. Hemoglobin 28: 223-227, 2004.

146. Harteveld, C. L.; Van Delft, P.; Plug, R. J.; Erjavec, Z.; Wajcman,
H.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Delfzicht [alpha-9(A7)asn-to-lys (alpha-1)]:
a new, clinically silent hemoglobin variant observed in a Dutch patient. Hemoglobin 26:
181-184, 2002.

147. Harteveld, C. L.; Wijermans, P. W.; de Ree, J. E. L. M.; Ter
Hal, P.; Van Delft, P.; Van Rooijen-Nijdam, I. H.; Rasp, E.; Kok,
P. J. M. J.; Souverijn, J. H. M.; Versteegh, F. G. A.; Giordano, P.
C.: A new Hb Evanston allele (alpha-14(A12)trp-to-arg) found solely,
and in the presence of common alpha-thalassemia deletions, in three
independent Asian cases. Hemoglobin 28: 1-5, 2004.

148. Hatton, C. S. R.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Drysdale, H. C.; Wood, W.
G.; Vickers, M. A.; Sharpe, J.; Ayyub, H.; Pretorius, I. M.; Buckle,
V. J.; Higgs, D. R.: Alpha-thalassemia caused by a large (62 kb)
deletion upstream of the human alpha-globin gene cluster. Blood 76:
221-227, 1990.

149. Hattori, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Suda, T.; Miura, Y.; Yoshinaka, H.; Miyaji,
T.: Hemoglobin Guizhou in Japan. Hemoglobin 9: 187-192, 1985.

150. Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Ogita, S.; Kikkawa, H.: Hemoglobin
M (Osaka), a new variant of hemoglobin M. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9:
87-94, 1964.

151. Headlee, M. G.; Nakatsuji, T.; Lam, H.; Wrightstone, R. N.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Etobicoke, alpha85(F5) ser-to-arg found in a newborn
of French-Indian-English descent. Hemoglobin 7: 285-287, 1983.

152. Heller, P.: Hemoglobin M (Chicago) and M (Kankakee).In: Lehmann,
H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 47-49.

153. Heller, P.; Weinstein, H. G.; Yakulis, V. J.; Rosenthal, I. M.
: Hemoglobin M (Kankakee), a new variant of hemoglobin M. Blood 20:
287-301, 1962.

154. Hess, J. F.; Fox, M.; Schmid, C.; Shen, C.-K. J.: Molecular
evolution of the human adult alpha-globin-like gene region: insertion
and deletion of Alu family repeats and non-Alu DNA sequences. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 5970-5974, 1983.

155. Hidaka, K.; Iuchi, I.; Kobayashi, T.; Katoh, K.; Yaguchi, K.
: Hb Fukutomi (alpha126(H9)asp-to-val): a new hemoglobin variant with
high oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 14: 499-509, 1990.

156. Higgs, D. R.; Goodbourn, S. E. Y.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Clegg, J.
B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Highly variable regions of DNA flank the human
alpha-globin genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 9: 4213-4224, 1981.

157. Higgs, D. R.; Hunt, D. M.; Drysdale, H. C.; Clegg, J. B.; Pressley,
L.; Weatherall, D. J.: The genetic basis of Hb Q-H disease. Brit.
J. Haemat. 46: 387-400, 1980.

158. Higgs, D. R.; Vickers, M. A.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Pretorius, I.-M.;
Jarman, A. P.; Weatherall, D. J.: A review of the molecular genetics
of the alpha-globin gene cluster. Blood 73: 1081-1104, 1989.

159. Higgs, D. R.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Flint, J.; Hill, A. V. S.; Thein,
S. L.; Nicholls, R. D.; Teal, H.; Ayyub, H.; Peto, T. E. A.; Falusi,
A. G.; Jarman, A. P.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Analysis of
the human alpha-globin gene cluster reveals a highly informative genetic
locus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 5165-5169, 1986.

160. Hill, A. V. S.; Bowden, D. K.; Trent, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Oppenheimer,
S. J.; Thein, S. L.; Mickleson, K. N. P.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg,
J. B.: Melanesians and Polynesians share a unique alpha-thalassemia
mutation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 571-580, 1985.

161. Hill, A. V. S.; Thein, S. L.; Mavo, B.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg,
J. B.: Non-deletion haemoglobin H disease in Papua New Guinea. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 767-771, 1987.

162. Hollan, S. R.; Szelenyi, J. G.; Brimhall, B.; Duerst, M.; Jones,
R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Stocklen, Z.: Multiple alpha chain loci for
human haemoglobins: Hb J (Buda) and Hb G (Pest). Nature 235: 47-50,
1972.

163. Hollan, S. R.; Szelenyi, J. G.; Lehmann, H.; Beale, D.: A Boston-type
haemoglobin M in Hungary: haemoglobin M Kiskunhalas. Haematologica 1:
11-18, 1967.

164. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Tremaine, L. M.; Mason, R. G.;
Vida, L. N.; Sarnwick, R.; Shahidi, N. T.: Hemoglobin Nigeria (alpha81
ser-to-cys), a new variant having an inhibitory effect on the gelation
of sickle hemoglobin. (Abstract) Blood 52 (suppl. 1): 113, 1978.

165. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Vida, L. N.; Mompoint, M.; Bowie,
L.; Jones, E.; Weil, S.: Hb Evanston (alpha 14 trp-to-arg): a new
variant with thalassemia-like hematologic expression. (Abstract) Blood 60:
53a, 1982.

166. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Zaizov, R.; Steinherz, M.; Solar,
I.; Kirschmann, C.: Hemoglobin Petah Tikva (alpha 110 ala-to-asp):
a new unstable variant with alpha-thalassemia-like expression. Blood 57:
705-711, 1981.

167. Honig, G. R.; Vida, L. N.; Shamsuddin, M.; Mason, R. G.; Schlumpf,
H. W.; Luke, R. A.: Hemoglobin Milledgeville (alpha44 (CD2) pro-to-leu):
a new variant with increased oxygen affinity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 626:
424-431, 1980.

168. Horst, J.; Assum, G.; Griese, E. U.; Eigel, A.; Hampl, W.; Kohne,
E.: Hemoglobin M Iwate is caused by a C-to-T transition in codon
87 of the human alpha-1-globin gene. Hum. Genet. 75: 53-55, 1987.

169. Houjun, L.; Dexiang, L.; Zhiguo, L.; Ping, L.; Ly, L.; Ji, C.;
Shaozhi, H.: A new fast-moving hemoglobin variant, Hb J-Tashikuergan
alpha19 (AB1) ala-to-glu. Hemoglobin 8: 391-395, 1984.

170. Hoyer, J. D.; McCormick, D. J.; Snow, K.; Lawler, J.; Jadick,
M.; Grageda, R.; Early, J. L.; Ball, C.; Skarda, P.; Kubik, K. S.;
Holmes, M. W.; Fairbanks, V. F.: Three new variants of the alpha-1-globin
gene without clinical or hematologic effects: Hb Hagerstown [alpha-44(CE2)pro-to-ala
(alpha-1)]; Hb Buffalo [alpha-89(FG1)his-to-gln (alpha-1)], a hemoglobin
variant from Somalia and Yemen; Hb Wichita [alpha-95(G2)pro-to-gln
(alpha-1)]; and a second, unrelated, case of Hb Roubaix [alpha-55(E4)val-to-leu
(alpha-1)]. Hemoglobin 26: 291-298, 2002.

171. Hoyer, J. D.; Weinhold, J.; Mailhot, E.; Alter, D.; McCormick,
D. J.; Snow, K.; Kubik, K. S.; Holmes, M. W.; Fairbanks, V. F.: Three
new hemoglobin variants with abnormal oxygen affinity: Hb Saratoga
Springs [alpha-40(C5)lys-to-asn (alpha-1)], Hb Santa Clara [beta-97(FG4)his-to-asn],
and Hb Sparta [beta-103(G5)phe-to-val]. Hemoglobin 27: 235-241,
2003.

172. Huisman, T. H. J.; Adams, H. R.; Wilson, J. B.; Efremov, G. D.;
Reynolds, C. A.; Wrightstone, R. N.: Hemoglobin G Georgia or alpha
95 leu (G-2) beta 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 200: 578-580, 1970.

173. Huisman, T. H. J.; Carver, M. F. H.; Efremov, G. D.: A syllabus
of human hemoglobin variants (1996). Augusta, Ga.: The Sickle Cell
Anemia Foundation , 1996.

174. Huisman, T. H. J.; Miller, A.: Hb Grady and alpha-thalassemia:
a contribution to the problem of the number of Hb (alpha) structural
loci in man. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 28: 363-369, 1976.

175. Huisman, T. H. J.; Sydenstricker, V. P.: Difference in gross
structure of two electrophoretically identical 'minor' hemoglobin
components. Nature 193: 489-491, 1962.

176. Huisman, T. H. J.; Wilson, J. B.; Gravely, M.; Hubbard, M.:
Hemoglobin Grady: the first example of a variant with elongated chains
due to an insertion of residues. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 71: 3270-3273,
1974.

177. Huntsman, R. G.; Hall, M.; Lehmann, H.; Sukumaran, P. K.: A
second and a third abnormal haemoglobin in Norfolk. Hb G-Norfolk and
Hb D-Norfolk. Brit. Med. J. 1: 720-722, 1963.

178. Hyde, R. D.; Kinderlerer, J. L.; Lehmann, H.; Hall, M.: Hb J
Rajappen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 243: 515-519, 1971.

179. Imai, K.; Tsuneshige, A.; Harano, T.; Harano, K.: Structure-function
relationships in hemoglobin Kariya, lys40(C5)alpha-to-glu, with high
oxygen affinity: functional role of the salt bridge between lys40alpha
and the beta-chain COOH terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 11174-11180,
1989.

180. Imamura, T.: Hemoglobin Kagoshima: an example of hemoglobin
Norfolk in a Japanese family. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 584-593, 1966.

181. Itano, H. A.; Robinson, E. A.: Genetic control of the alpha-
and beta-chains of hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 46: 1492-1501,
1960.

182. Itano, H. A.; Robinson, E. A.: Formation of normal and double
abnormal haemoglobins by recombination of haemoglobin I with S and
C. Nature 183: 1799-1800, 1959.

183. Iuchi, I.; Hidaka, K.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Kusumoto, T.:
Hemoglobin G Taichung (alpha 74 asp-to-his) heterozygotes found in
two Japanese families. Hemoglobin 2: 79-84, 1978.

184. Iuchi, I.; Shimasaki, S.; Hidaka, K.; Harano, T.; Ueda, S.; Shibata,
S.; Mizushima, J.; Kubo, N.: Hemoglobin Mizushi (alpha75 EF4 asp-to-gly):
a new hemoglobin variant observed in a Japanese family. Hemoglobin 4:
209-214, 1980.

185. Jarman, A. P.; Higgs, D. R.: A new hypervariable marker for
the human alpha-globin gene cluster. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43: 249-256,
1988.

186. Jen, P. C.; Liu, Y.: Hemoglobin Guangzhou, alpha64 (E3) asp-to-gly,
a new abnormal hemoglobin found in Guangzhou, China. Hemoglobin 11:
25-30, 1987.

187. Jones, R. T.; Brimhall, B.; Lisker, R.: Chemical characterization
of hemoglobin Mexico and hemoglobin Chiapas. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 154:
488-495, 1968.

188. Jones, R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Lisker, R.: The chemical structure
of hemoglobin Mexico determined by automatic peptide chromatography
and subunit hybridization. Clin. Res. 11: 105, 1963.

189. Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Patchen, L. C.; Moo-Penn, W. F.:
Hemoglobin Dunn: alpha6 aspartic acid-to-asparagine. Hemoglobin 3:
137-143, 1979.

190. Juricic, D.; Efremov, G. D.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Hb Savaria or alpha49(CE7)ser-to-arg in a Yugoslavian family. Hemoglobin 9:
631-633, 1985.

191. Kamuzora, H.; Lehmann, H.: A new hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin
J (Birmingham): alpha 120 (H3) ala-to-glu. Ann. Clin. Biochem. 11:
53-55, 1974.

192. Kan, Y. W.; Dozy, A. M.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Hadjiminas,
M. G.; Zachariadis, Z.; Furbetta, M.; Cao, A.: Molecular basis of
hemoglobin-H disease in the Mediterranean population. Blood 54:
1434-1438, 1979.

193. Kan, Y. W.; Golbus, M. S.; Dozy, A. M.: Prenatal diagnosis of
alpha-thalassemia: clinical application of molecular hybridization. New
Eng. J. Med. 295: 1165-1167, 1976.

194. Kazanetz, E. G.; Leonova, J. Y.; Wilson, J. B.; McMillan, S.
K.; Walbrecht, M.; de Pablos Gallego, J. M.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Anamosa or alpha(2)-111(G18)ala--val-beta2 (alpha2 mutation) and Hb
Mulhacen or alpha(2)-123(H6)ala--ser-beta2 (alpha1 mutation) are two
silent, stable variants detected by sequencing of amplified DNA. Hemoglobin 19:
1-6, 1995.

195. Kendall, A. G.; Barr, R. D.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
J (Nyanza) alpha 21 (B2) ala-to-asp. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 310:
357-359, 1973.

196. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Devi, T. S.; Fodde, R.; Bernini, L.
F.: Homology of a 130-kb region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster,
the alpha-locus controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human
and mouse. Mammalian Genome 4: 314-323, 1993.

197. Kilinc, Y.; Kumi, M.; Gurgey, A.; Altay, C.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin O-Padova or alpha30(B11)glu-to-lys
observed in members of a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 9: 621-625,
1985.

198. Kister, J.; Kiger, L.; Francina, A.; Hanny, P.; Szymanowicz,
A.; Blouquit, Y.; Prome, D.; Galacteros, F.; Delaunay, J.; Wajcman,
H.: Hemoglobin Roanne (alpha94(G1)asp-to-glu): a variant of the alpha-1
beta-2 interface with an unexpected high oxygen affinity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1246: 34-38, 1995.

199. Kleihauer, E. F.; Reynolds, C. A.; Dozy, A. M.; Wilson, J. B.;
Moores, R. R.; Berenson, M. P.; Wright, C. S.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hemoglobin Bibba or alpha(2)136 pro beta(2), an unstable alpha chain
abnormal hemoglobin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 154: 220-221, 1968.

200. Knuth, A.; Pribilla, W.; Marti, H. R.; Winterhalter, K. H.:
Hemoglobin Moabit: alpha 86 (F7) leu-to-arg: a new unstable abnormal
hemoglobin. Acta Haemat. 61: 121-124, 1979.

201. Koeffler, H. P.; Sparkes, R. S.; Stang, H.; Mohandas, T.: Regional
assignment of genes for human alpha-globin and phosphoglycollate phosphatase
to the short arm of chromosome 16. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 7015-7018,
1981.

202. Kohne, E.; Krause, M.; Leupold, D.; Kleihauer, E.: Hemoglobin
F Koelliker (alpha-2-minus 141 (HC3) arg-to-gamma-2): a modification
of fetal hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 1: 257-266, 1977.

203. Kraus, A. P.; Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Kraus, L. M.: Hemoglobin
Memphis, a new variant of sickle cell anemia. Trans. Assoc. Am. Phys. 80:
297-304, 1967.

204. Kraus, A. P.; Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Kraus, L. M.: Hemoglobin
Memphis: a new variety of sickle cell anemia with symptoms due to
an alpha-chain variant hemoglobin (alpha23 glu). J. Lab. Clin. Med. 66:
886-887, 1965.

205. Labie, D.; Rosa, J.: Sur une nouvelle hemoglobine anormale:
l'hemoglobine J (alpha-54 glutamine a glutamique). Nouv. Rev. Franc.
Hemat. 6: 426-430, 1966.

206. Labossiere, A.; Vella, F.: Hemoglobin I in a white family in
Saskatoon. Clin. Biochem. 4: 104-113, 1971.

207. Lacan, P.; Aubry, M.; Couprie, N.; Francina, A.: Two new alpha
chain variants: Hb Die (alpha-93(FG5)val-to-ala (alpha-1)) and Hb
Beziers [alpha-99(G6)lys-to-asn (alpha-1)]. Hemoglobin 28: 59-63,
2004.

208. Lacan, P.; Francina, A.; Souillet, G.; Aubry, M.; Couprie, N.;
Dementhon, L.; Becchi, M.: Two new alpha chain variants: Hb Boghe
(alpha-58(E7)his-to-gln, alpha-2), a variant on the distal histidine,
and Hb Charolles (alpha-103(G10)his-to-tyr, alpha-1). Hemoglobin 23:
345-352, 1999.

209. Lacombe, C.; Soria, J.; Arous, N.; Blouquit, Y.; Bardakdjian,
J.; Riou, J.; Galacteros, F.: A new case of Hb Dagestan (alpha60(E9)
lys-to-glu). Hemoglobin 11: 39-41, 1987.

210. Lambridis, A. J.; Ramsay, M.; Jenkins, T.: The haematological
puzzle of Hb J Cape Town is partly solved. Brit. J. Haemat. 63:
363-367, 1986.

211. Langdown, J. V.; Davidson, R. J. L.; Williamson, D.: A new alpha
chain variant, Hb Turriff (alpha-99(G6)lys-to-glu): the interference
of abnormal hemoglobins in Hb A(1c) determination. Hemoglobin 16:
11-17, 1992.

212. Leder, A.; Miller, H. I.; Hamer, D. H.; Seidman, J. G.; Norman,
B.; Sullivan, M.; Leder, P.: Comparison of cloned mouse alpha- and
beta-globin genes: conservation of intervening sequence locations
and extragenic homology. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 6187-6191, 1978.

213. Leder, A.; Swan, D.; Ruddle, F.; D'Eustachio, P. D.; Leder, P.
: Dispersion of alpha-like globin genes of the mouse to three different
chromosomes. Nature 293: 196-200, 1981.

214. Leder, A.; Wiener, E.; Lee, M. J.; Wickramasinghe, S. N.; Leder,
P.: A normal beta-globin allele as a modifier gene ameliorating the
severity of alpha-thalassemia in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
6291-6295, 1999.

215. Lee-Potter, J. P.; Deacon-Smith, R. A.; Lehmann, H.; Robb, L.
: Haemoglobin Ferndown (alpha6 aspartic acid-to-valine). FEBS Lett. 126:
117-119, 1981.

216. Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobins and haemoglobinopathies.In: Lehmann,
H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 1-14.

217. Lehmann, H.; Carrell, R. W.: Nomenclature of the alpha-thalassaemias. Lancet 323:
552-553, 1984. Note: Originally Volume I.

218. Lehmann, H.; Carrell, R. W.: Variations in the structure of
human haemoglobins: with particular reference to the unstable haemoglobins. Brit.
Med. Bull. 25: 14-23, 1969.

219. Li, H.; Zhao, X.; Qin, F.; Li, H.; Li, L.; He, X.; Chang, X.;
Li, Z.; Liang, K.; Xing, F.; Chang, W.; Wong, R.; Yang, I.; Li, F.;
Zhang, T.; Tian, R.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H.
J.: Abnormal hemoglobins in the Silk Road region of China. Hum.
Genet. 86: 231-235, 1990.

220. Li, H. J.; Liu, D. X.; Li, L.; Cha, S. C.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber,
B. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Guangzhou-Hangzhou or alpha64(E13)asp-to-gly
observed in members of a Chinese family living in Xinjiang. Hemoglobin 14:
441-444, 1990.

221. Liang, C.; Tao, H.; Lo, H.; Huang, S.; Li, R.; Wang, B.: Hemoglobin
Shuangfeng (alpha27 (B8) glu-to-lys): a new unstable hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 5:
691-700, 1981.

222. Liang, C.-C.; Chen, S.; Yang, K.; Jia, P.; Ma, Y.; Li, T.; Ni,
X.; Wang, X.; Deng, Q.; Yao, S.: Hemoglobin Beijing (alpha16 (A14)
lys-to-asn): a new fast-moving hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 6:
629-633, 1982.

223. Liang, C.-C.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Wang, L.-F.; Luo, H.-Y.;
Liu, G.-Y.; Liang, S.; Lung, G.-F.; Yu, C.-M.; Zuang, L.-Z.; Liant,
B.-L.; Tang, Z.-N.: Hemoglobin Duan (alpha75(EF4) asp-to-ala), a
new variant found in China. Hemoglobin 5: 481-486, 1981.

224. Liang, S.; Tang, Z.; Su, C.; Lung, Q.; Liang, R.; Fei, Y. J.;
Kutlar, F.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Hu, H.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Hb Duan (alpha-75(EF4)asp-to-ala), Hb Westmead (alpha-122(H5)his-to-gln),
and alpha-thalassemia-2 (-4.2 kb deletion) in a Chinese family. Hemoglobin 12:
13-21, 1988.

225. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Lopes, M.; Todd, D.
: The alpha-globin gene adjacent to the gene for Hb Q (alpha 74 asp-to-his)
is deleted, but not that adjacent to the gene for Hb G (alpha 30 glu-to-gln);
three-fourths of the alpha-globin genes are deleted in Hb Q-alpha-thalassemia. Blood 54:
1407-1416, 1979.

226. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Pillay, R. P.; Thuraisingham, V.: Further cases
of haemoglobin Q-H disease (Hb Q-alpha thalassemia). Blood 28: 830-839,
1966.

227. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Sadono, (NI): Haemoglobin O (Buginese X) in
Sulawesi. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1461-1462, 1958.

228. Liebhaber, S. A.; Cash, F. E.: Locus assignment of alpha-globin
structural mutations by hybrid-selected translation. J. Clin. Invest. 75:
64-70, 1985.

229. Liebhaber, S. A.; Cash, F. E.; Ballas, S. K.: Human alpha-globin
gene expression: the dominant role of the alpha(2)-locus in mRNA and
protein synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 15327-15333, 1986.

230. Liebhaber, S. A.; Goossens, M.; Kan, Y. W.: Homology and concerted
evolution at the alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci of human alpha-globin. Nature 290:
26-29, 1981.

231. Liebhaber, S. A.; Goossens, M. J.; Kan, Y. W.: Cloning and complete
nucleotide sequence of human 5(prime)-alpha-globin gene. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 77: 7054-7058, 1980.

232. Liebhaber, S. A.; Griese, E.-U.; Weiss, I.; Cash, F. E.; Ayyub,
H.; Higgs, D. R.; Horst, J.: Inactivation of human alpha-globin gene
expression by a de novo deletion located upstream of the alpha-globin
gene cluster. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9431-9435, 1990.

233. Liebhaber, S. A.; Rappaport, E. F.; Cash, F. E.; Ballas, S. K.;
Schwartz, E.; Surrey, S.: Hemoglobin I mutation encoded at both alpha-globin
loci on the same chromosome: concerted evolution in the human genome. Science 226:
1449-1451, 1984.

234. Liu, G.-Y.; Zhang, G.-X.; Nie, S.-Y.; Luo, H.-Y.; Teng, Y.-Q.;
Liu, S.-P.; Song, M.; Son, L.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Liang, C.-C.
: A case of hemoglobin Iwate (alpha87(F8)his-to-arg) in China. Hemoglobin 7:
279-282, 1983.

235. Lorkin, P. A.; Charlesworth, D.; Lehmann, H.; Rahbar, S.; Tuchinda,
S.; Lie-Injo, L. E.: Two haemoglobins Q, alpha 74 (EF3) and alpha
75 (EF4) aspartic acid to histidine. Brit. J. Haemat. 19: 117-125,
1970.

236. Lorkin, P. A.; Huntsman, R. G.; Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.;
Vella, F.; Dakbre, P. D.: Hemoglobin G (Norfolk): alpha 85 (F6) asp-to-asn. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 379: 22-27, 1975.

237. Lu, Y.-Q.; Liu, J.-F.; Huang, C.-H.; Huang, P.-Y.; Hu, H.-L.;
Peng, X.-H.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Yang, K.-G.; Liang, C.-C.; Zuo,
C.-R.: Hemoglobin Lille (alpha74 (EF3) asp-to-ala): the first instance
in China. Hemoglobin 8: 523-527, 1984.

238. Maggio, A.; Massa, A.; Giampaolo, A.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.
: Occurrence of Hb M Iwate (alpha 87 his-to-tyr) in an Italian carrier. Hemoglobin 5:
205-208, 1981.

239. Malcorra-Azpiazu, J. J.; Balda-Aguirre, M. I.; Diaz-Chico, J.
C.; Kutlar, F.; Kutlar, A.; Wilson, J. B.; Hu, H.; Huisman, T. H.
J.: Hb Le Lamentin or alpha20 (B1) his-to-gln found in a Spanish
family. Hemoglobin 12: 201-205, 1988.

240. Mamalaki, A.; Horanyi, M.; Szelenyi, J.; Moschonas, N. K.: Locus
assignment of human alpha-globin structural mutants by selective enzymatic
amplification of alpha-1 and alpha-2-globin cDNAs. Hum. Genet. 85:
509-512, 1990.

241. Marengo-Rowe, A. J.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: New human hemoglobin
variant from southern Arabia: G-Audhali (alpha-23(b4) glutamic acid-valine)
and the variability of B4 in human haemoglobin. Nature 219: 1164-1166,
1968.

242. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Massa, A.; Gabbianelli, M.; Fontanarosa,
P. P.; Camagna, A.; Ignesti, C.; Tentori, L.: A new abnormal human
hemoglobin: Hb Prato (alpha31 arg-to-ser). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 578:
534-540, 1979.

243. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.; Bestetti, A.: Occurrence
of Hb J Paris in an Italian family and recombination studies on the
free abnormal alpha-chain. Hemoglobin 3: 465-469, 1979.

244. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.; D'Erasmo, F.; Colapietro,
A.; De Stasio, G.; Di Fonzo, S.: A new human hemoglobin variant:
Hb Bari (alpha 45(CD3) his-to-gln). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 622:
315-319, 1980.

245. Marti, H. R.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Koelliker:
a new acquired haemoglobin appearing after severe haemolysis: alpha-2
(minus 141 arg) beta-2. Acta Haemat. 37: 174-180, 1967.

246. Martin, G.; Villegas, A.; Calero, F.; del Palacio, S.; Lopez,
J. C.; Lopez, M.; Espinos, D.: Hb O Padova in a Spanish family. Acta
Haemat. 84: 1-4, 1990.

247. Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Residenti, C.; Colombo, B.: Hb J Camaguey
alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-gly: a new abnormal human hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 2:
47-52, 1978.

248. Masala, B.: Hemoglobinopathies in Sardinia. Hemoglobin 16:
331-351, 1992.

249. Masala, B.; Manca, L.; Stangoni, A.; Cuccuru, G. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Sassari or
alpha126 (H9) asp-to-his observed in a family from northern Sardinia. Hemoglobin 11:
373-378, 1987.

250. Mavilio, F.; Marinucci, M.; Tentori, L.; Fontanarosa, P. P.;
Rossi, U.; Biagiotti, S.: Hemoglobin Legnano (alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-leu):
a new abnormal human hemoglobin with high oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 2:
249-259, 1978.

251. Mayne, E. E.; Elder, G. E.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Ferguson, L. A.
K.: Hb M Iwate (alpha87 his-to-tyr): de novo mutation in an Irish
family. Hemoglobin 10: 205-208, 1986.

252. McDonald, M. J.; Michalski, L. A.; Turci, S. M.; Guillette, R.
A.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Structural, functional,
and subunit assembly properties of Hb Attleboro [alpha138(H21)ser-to-pro],
a variant possessing a site mutation at a critical C-terminal residue. Biochemistry 29:
173-178, 1990.

253. Meloni, T.; Pilo, G.; Camardella, L.; Cancedda, F.; Lania, A.;
Pepe, G.; Luzzatto, L.: Coexistence of three hemoglobins with different
alpha-chains in two unrelated children (with family studies indicating
polymorphism in the number of alpha-globin genes in the Sardinian
population). Blood 55: 1025-1032, 1980.

254. Meyering, C. A.; Israels, A. L.; Sebens, T.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Studies on the heterogeneity of hemoglobin. II. The heterogeneity
of different human hemoglobin types in carboxymethyl cellulose and
in amberlite irc-50 chromatography: quantitative aspects. Clin. Chim.
Acta 5: 208-222, 1960.

255. Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Yamamoto, K.; Ohba, Y.; Shibata, S.:
Amino acid substitution of hemoglobin Ube 2 (alpha 68 asp): an example
of successful application of partial hydrolysis of peptide with 5
percent acetic acid. Clin. Chim. Acta 16: 347-352, 1967.

256. Miyaji, T.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Tamura, A.; Sasaki, H.: Further
studies on the fingerprint of Hb M (Iwate). Acta Haemat. Jpn. 25:
169-175, 1962.

257. Miyashita, H.; Hashimoto, K.; Mohri, H.; Ohokubo, T.; Harano,
T.; Harano, K.; Imai, K.: Hb Kanagawa (alpha-40(C5)lys-to-met): a
new alpha chain variant with an increased oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 16:
1-10, 1992.

258. Moi, P.; Cash, F. E.; Liebhaber, S. A.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.
: An initiation codon mutation (AUG-to-GUG) of the human alpha-1-globin
gene: structural characterization and evidence for a mild thalassemic
phenotype. J. Clin. Invest. 80: 1416-1421, 1987.

259. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Baine, R. M.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey,
J. E.; Benson, J. M.: Hemoglobin Evanston: alpha14(A12) trp-to-arg--a
variant hemoglobin associated with alpha-thalassemia-2. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 747: 65-70, 1983.

260. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Bechtel, K. C.; Johnson, M. H.; Jue, D. L.;
Holland, S.; Huff, C.; Schmidt, R. M.: Hemoglobin (Jackson) alpha
127 (H10) lys-to-asn. Am. J. Clin. Path. 66: 453-456, 1976.

261. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Baine, R. M.: Hemoglobin J Rovigo
(alpha 53 ala-to-asp) in association with beta thalassemia. Hemoglobin 2:
443-445, 1978.

262. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey, J. E.;
Simpkins, H.; Katz, J.: Hemoglobin Queens: alpha34(B15) leu-to-arg
structural and functional properties and its association with Hb E. Am.
J. Hemat. 13: 323-327, 1982.

263. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Therrell, B. L.
: Hemoglobin Swan River (alpha6(A4)asp-to-gly). Hemoglobin 11: 61-62,
1987.

264. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Swan, D. C.; Hine, T. K.; Baine, R. M.; Jue,
D. L.; Benson, J. M.; Johnson, M. H.; Virshup, D. M.; Zinkham, W.
H.: Hb Catonsville (glutamic acid inserted between pro-37 (C2) alpha
and thr-38 (C3) alpha). J. Biol. Chem. 264: 21454-21457, 1989.

265. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Therrell, B. L., Jr.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M.
H.: Hemoglobin Cubujuqui (alpha141 arg-to-ser): functional consequences
of the alteration of the C-terminus of the alpha chain of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 5:
715-724, 1981.

266. Murayama, M.: Chemical difference between normal human haemoglobin
and haemoglobin-I. Nature 196: 276-277, 1962.

267. Musumeci, S.; Schiliro, G.; Pizzarelli, G.; Fischer, A.; Russo,
G.: Thalassemia of intermediate severity resulting from the interaction
between alpha- and beta-thalassemia. J. Med. Genet. 15: 448-451,
1978.

268. Nakashima, H.; Fujiyama, A.; Kagiyama, S.; Imamura, T.: Genetic
polymorphisms of gene conversion within the duplicated human alpha-globin
loci. Hum. Genet. 84: 568-570, 1990.

269. Nakatsuji, T.; Abraham, B. L.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Winnipeg or alpha75 (EF4) asp-to-tyr in a large Caucasian
family living in Georgia, USA. Hemoglobin 7: 105-110, 1983.

270. Nakatsuji, T.; Miwa, S.; Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsumoto, N.;
Matsuoka, I.: Hemoglobin Tottori (alpha59 (E8) glycine-to-valine):
a new unstable hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 5: 427-439, 1981.

271. Nakatsuji, T.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Cordele
alpha47 (CE5) asp-to-ala, a mildly unstable variant observed in black
twins. Hemoglobin 8: 37-46, 1984.

272. Ngiwsara, L.; Srisomsap, C.; Winichagoon, P.; Fucharoen, S.;
Svasti, J.: Two cases of compound heterozygosity for Hb Hekinan [alpha27(B8)glu-to-asp
(alpha-1)] and alpha-thalassemia in Thailand. Hemoglobin 28: 145-150,
2004.

273. Niazi, G. A.; Efremov, G. D.; Nikolov, N.; Hunter, E., Jr.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Strumica or alpha 112(G19) his-to-arg. (with
an addendum: hemoglobin J-Paris-I, alpha 12(A10) ala-to-asp, in the
same population). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 412: 181-186, 1975.

274. North, M. L.; Hassan, W.; Thillet, J.; Schwartz, M.; Taubert,
C.; Ritter, J.; Gandar, R.; Rosa, J.: Etude clinique et biologique
d'un cas d'hemoglobine hybride S-Stanleyville II (alpha 78 asn-to-lys,
beta 6 glu-to-val). Nouv. Rev. Franc. Hemat. 22: 235-241, 1980.

275. Nozari, G.; Rahbar, S.; Darbre, P.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
Setif (alpha 94 (G1) asp-to-tyr) in Iran--a report of 9 cases. Hemoglobin 1:
289-291, 1977.

276. O'Brien, C.; Gray, M. J.; Jacobs, A. S.: A survey of cord bloods
for abnormal hemoglobin, with further observations on hemoglobin I
(Burlington). Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 88: 816-822, 1964.

277. Ohba, Y.; Fujisawa, K.; Imai, K.; Leowattana, W.; Tani, Y.; Ami,
M.; Miyaji, T.: A new alpha chain variant Hb Tonosho [alpha110(G17)ala-to-thr]:
subunit dissociation during cation exchange chromatography for Hb
A1c assay. Hemoglobin 14: 413-422, 1990.

278. Ohba, Y.; Hattori, Y.; Matsuoka, M.; Miyaji, T.; Fuyuno, K.:
Hb Kokura (alpha 47 (CE5) asp-to-gly): a slightly unstable variant. Hemoglobin 6:
69-74, 1982.

279. Ohba, Y.; Imai, K.; Uenaka, R.; Ami, M.; Fujisawa, K.; Itoh,
K.; Hirakawa, K.; Miyaji, T.: Hb Miyano or alpha41(C6)thr-to-ser:
a new high oxygen affinity alpha chain variant found in an erythremic
blood donor. Hemoglobin 13: 637-647, 1989.

280. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Morito, M.; Iuchi, I.: Characterization
of Hb Ube-4: alpha 116 (GH4) glu-to-ala. Hemoglobin 2: 181-186,
1978.

281. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Takeda, I.; Fukuba, Y.; Shibata,
S.; Ohkura, K.: Hemoglobin Matsue-Oki: alpha 75 (EF4) aspartic acid-to-asparagine. Hemoglobin 1:
383-388, 1977.

282. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Yokoyama, M.: Further studies
on hemoglobin Hirosaki: demonstration of its presence at low concentration. Hemoglobin 2:
281-286, 1978.

283. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Yokoyama, M.; Numakura, H.;
Nagata, K.; Takebe, Y.; Izumi, Y.; Shibata, S.: Hemoglobin Hirosaki
(alpha 43(CE1) phe-to-leu), a new unstable variant. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 405: 155-160, 1975.

284. Ohba, Y.; Yamamoto, K.; Kawata, R.; Miyaji, T.: Hyperunstable
hemoglobin Toyama, alpha136 (H19) leu to arg detection and identification
by in vitro biosynthesis with radioactive amino acids. Hemoglobin 11:
539-556, 1987.

285. Ohba, Y.; Yoshinaka, H.; Hattori, Y.; Matsuoka, M.; Miyaji, T.
: Hemoglobin J Habana found in a cord blood of a Japanese. Hemoglobin 7:
327-329, 1983.

286. Ojwang, P. J.; Ogada, T.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Savaria or alpha(2)49(CE7) ser-to-arg in an indigenous
female from Kenya. Hemoglobin 9: 197-200, 1985.

287. Ooya, I.; Kawamura, K.; Seita, M.; Hanada, M.; Hitsumoto, A.
: Hemoglobin Kokura which was discovered in Kokura. (Abstract) 23rd
Gen. Meeting Japan. Soc. Hemat., Kyoto , 1961.

288. Orkin, S. H.: The duplicated human alpha globin lie close together
in cellular DNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 5950-5954, 1978.

289. Orringer, E. P.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin
Chapel Hill or alpha 74 asp-to-gly. FEBS Lett. 65: 297-300, 1976.

290. Ostertag, W.; Von Ehrenstein, G.; Charache, S.: Duplicated alpha-chain
genes in Hopkins-2 haemoglobin of man and evidence for unequal crossing
over between them. Nature N.B. 237: 90-94, 1972.

291. Overly, W. L.; Rosenberg, A.; Harris, J. W.: Hemoglobin M (Reserve):
studies on identification and characterization. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 69:
62-87, 1967.

292. Paglietti, E.; Barella, S.; Satta, S.; Perra, C.; Cao, A.; Galanello,
R.: Hb Sassari [alpha-126(H9)asp-to-his] results from a GAC-to-CAC
mutation in the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 22: 65-67, 1998.

293. Phillips, J. A., III; Scott, A. F.; Smith, K. D.; Young, K. E.;
Lightbody, K. L.; Jiji, R. M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: A molecular
basis for hemoglobin-H diseases in American blacks. Blood 54: 1439-1445,
1979.

294. Phillips, J. A., III; Vik, T. A.; Scott, A. F.; Young, K. E.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Smith, K. D.; Fairbanks, V. F.; Koenig, H. M.
: Unequal crossing-over: a common basis of single alpha-globin genes
in Asians and American blacks with hemoglobin-H disease. Blood 55:
1066-1069, 1980.

295. Pik, C.; Tonz, O.: Nature of haemoglobin M (Oldenburg). Nature 210:
1182, 1966.

296. Pobedimskaya, D. D.; Molchanova, T. P.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Ramona or alpha(2)24(B5)tyr-to-cys. Hemoglobin 18: 365-366, 1994.

297. Pootrakul, S.; Boonyarat, D.; Kematorn, B.; Suanpan, S.; Wasi,
P.: Hemoglobin Thailand (alpha 56 (E5) lys-to-thr): a new abnormal
human hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 1: 781-798, 1977.

298. Pootrakul, S.; Dixon, G. H.: Hemoglobin Mahidol: a new hemoglobin
alpha-chain mutant. Canad. J. Biochem. 48: 1066-1078, 1970.

299. Pootrakul, S.; Kematorn, B.; Na-Nakorn, S.; Suanpan, S.: A new
haemoglobin variant. Haemoglobin Anantharaj (alpha 11 (A9) lysine-to-glutamic
acid). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 405: 161-166, 1975.

300. Pootrakul, S.; Srichiyanont, S.; Wasi, P.; Suanpan, S.: Hemoglobin
Siam (alpha 15 arg): a new alpha-chain variant. Humangenetik 25:
199-204, 1974.

301. Popp, R. A.; Lalley, P. A.; Whitney, J. B., III; Anderson, W.
F.: Mouse alpha-like globin genes and alpha-globin-like pseudogenes
are not syntenic. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 6362-6366, 1981.

302. Poyart, C.; Krishnamoorthy, R.; Bursaux, E.; Gacon, G.; Labie,
D.: Structural and functional studies of haemoglobin Suresnes or
alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-his, a new high oxygen affinity mutant. FEBS
Lett. 69: 103-107, 1976.

303. Prato, V.; Gallo, E.; Ricco, G.; Mazza, U.; Bianco, G.; Lehmann,
H.: Haemolytic anaemia due to haemoglobin Torino. Brit. J. Haemat. 19:
105-115, 1970.

304. Prehu, C.; Bost, M.; Barro, C.; Prome, D.; Riou, J.; Godart,
C.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Roubaix (alpha-55(E4)val-to-leu):
a new neutral hemoglobin variant involving the alpha-1 gene. Hemoglobin 23:
361-365, 1999.

305. Prehu, C.; Hanichi, A.; Yapo, A. P.; Claparols, C.; Prome, D.;
Riou, J.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Douala [alpha-3(A1)ser-phe]: a new alpha-1
gene mutation in a Cameroonian woman heterozygous for Hb S and a 3.7
kb deletional alpha-thalassemia. Hemoglobin 25: 323-329, 2001.

306. Priest, J. R.; Watterson, J.; Jones, R. T.; Faassen, A. E.; Hedlund,
B. E.: Mutant fetal hemoglobin causing cyanosis in a newborn. Pediat. 83:
734-736, 1989.

307. Proudfoot, N. J.; Maniatis, T.: The structure of a human alpha-globin
pseudogene and its relationship to alpha-globin gene duplication. Cell 21:
537-544, 1980.

308. Pulsinelli, P. D.; Perutz, M. F.; Nagel, R. L.: Structure of
hemoglobin M (Boston), a variant with a five-coordinated ferric heme. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 70: 3870-3874, 1973.

309. Qualtieri, A.; De Marco, E. V.; Crescibene, L.; Andreoli, V.;
Bagala, A.; Scornaienchi, M.; Brancati, C.; Greco, C. M.: Hb J-Wenchang-Wuming
or alpha-11(A9)lys-to-gln in an Italian woman. Hemoglobin 19: 277-280,
1995.

310. Quattrin, N.; Ventruto, V.: Hemoglobin Mexico in a Sardinian
woman. Helv. Med. Acta 33: 388-394, 1967.

311. Rahbar, S.; Ala, F.; Akhavan, E.; Nowzari, G.; Shoa'i, I.; Zamanianpoor,
M. H.: Two new hemoglobins: hemoglobin Perspolis (alpha 64 (E13)
asp-to-tyr) and hemoglobin J Kurosh (alpha 19 (AB) ala-to-asp). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 427: 119-125, 1976.

312. Rahbar, S.; Kinderlerer, J. L.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin L Persian
Gulf: alpha 57 (E6) glycine leads to arginine. Acta Haemat. 42:
169-175, 1969.

313. Rahbar, S.; Mahdavi, N.; Nowzari, G.; Mostafavi, I.: Hemoglobin
Arya: alpha 47, aspartic acid to asparagine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 386:
525-529, 1975.

314. Rahbar, S.; Nowzari, G.; Daneshmand, P.: Hemoglobin Daneshgah-Tehran
alpha 72 (EF1) histidine-to-arginine. Nature N.B. 245: 268-269,
1973.

315. Ranney, H. M.; O'Brien, C.; Jacobs, A. S.: An abnormal human
foetal haemoglobin with an abnormal alpha-polypeptide chain. Nature 194:
743-745, 1962.

316. Raper, A. B.: Unusual haemoglobin variant in a Gujerati Indian. Brit.
Med. J. 1: 1285-1286, 1957.

317. Reeders, S. T.: Personal Communication. Oxford, England  9/26/1986.

318. Reynolds, C. A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Russ or alpha-2
(51 arg) beta-2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 130: 541-543, 1966.

319. Rhoda, M.-D.; Martin, J.; Blouquit, Y.; Garel, M.-C.; Edelstein,
S. J.; Rosa, J.: Sickle cell hemoglobin fiber formation strongly
inhibited by the Stanleyville II mutation (alpha78 asn-to-lys). Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 111: 8-13, 1983.

320. Romao, L.; Cash, F.; Weiss, I.; Liebhaber, S.; Pirastu, M.; Galanello,
R.; Loi, A.; Paglietti, E.; Ioannou, P.; Cao, A.: Human alpha-globin
gene expression is silenced by terminal truncation of chromosome 16p
beginning immediately 3-prime of the zeta-globin gene. Hum. Genet. 89:
323-328, 1992.

321. Romero, M. J.; Garrido, M. L.; Abril, E.; Garrido, F.; de Pablos,
J. Ma.: Detection of Hb J-Camaguey (alpha-141(HC3)arg-to-gly) in
three Spanish families. Hemoglobin 19: 287-289, 1995.

322. Rosa, J.; Maleknia, N.; Vergos, D.; Dunet, R.: Une nouvelle
hemoglobine anormale: l'hemoglobine J(alpha-Paris) 12 ala-a-asp. Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 6: 423-426, 1966.

323. Rubin, E. M.; Kan, Y. W.: A simple sensitive prenatal test for
hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassaemia. Lancet 325: 75-77,
1985. Note: Originally Volume I.

324. Rucknagel, D. L.; Page, E. B.; Jensen, W. N.: Hemoglobin I:
an inherited hemoglobin anomaly. Blood 10: 999-1009, 1955.

325. Saenz, G. F.; Alvarado, M.; Arroyo, G.; Alfaro, E.; Montero,
G.; Jimenez, J.; Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Colombo, B.: Hemoglobin
Suresnes in a Costa-Rican woman of Spanish-Indian ancestry. Hemoglobin 2:
383-387, 1978.

326. Saenz, G. F.; Elizondo, J.; Alvarado, M. A.; Atmetlla, F.; Arroyo,
G.; Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Colombo, B.: Chemical characterization
of a new haemoglobin variant Haemoglobin J (Cubujuqui) (alpha 141
(HC3) arg-to-ser). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 494: 48-50, 1977.

327. Sanna, M. T.; Giardina, B.; Scatena, R.; Pellegrini, M.; Olianas,
A.; Manca, L.; Masala, B.; Castagnola, M.; Corda, M.: Functional
alterations in adult and fetal hemoglobin Sassari asp-alpha-126(H9)-to-his:
the role of alpha-1-alpha-2 contact. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 18338-18342,
1994.

328. Sansone, G.; Centa, A.; Sciarratta, V.; Gallo, E.; Lehmann, H.
: Haemoglobin O Indonesia (alpha116 glu-to-lys) in an Italian family. Acta
Haemat. 43: 40-47, 1970.

329. Schiliro, G.; Russo, A.; Azzia, N.; Digiacomo, M. S.; Musumeci,
S.; Russo, G.: Hemoglobin Koelliker (alpha minus 141 arg) in favism. Acta
Haemat. 67: 229, 1982.

330. Schiliro, G.; Russo-Mancuso, G.; Dibenedetto, S. P.; Samperi,
P.; Di Cataldo, A.; Ragusa, R.; Testa, R.: Six rare hemoglobin variants
found in Sicily. Hemoglobin 15: 431-437, 1991.

331. Schmidt, R. M.; Bechtel, K. C.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin
Q(India), alpha 64 (E13) asp-to-his, and beta thalassemia in a Canadian
family. Am. J. Clin. Path. 66: 446-448, 1976.

332. Schnedl, W. J.; Reisinger, E. C.; Katzensteiner, S.; Lipp, R.
W.; Schreiber, F.; Hopmeier, P.; Krejs, G. J.: Haemoglobin O Padova
and falsely low haemoglobin A(1c) in a patient with type I diabetes. J.
Clin. Path. 50: 434-446, 1997.

333. Schneider, R. G.; Alperin, J. B.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
I in an American Negro family: structural and hematologic studies. J.
Lab. Clin. Med. 68: 940-946, 1966.

334. Schneider, R. G.; Alperin, J. B.; Lehmann, H.: Sickling tests.
Pitfalls in performance and interpretation. JAMA 202: 419-421, 1967.

335. Schneider, R. G.; Atkins, R. J.; Hosty, T. S.; Tomlin, G.; Casey,
R.; Lehmann, P. A.; Lorkin, P. A.; Nagai, K.: Haemoglobin Titusville
(alpha 94 asp-to-asn): a new haemoglobin with a lowered affinity for
oxygen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 400: 365-373, 1975.

336. Schneider, R. G.; Brimhall, B.; Jones, R. T.; Bryant, R.; Mitchell,
C. B.; Goldberg, A. I.: Hb Ft. Worth: alpha27glu-to-gly--a variant
present in unusually low concentration. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 243:
164-169, 1971.

337. Schneider, R. G.; Hightower, B.; Carpentieri, U.; Duerst, M.
L.; Shih, T. B.; Jones, R. T.: Hemoglobin Oleander (alpha116 (GH4)
glu-to-gln): structural and functional characterization. Hemoglobin 6:
465-480, 1980.

338. Schoenfelder, S.; Sexton, T.; Chakalova, L.; Cope, N. F.; Horton,
A.; Andrews, S.; Kurukuti, S.; Mitchell, J. A.; Umlauf, D.; Dimitrova,
D. S.; Eskiw, C. H.; Luo, Y.; Wei, C.-L.; Ruan, Y.; Bieker, J. J.;
Fraser, P.: Preferential associations between co-regulated genes
reveal a transcription interactome in erythroid cells. Nature Genet. 42:
53-61, 2010.

339. Schroeder, W. A.; Jones, R. T.: Some aspects of the chemistry
and function of human and animal hemoglobins. Fortschr. Chem. Organ.
Naturst. 23: 113-194, 1965.

340. Schroeder, W. A.; Shelton, J. B.; Shelton, J. R.; Powars, D.
: Hemoglobin Sunshine Seth (alpha94 asp-to-his). Hemoglobin 3: 145-159,
1979.

341. Schwartz, I. R.; Atwater, J.; Repplinger, E.; Tocantins, L. M.
: Sickling of erythrocytes with I-A electrophoretic haemoglobin pattern. Fed.
Proc. 16: 115, 1957.

342. Sciarratta, G. V.; Ivaldi, G.; Molaro, G. L.; Sansone, G.; Salkie,
M. L.; Wilson, J. B.; Reese, A. L.; Huisman, T. H. J.: The characterization
of hemoglobin Manitoba or alpha(2)102(G9)ser-to-arg and hemoglobin
Contaldo or alpha(2)103(G10)his-to-arg by high performance liquid
chromatography. Hemoglobin 8: 169-181, 1984.

343. Scott, A. F.; Phillips, J. A., III; Young, K. E.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Smith, K. D.; Charache, S.; Clegg, J. B.: The molecular
basis of hemoglobin Grady. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33: 129-133, 1981.

344. Sellaye, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Galacteros, F.; Arous, N.; Monplaisir,
N.; Rhoda, M. D.; Braconnier, F.; Rosa, J.: A new silent hemoglobin
variant in a black family from French West Indies: hemoglobin Le Lamentin
alpha20 his-to-gln. FEBS Lett. 145: 128-130, 1982.

345. Shelton, J. B.; Shelton, J. R.; Schroeder, W. A.; Powars, D.
R.: Hb Aztec or alpha76(EF5) met-to-thr: detection of a silent mutant
by high performance liquid chromatography. Hemoglobin 9: 325-332,
1985.

346. Shibata, S.: Hereditary nigremia (geneticobiochemical aspects). Jpn.
J. Hum. Genet. 9: 193-206, 1964.

347. Shibata, S.; Iuchi, I.; Miyaji, T.; Ueda, S.: Spectroscopic
characterization of hemoglobin M (Iwate) and hemoglobin M (Kurume),
the two variants of hemoglobin M found in Japan. Acta Haemat. Jpn. 24:
477-485 and 486-494, 1961.

348. Shibata, S.; Miyaji, T.; Ohba, Y.: Abnormal hemoglobins in Japan. Hemoglobin 4:
395-408, 1980.

349. Shibata, S.; Tamura, A.; Iuchi, I.; Takahashi, H.: Hemoglobin
M-1. Demonstration of a new abnormal hemoglobin in hereditary nigremia. Acta
Haemat. Jpn. 23: 96-104, 1960.

350. Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Miyaji, T.; Imamura, T.: Hemoglobinopathies
in Japan. Hemoglobin 5: 509-515, 1981.

351. Shimasaki, S.: A new hemoglobin variant, hemoglobin Nunobiki
(alpha141 (HC3) arg-to-cys): notable influence of the carboxy-terminal
cysteine upon various physico-chemical characteristics of hemoglobin. J.
Clin. Invest. 75: 695-701, 1985.

352. Shimasaki, S.; Iuchi, I.; Hidaka, K.; Mizuta, W.: The survey
of abnormal hemoglobin in Kobe district. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 28:
127-128, 1983.

353. Shimizu, A.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Tsugita, A.; Kitayama,
K.: The structural study on a new hemoglobin variant, Hb M (Osaka). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 97: 472-482, 1965.

354. Shimizu, A.; Tsugita, A.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.: The primary
structure of hemoglobin M (Iwate). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 107: 270-277,
1965.

355. Shin, M.-C.; Chen, C.-M.; Liu, S.-C.; Huang, C.-H.; Lee, T.-P.;
Chan, W.-L.; Chang, J.-G.: Hb UBE-2 in a Taiwanese subject: an A-to-G
substitution at codon 68 of the alpha-2-globin gene. Hemoglobin 26:
99-101, 2002.

356. Silvestroni, E.; Bianco, I.; Brancati, C.: Haemoglobins N and
P in Italian families. Nature 200: 658-659, 1963.

357. Simmers, R. N.; Mulley, J. C.; Hyland, V. J.; Callen, D. F.;
Sutherland, G. R.: Mapping the human alpha globin gene complex to
16p13.2-pter. J. Med. Genet. 24: 761-766, 1987.

358. Smith, E. W.; Torbert, J. V.: Study of two abnormal hemoglobins
with evidence for a new genetic locus for hemoglobin formation. Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 102: 38-45, 1958.

359. Southern, E. M.: Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments
separated by gel electrophoresis. J. Molec. Biol. 98: 503-517, 1975.

360. Spivak, V. A.; Molchanova, T. P.; Ermakov, N. V.; Tokarev, Y.
N.; Martinez, G.; Szelenyi, J.; Horanyi, M.; Foldi, J.; Hollan, S.;
Kazieva, H.; Shamov, I. A.: A new hemoglobin variant: Hb Dagestan
alpha60(E9) lys-to-glu. Hemoglobin 5: 133-138, 1981.

361. Straub, A. C.; Lohman, A. W.; Billaud, M.; Johnstone, S. R.;
Dwyer, S. T.; Lee, M. Y.; Bortz, P. S.; Best, A. K.; Columbus, L.;
Gaston, B.; Isakson, B. E.: Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin
alpha regulates nitric oxide signalling. Nature 491: 473-477, 2012.

362. Suarez, C. R.; Jue, D. L.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Savaria--alpha49(CE7)ser-to-arg
in the United States. Hemoglobin 9: 627-629, 1985.

363. Sugihara, J.; Imamura, T.; Kagimoto, M.; Matsuo, T.; Yamada,
H.; Imoto, T.; Yanase, T.: A new electrophoretic variant of hemoglobin
(Munakata) in which a lysine residue is replaced by a methionine residue
at position 90 of the alpha-chain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 744: 119-120,
1983.

364. Sugihara, J.; Imamura, T.; Yamada, H.; Imoto, T.; Matsuo, T.;
Sumida, I.; Yanase, T.: A new electrophoretic variant of hemoglobin
(Ogi) in which a leucine residue is replaced by an arginine residue
at position 34 of the alpha-chain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 701: 45-48,
1982.

365. Sukumaran, P. K.; Merchant, S. M.; Desai, M. P.; Wiltshire, B.
G.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Q India (alpha-64 (E13) aspartic acid
to histidine). Associated with beta-thalassemia observed in three
Sindhi families. J. Med. Genet. 9: 436-442, 1972.

366. Sukumaran, P. K.; Pik, C.: Some observations on haemoglobin
L(Bombay). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 104: 290-292, 1965.

367. Sumida, I.: Studies of abnormal hemoglobins in western Japan:
frequency of visible hemoglobin variants, and chemical characterization
of hemoglobin Sawara (alpha26ala-beta2) and hemoglobin Mugino (Hb
L Ferrara; alpha247gly-beta2). Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 343-363,
1975.

368. Sumida, I.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura, T.; Yanase, T.: Hemoglobin Sawara:
alpha 6 (A4) aspartic acid to alanine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 322:
23-26, 1973.

369. Suzuki, T.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Enoki, Y.; Tyuma, I.:
Functional abnormality of hemoglobin M (Osaka). Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 19: 691-695, 1965.

370. Szelenyi, J. G.; Horanyi, M.; Foldi, J.; Hudacsek, J.; Istvan,
L.; Hollan, S. R.: A new hemoglobin variant in Hungary: Hb Savaria-alpha
49 (CE7) ser-to-arg. Hemoglobin 4: 27-38, 1980.

371. Tamura, A.: Black blood disease. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 183-192,
1964.

372. Thillet, J.; Blouquit, Y.; Perrone, F.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin
Pontoise: alpha 63 ala-to-asp (E12): a new fast moving variant. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 491: 16-22, 1977.

373. Thompson, R. B.; Rau, P. J.; Odom, J.; Bell, W. N.: The sickling
phenomenon in a white male without Hb-S. Acta Haemat. 34: 347-353,
1965.

374. Tonz, O.; Simon, H. A.; Hasselfeld, W.: Untersuchung einer grossen
Haemoglobin-M-Sippe. Entdeckung eines neuen Blutfarbstoffes: Hb M-Oldenburg. Schweiz.
Med. Wschr. 92: 1311-1313, 1962.

375. Trabuchet, G.; Morle, F.; Verdier, G.; Godet, J.; Benabadji,
M.; Nigon, V. M.: Mapping the alpha-globin genes in Hb J Mexico carriers. Hum.
Genet. 62: 164-166, 1982.

376. Traeger-Synodinos, J.; Harteveld, C. L.; Kanavakis, E.; Giordano,
P. C.; Kattamis, C.; Bernini, L. F.: Hb Aghia Sophia (alpha-62(E11)val-to-0
(alpha-1)), an 'in-frame' deletion causing alpha-thalassemia. Hemoglobin 23:
317-324, 1999.

377. Trincao, C.; Demelo, J. M.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin
J Paris in the south of Portugal (Algarve). Acta Haemat. 39: 291-298,
1968.

378. Turbpaiboon, C.; Svasti, S.; Sawangareetakul, P.; Winichagoon,
P.; Srisomsap, C.; Siritanaratkul, N.; Fucharoen, S.; Wilairat, P.;
Svasti, J.: Hb Siam (alpha-15(A13)gly-to-arg(alpha-1) (GGT-to-CGT))
is a typical alpha chain hemoglobinopathy without an alpha-thalassemic
effect. Hemoglobin 26: 77-81, 2002.

379. Vandenplas, S.; Higgs, D. R.; Nicholls, R. D.; Bester, A. J.;
Mathew, C. G. P.: Characterization of a new alpha(0) thalassemia
defect in the South African population. Brit. J. Haemat. 66: 539-542,
1987.

380. Van Ros, G.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin Stanleyville-II
(alpha 78 asparagine to lysine). Brit. Med. J. 4: 92-93, 1968.

381. Vasseur, C.; Blouquit, Y.; Kister, J.; Prome, D.; Kavanaugh,
J. S.; Rogers, P. H.; Guillemin, C.; Arnone, A.; Galacteros, F.; Poyart,
C.; Rosa, J.; Wajcman, H.: Hemoglobin Thionville: an alpha-chain
variant with a substitution of a glutamate for valine at NA-1 and
having an acetylated methionine NH(2) terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 267:
12682-12691, 1992.

382. Vasseur, C.; Guillemin, C.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hemoglobin
Thionville: an alpha chain variant with substitution of a glutamic
residue for valine NA-1 and having an extended N-terminus. (Abstract) Blood 76
(suppl. 1): 78a, 1990.

383. Vella, F.; Casey, R.; Lehmann, H.; Labossiere, A.; Jones, T.
G.: Haemoglobin Ottawa: alpha 15 gly-to-arg. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 336:
25-29, 1974.

384. Vella, F.; Charlesworth, D.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
Broussais: alpha 90 lys replaced by asn. Canad. J. Biochem. 48:
408-410, 1970.

385. Vella, F.; Galbraith, P.; Wilson, J. B.; Wong, S. C.; Folger,
G. C.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin St. Claude or alpha 127 (H10)
lys-to-thr. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 365: 318-323, 1974.

386. Vella, F.; Wells, R. H. C.; Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: A haemoglobinopathy
involving haemoglobin H and a new (Q) haemoglobin. Brit. Med. J. 1:
752-755, 1958.

387. Vella, F.; Wiltshire, B.; Lehmann, H.; Galbraith, P.: Hemoglobin
Winnipeg. Clin. Biochem. 6: 66-70, 1973.

388. Vettore, L.; De Sandre, G.; Di Iorio, E. E.; Winterhalter, K.
H.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.: A new abnormal hemoglobin O Padova, alpha
30 (B11) glu-to-lys, and a dyserythropoietic anemia with erythroblastic
multinuclearity coexisting in the same patient. Blood 44: 869-878,
1974.

389. Virshup, D. M.; Zinkham, W. H.; Hine, T.; Baine, R. M.; Jue,
D. L.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Catonsville: an unstable, high
affinity variant with an insertion of glutamic acid between residues
37(pro) and 38 (thr) in the alpha chain. (Abstract) Blood 72 (suppl.):
75a, 1988.

390. Wainscoat, J. S.; Higgs, D. R.; Kanavakis, E.; Cao, A.; Georgiou,
D.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Association of two DNA polymorphisms
in the alpha-globin gene cluster: implications for genetic analysis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 35: 1086-1089, 1983.

391. Wainscoat, J. S.; Kanavakis, E.; Weatherall, D. J.; Walker, J.;
Holmes-Seidle, M.; Bobrow, M.; Donnison, A. B.: Regional localisation
of the human alpha-globin genes. (Letter) Lancet 318: 301-302, 1981.
Note: Originally Volume II.

392. Wajcman, H.; Beklhodja, O.; Labie, D.: Hb Setif: G1 (94) alpha--asp-to-tyr.
A new chain hemoglobin variant with substitution of the residue involved
in a hydrogen bond between unlike subunits. FEBS Lett. 27: 298-300,
1972.

393. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Gombaud-Saintonge, G.; Riou, J.; Galacteros,
F.: HB Fontainebleau (alpha21(B2)ala-to-pro), a new silent mutant
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 13: 421-429, 1989.

394. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Lahary, A.; Soummer, A. M.; Groff,
P.; Bardakdjian, J.; Prehu, C.; Riou, J.; Godard, C.; Galacteros,
F.: Three new neutral alpha chain variants: Hb Bois Guillaume (alpha-65(E14)ala-to-val),
Hb Mantes-La-Jolie (alpha-79(EF8)ala-to-thr), and Hb Mosella (alpha-111(G18)ala-to-thr). Hemoglobin 19:
281-286, 1995.

395. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Riou, J.; Kister, J.; Poyart, C.;
Soria, J.; Galacteros, F.: A new hemoglobin variant found during
investigations of diabetes mellitus: Hb Pavie [alpha-135(H18)val-to-glu]. Clin.
Chim. Acta 188: 39-48, 1990.

396. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Vasseur, C.; Le Querrec, A.; Laniece,
M.; Melevendi, C.; Rasore, A.; Galacteros, F.: Two new human hemoglobin
variants caused by unusual mutational events: Hb Zaire contains a
five residue repetition within the alpha-chain and Hb Duino has two
residues substituted in the beta-chain. Hum. Genet. 89: 676-680,
1992.

397. Wajcman, H.; Bost, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Prehu, C.; Riou, J.; Galacteros,
F.: Two new alpha chain variants found during glycated hemoglobin
screening: Hb Tatras (alpha7(A5)lys-to-asn) and Hb Lisbon (alpha23(B4)glu-to-asp). Hemoglobin 18:
427-432, 1994.

398. Wajcman, H.; Dahmane, M.; Prehu, C.; Costes, B.; Prome, D.; Arous,
N.; Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Riou, J.; Ayache, K. C.; Godart, C.; Galacteros,
F.: Haemoglobin J-Biskra: a new mildly unstable alpha-1 gene variant
with a deletion of eight residues (alpha-50-57, alpha-51-58 or alpha-52-59)
including the distal histidine. Brit. J. Haemat. 100: 401-406, 1998.

399. Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.; Francina, A.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros,
F.: Hemoglobin Nouakchott [alpha114(GH2)pro-to-leu]: a new hemoglobin
variant displaying an unusual increase in hydrophobicity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 998: 25-31, 1989.

400. Wajcman, H.; Elion, J.; Boissel, J. P.; Labie, D.; Jos, J.; Girot,
R.: A silent hemoglobin variant: hemoglobin Necker Enfants-Malades
alpha 20 (B1) his-to-tyr. Hemoglobin 4: 177-184, 1980.

401. Wajcman, H.; Gombaud-Saintonge, G.; Galacteros, F.; Martha, M.;
Vertongen, F.: Hb Belliard (alpha56 (E5) lys-to-asn): a new fast-moving
alpha chain variant found in a subject of Spanish origin. Hemoglobin 13:
157-162, 1990.

402. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Josifovska, O.; Spielvogel,
A.; Nagel, R.L.: Hb Montefiore [alpha126 (H9) asp-to-tyr]: an abnormal
hemoglobin with high oxygen affinity and absence of cooperativity..
(Abstract) Blood 80 (suppl. 1): 82a, 1992.

403. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; M'Rad, A.; Marden, M. C.; Riou, J.;
Galacteros, F.: Hb Val de Marne [alpha133 (H16) ser-to-arg]: a new
hemoglobin variant with moderate increase in oxygen affinity.. Hemoglobin 17:
407-417, 1993.

404. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; M'Rad, A.; Soummer, A. M.; Galacteros,
F.: Hb Cemenelum [alpha92 (FG4) arg-to-trp]: a hemoglobin variant
of the alpha-1/beta-2 interface that displays a moderate increase
in oxygen affinity. Ann. Hemat. 68: 73-76, 1994.

405. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Marden, M.; Lahary, A.; Monconduit,
M.; Galacteros, F.: Hemoglobin Rouen (alpha140(HC2)tyr-to-his): alteration
of the alpha chain C-terminal region and moderate increase in oxygen
affinity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1180: 53-57, 1992.

406. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Riou, J.; Galacteros, F.; Girot, R.;
Maier-Redelsperger, M.; Nayudu, N. V. S.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Godavari
(alpha-95(G2)pro to thr): a neutral amino acid substitution in the
alpha-1/beta-2 interface that modifies the electrophoretic mobility
of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 22: 11-22, 1998.

407. Wajcman, H.; Vasseur, C.; Blouquit, Y.; Rosa, J.; Labie, D.;
Najman, A.; Reman, O.; Leporrier, M.; Galacteros, F.: Unstable alpha-chain
hemoglobin variants with factitious beta-thalassemia biosynthetic
ratio: Hb Questembert (alpha131 [H14] ser-to-pro) and Hb Caen (alpha132
[H15] val-to-gly). Am. J. Hemat. 42: 367-374, 1993.

408. Wajcman, H.; Vasseur, C.; Galacteros, F.; Blouquit, Y.; Rosa,
J.; Labie, D.; Najman, A.: Hb Questembert [alpha-131(H14)ser-to-pro]:
a new highly unstable variant with unbalanced chain synthesis. (Abstract) Blood 76
(suppl. 1): 79a, 1990.

409. Waye, J. S.; Eng, B.; Patterson, M.; Carcao, M. D.; Chang, L.;
Olivieri, N. F.; Chui, D. H. K.: Identification of two new alpha-thalassemia
mutations in exon 2 of the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 25: 391-396,
2001.

410. Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: Recent developments in the
molecular genetics of human hemoglobin. Cell 16: 467-479, 1979.

411. Webber, B. B.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Albany-GA or alpha11(A9)lys-to-asn. Hemoglobin 7: 257-262, 1983.

412. Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Gu, L.-H.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hb Ethiopia or alpha140(HC2)tyr-to-his. Hemoglobin 16: 441-443,
1992.

413. Weitkamp, L. R.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Rowley, P. T.; Kirk,
R. L.: The linkage relationships of the haemoglobin beta, delta and
alpha loci with 34 genetic marker systems. Ann. Hum. Genet. 41:
61-75, 1977.

414. Wilkie, A. O. M.; Higgs, D. R.; Rack, K. A.; Buckle, V. J.; Spurr,
N. K.; Fischel-Ghodsian, N.; Ceccherini, I.; Brown, W. R. A.; Harris,
P. C.: Stable length polymorphism of up to 260 kb at the tip of the
short arm of human chromosome 16. Cell 64: 595-606, 1991.

415. Williamson, D.; Langdown, J. V.; Myles, T.; Mason, C.; Henthorn,
J. S.; Davies, S. C.: Polycythaemia and microcytosis arising from
the combination of a new high oxygen affinity haemoglobin (Hb Luton,
alpha-89 his-to-leu) and alpha-thalassaemia trait. Brit. J. Haemat. 82:
621-622, 1992.

416. Wilson, J. T.; deRiel, J. K.; Forget, B. G.; Marotta, C. A.;
Weissman, S. M.: Nucleotide sequence of 3-prime untranslated portion
of human alpha globin mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 4: 2353-2368, 1977.

417. Wiltshire, B. G.; Clark, K. G. A.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.
: Haemoglobin Denmark Hill (alpha 95 (G2) pro-to-ala), a variant with
unusual electrophoretic and oxygen-binding properties. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 278: 459-464, 1972.

418. Winter, W. P.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Fielding, J.: Identification
of several rare hemoglobin variants discovered in a population survey
including a new variant Hb Garden State alpha-82 ala-to-asp. (Abstract) Clin.
Res. 26: 122A, 1978.

419. Wong, S. C.; Ali, M. A. M.; Pond, J. R.; Rubin, S. M.; Johnson,
S. E. N.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb J-Singa (alpha-78
asn-to-asp), a newly discovered hemoglobin variant with the same amino
acid substitution as one of the two present in Hb J-Singapore (alpha-78
asn-to-asp, alpha-79 ala-to-gly). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 784: 187-188,
1984.

420. Yamaoka, K.; Kawamura, K.; Hanada, M.; Seita, M.; Hitsumoto,
S.; Ooya, I.: Studies on abnormal haemoglobins. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 5:
99-111, 1960.

421. Yanase, T.; Hanada, M.; Seita, M.; Ohya, I.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura,
T.; Fujimura, T.; Kawasaki, K.; Yamaoka, K.: Molecular basis of morbidity
from a series of studies of hemoglobinopathies in western Japan. Jpn.
J. Hum. Genet. 13: 40-53, 1968.

422. Yi, C. H.; Li, H. J.; Li, H. W.; Zhang, X. S.; Zhao, X. N.; Zhang,
C. T.: Hemoglobin Shenyang found among Uygurs in P.R. China. Hemoglobin 13:
97-99, 1989.

423. Yi-Tao, Z.; Headlee, M. E.; Henson, J.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.;
Huisman, T. H. J.: Identification of hemoglobin G-Philadelphia (alpha68
asn-to-lys) and hemoglobin Matsue-Oki (alpha75 asp-to-asn) in a black
infant. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 707: 206-212, 1982.

424. Yodsowan, B.; Svasti, J.; Srisomsap, C.; Winichagoon, P.; Fucharoen,
S.: Hb Siam [alpha-15(A13)gly-arg] is a GGT-CGT mutation in the alpha-1-globin
gene. Hemoglobin 24: 71-75, 2000.

425. Yongsuwan, S.; Svasti, J.; Fucharoen, S.: Decreased heat stability
found in purified hemoglobin Queens (alpha34(B15)leu-to-arg). Hemoglobin 11:
567-570, 1987.

426. Zeng, F.-Y.; Fucharoen, S.; Huang, S.-Z.; Rodgers, G. P.: Hb
Q-Thailand (alpha74 (EF3) asp-to-his): gene organization, molecular
structure, and DNA diagnosis. Hemoglobin 16: 481-491, 1992.

427. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Liang, X.; Long, G.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J.
B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Wuming or alpha11 (A9) lys-to-gln. Hemoglobin 5:
679-687, 1981.

428. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Qiu, X.; Cheng, G.; Ren, Z.; Jin, Q.; Chen,
C.; Jiao, C.; Tang, Z.; Liu, R.; Bao, X.; Zeng, L.; Duan, Y.; Zhang,
G.: Hemoglobin Chongqing (alpha2 (NA2) leu-to-arg) and hemoglobin
Harbin (alpha16 (A14) lys-to-met) found in China. Hemoglobin 8:
569-581, 1984.

429. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Zhou, X.; Qiu, X.; Dong, Q.; Li, M.; Bai,
J.: Hb Shenyang (alpha26 (B7) ala-to-glu): a new unstable variant
found in China. Hemoglobin 6: 625-628, 1982.

430. Zhao, W.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Kutlar, A.; Tamagnini,
G. P.; Kuam, B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Hekinan observed in three
Chinese from Macau: identification of the GAG-to-GAT mutation in the
alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 14: 627-635, 1990.

431. Zhou, Z.; Chen, L.; Chen, P.; Zhang, K.; Wang, Y.: Hemoglobin
Hangzhou alpha64 (E13) asp-to-gly: a new variant found in China. Hemoglobin 11:
31-33, 1987.

432. Zimmer, E. A.; Martin, S. L.; Beverley, S. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Wilson,
A. C.: Rapid duplication and loss of genes coding for the alpha chains
of hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77: 2158-2162, 1980.

433. Zwerdling, T.; Williams, S.; Nasr, S. A.; Rucknagel, D. L.:
Hb Port Huron (alpha56(E5)lys-to-arg): a new alpha chain variant. Hemoglobin 15:
381-391, 1991.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
Autosomal dominant

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
[Skin];
Jaundice;
Cyanosis

HEMATOLOGY:
Alpha polypeptide hemoglobin chain;
Alpha-thalassemia silent carrier (3 normal genes);
Alpha-thalassemia with microcytosis (2 normal genes);
Alpha-thalassemia with microcytosis and hemolysis, Hb H disease (1
normal gene);
Alpha-thalassemia with fatal Hb Bart's hydrops fetalis (No normal
gene);
Polycythemia (e.g. Hb Chesapeake 141800.0018);
Unstable hemoglobin (e.g. Hb Contaldo 141800.0022);
Hemolysis (e.g. Hb Koelliker 141800.0083);
Methemoglobinemia (e.g. Hb M Boston 141800.0092);
Amelioration of SS disease (e.g. Hb Memphis 141800.0096);
Congenital Heinz body anemia (e.g. Hb Toyama 141800.0152)

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Decreased heme-heme interaction (e.g. Hb Kanagawa 141800.0169);
Increased oxygen affinity (e.g. Hb Nunobiki 141800.0109);
Reduced oxygen affinity (e.g. Hb Thionville 141800.0168);
Decreased reversible oxygen-binding capacity (e.g. Hb L (Bombay) 141800.9999)

MISCELLANEOUS:
Two alpha-globin genes - 5-prime or alpha-2 and 3-prime or alpha-1

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 05/18/2011

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2010
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/22/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/19/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/5/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/2/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/21/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 09/30/2013
alopez: 12/19/2012
terry: 12/14/2012
alopez: 11/2/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
alopez: 8/6/2012
alopez: 7/25/2011
carol: 6/9/2011
alopez: 5/13/2011
alopez: 1/28/2010
terry: 6/3/2009
carol: 5/22/2009
terry: 1/15/2009
terry: 1/14/2009
wwang: 10/4/2007
wwang: 10/3/2006
terry: 9/19/2006
alopez: 7/25/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
terry: 6/23/2006
terry: 3/29/2006
carol: 10/21/2005
wwang: 10/21/2005
terry: 10/11/2005
carol: 10/3/2005
terry: 8/11/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
wwang: 5/13/2005
terry: 5/11/2005
terry: 2/7/2005
tkritzer: 1/25/2005
terry: 12/6/2004
tkritzer: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/6/2004
tkritzer: 6/8/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 1/21/2004
terry: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/15/2004
cwells: 9/3/2003
terry: 9/2/2003
carol: 8/29/2003
carol: 8/25/2003
carol: 5/13/2003
terry: 4/17/2003
terry: 3/5/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 10/7/2002
tkritzer: 10/3/2002
tkritzer: 10/2/2002
carol: 6/3/2002
terry: 6/3/2002
terry: 5/23/2002
cwells: 3/22/2002
cwells: 3/20/2002
terry: 2/27/2002
mcapotos: 11/1/2001
mcapotos: 10/26/2001
mcapotos: 10/11/2001
cwells: 5/31/2001
mcapotos: 2/19/2001
mcapotos: 2/15/2001
terry: 2/14/2001
mcapotos: 5/26/2000
mcapotos: 5/24/2000
terry: 5/1/2000
mcapotos: 2/7/2000
mcapotos: 2/4/2000
carol: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/24/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
carol: 12/8/1999
mgross: 7/16/1999
terry: 7/14/1999
carol: 6/27/1999
terry: 4/30/1999
alopez: 4/21/1999
terry: 3/24/1999
carol: 3/9/1999
terry: 2/24/1999
mgross: 2/16/1999
mgross: 2/11/1999
terry: 2/9/1999
dkim: 7/21/1998
carol: 7/2/1998
alopez: 6/12/1998
terry: 6/5/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
carol: 5/4/1998
terry: 4/30/1998
mark: 2/16/1998
terry: 2/6/1998
mark: 10/19/1997
jenny: 9/5/1997
terry: 8/27/1997
alopez: 7/31/1997
alopez: 7/29/1997
terry: 7/10/1997
mark: 7/10/1997
alopez: 7/10/1997
terry: 7/9/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
terry: 11/15/1996
terry: 11/13/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 2/13/1996
terry: 2/5/1996
mark: 11/17/1995
terry: 11/18/1994
jason: 7/29/1994
pfoster: 4/25/1994
mimadm: 4/17/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994

612174	TITLE *612174 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN 39; CAB39
;;MO25-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases using peptide fragments of proteins that
interacted with the serine/threonine protein kinase LKB1 (STK11; 602216)
in HeLa cells, Boudeau et al. (2003) identified CAB39, which they
designated MO25-alpha. The deduced 341-amino acid protein shares a high
degree of conservation with its C. elegans and Drosophila orthologs.
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.2-kb MO25-alpha transcript in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle. Western
blot analysis detected MO25-alpha in most tissues and cell lines
examined. Endogenous MO25-alpha in HeLa cells had an apparent molecular
mass of 40 kD by SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation analysis of human and rat cells, Boudeau et al.
(2003) showed that MO25-alpha associated with STRAD-alpha (608626) and
LKB1. Cotransfection and mutation analysis revealed that MO25-alpha
interacted directly with STRAD-alpha rather than with LKB1, and the
interaction required the last 3 residues of STRAD-alpha. MO25-alpha also
interacted with STRAD-beta (ALS2CR2; 607333) in a complex with LKB1.
MO25-alpha and STRAD-alpha anchored LKB1 in the cytoplasm, excluding it
from the nucleus. Moreover, MO25-alpha enhanced formation of
LKB1-STRAD-alpha complexes in vivo and stimulated LKB1 catalytic
activity about 10-fold. Boudeau et al. (2003) concluded that MO25-alpha
may function as a scaffolding component of the LKB1-STRAD complex and
regulate LKB1 activity and cellular localization.

Using mutagenesis, Boudeau et al. (2004) identified 2 binding sites on
opposite surfaces of MO25-alpha that were required for assembly of the
MO25-alpha-STRAD-alpha-LKB1 complex.

Denning et al. (2012) identified a mechanism of cell extrusion that is
caspase-independent and that can eliminate a subset of the C. elegans
cells programmed to die during embryonic development. In wildtype
animals, these cells die soon after their generation through
caspase-mediated apoptosis. However, in mutants lacking all 4 C. elegans
caspase genes, these cells were eliminated by being extruded from the
developing embryo into the extraembryonic space of the egg. The shed
cells showed apoptosis-like cytologic and morphologic characteristics,
indicating that apoptosis can occur in the absence of caspases in C.
elegans. Denning et al. (2012) described a kinase pathway required for
cell extrusion involving Par4, Strd1, and Mop25.1/25.2, the C. elegans
homologs of the mammalian tumor suppressor kinase LKB1 (602216) and its
binding partners STRAD-alpha (608626) and MO25-alpha. The AMPK-related
kinase Pig1, a possible target of the Par4-Strd1-Mop25 kinase complex,
is also required for cell shedding. Pig1 promotes shed cell detachment
by preventing the cell surface expression of cell adhesion molecules.
Denning et al. (2012) concluded that their findings revealed a mechanism
for apoptotic cell elimination that is fundamentally distinct from that
of canonical programmed cell death.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Zeqiraj et al. (2009) described the structure of the core heterotrimeric
LKB1-STRAD-alpha-MO25-alpha complex, revealing an unusual allosteric
mechanism of LKB1 activation. STRAD-alpha adopts a closed conformation
typical of active protein kinases and binds LKB1 as a pseudosubstrate.
STRAD-alpha and MO25-alpha promote the active conformation of LKB1,
which is stabilized by MO25-alpha interacting with the LKB1 activation
loop. Zeqiraj et al. (2009) suggested that this previously undescribed
mechanism of kinase activation may be relevant to understanding the
evolution of other pseudokinases, and also commented that the structure
reveals how mutations found in Peutz-Jeghers (175200) syndrome and in
various sporadic cancers impair LKB1 function.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CAB39
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH94102).

REFERENCE 1. Boudeau, J.; Baas, A. F.; Deak, M.; Morrice, N. A.; Kieloch, A.;
Schutkowski, M.; Prescott, A. R.; Clevers, H. C.; Alessi, D. R.:
MO25-alpha/beta interact with STRAD-alpha/beta enhancing their ability
to bind, activate and localize LKB1 in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 22:
5102-5114, 2003.

2. Boudeau, J.; Scott, J. W.; Resta, N.; Deak, M.; Kieloch, A.; Komander,
D.; Hardie, D. G.; Prescott, A. R.; van Aalten, D. M. F.; Alessi,
D. R.: Analysis of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex. J. Cell Sci. 117:
6365-6375, 2004.

3. Denning, D. P.; Hatch, V.; Horvitz, H. R.: Programmed elimination
of cells by caspase-independent cell extrusion in C. elegans. Nature 488:
226-230, 2012.

4. Zeqiraj, E.; Filippi, B. M.; Deak, M.; Alessi, D. R.; van Aalten,
D. M. F.: Structure of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex reveals an allosteric
mechanism of kinase activation. Science 326: 1707-1711, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/28/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2008

EDITED alopez: 08/29/2012
terry: 8/28/2012
alopez: 1/11/2010
terry: 1/8/2010
terry: 9/4/2009
mgross: 7/14/2008

613593	TITLE *613593 BUTYROPHILIN, SUBFAMILY 3, MEMBER A1; BTN3A1
;;BT3.1;;
BTF5;;
CD277
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The butyrophilin (BTN) genes are a group of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)-associated genes that encode type I membrane proteins with
2 extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig) domains and an intracellular B30.2
(PRYSPRY) domain. Three subfamilies of human BTN genes are located in
the MHC class I region: the single-copy BTN1A1 gene (601610) and the
BTN2 (e.g., BTN2A1; 613590) and BTN3 (e.g., BNT3A1) genes, which have
undergone tandem duplication, resulting in 3 copies of each (summary by
Smith et al., 2010).

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, RT-PCR of peripheral blood leukocytes and
human cell lines, and 3-prime RACE of a fetal tissue cDNA library,
Rhodes et al. (2001) cloned BTN3A1. They also identified a BTN3A1 splice
variant encoding a truncated protein lacking the B30.2 domain, and this
variant was more abundant than the full-length form.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rhodes et al. (2001) determined that the BTN3A1 gene spans approximately
12 kb and contains 9 coding exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rhodes et al. (2001) mapped the BTN3A1
gene within the BTN gene cluster on chromosome 6p22.1. The BTN gene
cluster is located about 4 Mb telomeric to the classical MHC class I
genes.

REFERENCE 1. Rhodes, D. A.; Stammers, M.; Malcherek, G.; Beck, S.; Trowsdale,
J.: The cluster of BTN genes in the extended major histocompatibility
complex. Genomics 71: 351-362, 2001.

2. Smith, I. A.; Knezevic, B. R.; Ammann, J. U.; Rhodes, D. A.; Aw,
D.; Palmer, D. B.; Mather, I. H.; Trowsdale, J.: BTN1A1, the mammary
gland butyrophilin, and BTN2A2 are both inhibitors of T cell activation. J.
Immun. 184: 3514-3525, 2010.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/11/2010

EDITED mgross: 10/11/2010

174761	TITLE *174761 POLYMERASE (DNA-DIRECTED), DELTA 1, CATALYTIC SUBUNIT; POLD1
;;POLYMERASE, DNA, DELTA; POLD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The POLD1 gene encodes the catalytic and proofreading subunit of DNA
polymerase-delta, which is responsible for DNA synthesis of the lagging
strand during DNA replication (summary by Palles et al., 2013 and Weedon
et al., 2013).

The DNA polymerase delta complex is involved in DNA replication and
repair, and it consists of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA;
176740), the multisubunit replication factor C (see 102579), and the 4
subunit polymerase complex: POLD1, POLD2 (600815), POLD3 (611415), and
POLD4 (611525) (Liu and Warbrick, 2006).

CLONING

Syvaoja et al. (1990) purified DNA polymerases alpha (312040), delta,
and epsilon (174762) from the same HeLa cell extract. The results of
their studies supported the premise that the alpha, delta, and epsilon
polymerases are distinct enzymes. PCNA is the auxiliary protein
(cofactor) for DNA polymerase delta. Syvaoja and Linn (1989) identified
a form of DNA polymerase delta in HeLa cells that is insensitive to
PCNA. Lee and Toomey (1987) isolated DNA polymerase delta from human
placenta and presented evidence that both its polymerase and its
exonuclease activities are associated with a single protein. Lee (1988)
concluded that the multiple forms of placenta DNA polymerase delta are
the result of proteolysis during isolation and that all derive from one
protein.

Chung et al. (1991) cloned cDNA corresponding to the POLD gene and
showed that the 3,443-bp sequence encodes a polypeptide of 1,107 amino
acids. The enzyme is 94% identical to bovine DNA polymerase delta and
contains the numerous highly conserved regions previously observed in
the bovine and yeast enzymes. The human enzyme also contains 2 putative
zinc finger domains in the C-terminal region of the molecule as well as
a putative nuclear localization signal at the N-terminal end.

Yang et al. (1992) also cloned human POLD cDNA and demonstrated that it
is 3.5 kb long and encodes a protein of 1,107 amino acids with a
calculated molecular mass of 124 kD. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
that the mRNA is 3.4 kb.

Weedon et al. (2013) found expression of the POLD1 gene across a panel
of human tissues, with high levels of expression in heart and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishida et al. (1988) showed that DNA repair synthesis in human
fibroblasts requires DNA polymerase delta. Dresler et al. (1988) showed
that repair synthesis late after ultraviolet irradiation, like repair
synthesis at earlier stages, is mediated by this enzyme.

Kamath-Loeb et al. (2000) showed that WRN functionally interacts with
DNA polymerase delta, which is required for DNA replication and DNA
repair.

Lydeard et al. (2007) showed that in haploid budding yeast, Rad51
(179617)-dependent break-induced replication (BIR) induced by HO
endonuclease requires the lagging strand DNA polymerase alpha-primase
complex as well as polymerase delta to initiate new DNA synthesis.
Polymerase epsilon is not required for the initial primer extension step
of BIR but is required to complete 30 kb of new DNA synthesis.
Initiation of BIR also requires the nonessential DNA polymerase delta
subunit polymerase-32 primarily through its interaction with another
polymerase delta subunit, polymerase-31. HO-induced gene conversion, in
which both ends of a double-strand break engage in homologous
recombination, does not require polymerase-32. Polymerase-32 is also
required for the recovery of both Rad51-dependent and Rad51-independent
survivors in yeast strains lacking telomerase. The results of Lydeard et
al. (2007) strongly suggested that both types of telomere maintenance
pathways occur by recombination-dependent DNA replication. Thus,
polymerase-32, dispensable for replication and for gene conversion, is
uniquely required for BIR; this finding provided an opening into
understanding how DNA replication restart mechanisms operate in
eukaryotes.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of DNA from a panel of 24 human/hamster hybrid cells,
Chung et al. (1991) mapped the POLD gene to chromosome 19. Yang et al.
(1992) localized the POLD gene to chromosome 19 by Southern blotting of
EcoRI-digested DNA from a panel of rodent/human cell hybrids. By in situ
hybridization, Kemper et al. (1992) assigned the POLD1 gene to
19q13.3-q13.4.

Goldsby et al. (1998) mapped the Pold1 gene to mouse chromosome 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (1995) showed that the human POLD1 gene contains 27 exons
spanning approximately 32 kb. The gene has a GC-rich promoter region and
multiple transcription start sites. Zhao and Chang (1997) found that the
core promoter of the POLD1 gene extends 328 bp upstream from the major
transcription start site. Multiple elements in this region, including
two 11-bp direct repeats, play an important role in POLD1 promoter
activity. Zhao and Chang (1997) showed that SP1 (189906) and SP3
(601804) can activate the POLD1 promoter through the direct repeat
sequences.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Susceptibility to Colorectal Cancer 10

In affected members of 2 large multigenerational families with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer-10 (CRCS10; 612591), Palles et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous mutation in the POLD1 gene (S478N;
174761.0001) at a highly conserved residue in the exonuclease domain.
The S489N mutation was also identified in a third affected family in the
validation phase of the study. The phenotype was characterized by the
development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas early in
adult life. However, 7 mutation carriers also developed endometrial
carcinoma, and 1 patient had 2 primary brain tumors. Tumor tissue from 2
of 6 mutation carriers showed additional somatic mutations, most
commonly in the APC (611731), KRAS (190070), or FBXW7 (606278) genes.
All tumors showed microsatellite stability. In addition to germline
POLD1 mutations, Palles et al. (2013) identified somatic POLE mutations
in 5 colorectal cancers from a large database. All of these tumors had
additional somatic mutations. These findings suggested that the
mechanism of tumorigenesis in POLD1-mutated tumors is decreased fidelity
of replication-associated polymerase proofreading, leading to an
increased mutation rate.

- Mandibular Hypoplasia, Deafness, Progeroid Features, and
Lipodystrophy Syndrome

In 4 unrelated patients with mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid
features, and lipodystrophy syndrome (MDPL; 615381), Weedon et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous in-frame deletion of residue
ser605 (ser604del) in the polymerase active site of the POLD1 gene
(174761.0003). The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 of the patients, was
not found in any of the parents or in several large control databases.
The disorder was characterized by loss of subcutaneous fat in early
childhood, a characteristic facial appearance, and metabolic
abnormalities including insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus.
Sensorineural deafness occurred late in the first or second decades of
life. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed that the
mutant enzyme had lost its DNA polymerase ability, whereas its
exonuclease activity, although decreased compared to wildtype, was still
present. The studies demonstrated decoupling of the mutant enzyme's
activities and suggested that the mutant protein could bind DNA, but was
unable to interact with and incorporate dNTPs. The mutations causing
colorectal cancer (174761.0001 and 174761.0002) affect the proofreading
domain and lead to increased base-substitution error rates, whereas the
ser605del mutant enzyme retains proofreading ability but cannot catalyze
polymerization, which likely leads to an increase in stalled replication
forks, cell senescence, and death. The findings implicated POLD1 in
adipose tissue homeostasis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Normal cells minimize spontaneous mutations through the combined actions
of polymerase base selectivity, 3-prime to 5-prime exonucleolytic
proofreading, mismatch correction, and DNA damage repair. To determine
the consequences of defective proofreading in mammals, Goldsby et al.
(2002) generated mice with a point mutation (asp400 to ala) in the
proofreading domain of DNA polymerase delta. They showed that this
mutation inactivates the 3-prime to 5-prime exonuclease of DNA
polymerase delta and causes a mutator and cancer phenotype in a
recessive manner. By 18 months of age, 94% of mice homozygous for the
mutation developed cancer and died (median survival, 10 months). In
contrast, only 3 to 4% of heterozygotes and wildtype homozygotes
developed cancer in this time frame. Of the 66 tumors arising in 49
homozygous mice, 40 were epithelial in origin (carcinomas), 24 were
mesenchymal (lymphomas and sarcomas), and 2 were composite (teratomas);
one-third of these animals developed tumors in more than 1 tissue. Skin
squamous cell carcinoma was the most common tumor type, occurring in 60%
of all homozygous mice and in 90% of those surviving beyond 8 months of
age. These data showed that DNA polymerase delta proofreading suppresses
spontaneous tumor development and strongly suggested that unrepaired DNA
polymerase errors contribute to carcinogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10
POLD1, SER478ASN

In affected members of 2 large multigenerational families with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer-10 (CRCS10; 612591), Palles et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous 1433G-A transition in the POLD1 gene,
resulting in a ser478-to-asn (S478N) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the exonuclease domain. The mutant mRNA was stably expressed.
Microsatellite analysis of the 2 families suggested a common ancestor.
The S489N mutation was identified in a third affected family in the
validation phase of the study. The mutation, which was initially
identified by linkage analysis combined with whole-genome sequencing,
was not found in 6,721 controls or 10,755 control exomes. A yeast
construct carrying the analogous mutation showed a 12-fold higher
mutation rate compared to wildtype. Molecular modeling using yeast
structures indicated that the S478N mutation will distort the packing of
helices involved at the exonuclease active site, likely affecting
nuclear activity. The phenotype was characterized by the development of
multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas early in adult life.
However, 7 mutation carriers also developed endometrial carcinoma, and 1
patient had 2 primary brain tumors. Tumor tissue from 2 of 6 mutation
carriers showed additional somatic mutations, most commonly in the APC
(611731), KRAS (190070), or FBXW7 (606278) genes. All tumors showed
microsatellite stability.

.0002
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10
POLD1, PRO327LEU

In a 70-year-old patient with multiple colorectal adenomas (612591),
Palles et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 981C-G transversion in
the POLD1 gene, resulting in a pro327-to-leu (P327L) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the exonuclease domain.

.0003
MANDIBULAR HYPOPLASIA, DEAFNESS, PROGEROID FEATURES, AND LIPODYSTROPHY
SYNDROME
POLD1, 3-BP DEL, 1812CTC

In 4 unrelated patients with mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid
features, and lipodystrophy syndrome (MDPL; 615381), Weedon et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous in-frame 3-bp deletion
(c.1812_1814delCTC) in the POLD1 gene, resulting in the deletion of
residue ser605 (ser605del) in motif A, a highly conserved region of the
polymerase active site. The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 of the patients, was
not found in any of the parents or in several large control databases.
In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed that the mutant
enzyme had lost its DNA polymerase ability, whereas its exonuclease
activity, although decreased compared to wildtype, was still present.
These studies demonstrated decoupling of the mutant enzyme's activities
and suggested that the mutant protein could bind DNA, but was unable to
interact with and incorporate dNTPs. The findings implicated POLD1 in
adipose tissue homeostasis.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bertazzoni et al. (1977); Dresler et al. (1988); Lestienne  (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Bertazzoni, U.; Scovassi, A. I.; Brun, G. M.: Chick-embryo DNA
polymerase gamma: identity of gamma-polymerases purified from nuclei
and mitochondria. Europ. J. Biochem. 81: 237-248, 1977.

2. Chang, L.-S.; Zhao, L.; Zhu, L.; Chen, M.-L.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.
: Structure of the gene for the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase
delta (POLD1). Genomics 28: 411-419, 1995.

3. Chung, D. W.; Zhang, J.; Tan, C.-K.; Davie, E. W.; So, A. G.; Downey,
K. M.: Primary structure of the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase
delta and chromosomal location of the gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
11197-11201, 1991.

4. Dresler, S. L.; Gowans, B. J.; Robinson-Hill, R. M.; Hunting, D.
J.: Involvement of DNA polymerase delta in DNA repair synthesis in
human fibroblasts at late times after ultraviolet irradiation. Biochemistry 27:
6379-6383, 1988.

5. Goldsby, R. E.; Hays, L. E.; Chen, X.; Olmsted, E. A.; Slayton,
W. B.; Spangrude, G. J.; Preston, B. D.: High incidence of epithelial
cancers in mice deficient for DNA polymerase delta proofreading. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 15560-15565, 2002.

6. Goldsby, R. E.; Singh, M.; Preston, B. D.: Mouse DNA polymerase
delta gene (Pold1) maps to chromosome 7. Mammalian Genome 9: 92-93,
1998.

7. Kamath-Loeb, A. S.; Johansson, E.; Burgers, P. M. J.; Loeb, L.
A.: Functional interaction between the Werner syndrome protein and
DNA polymerase delta. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4603-4608, 2000.

8. Kemper, R. R.; Ahn, E. R.; Zhang, P.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.; Rabin,
M.: Human DNA polymerase delta gene maps to region 19q13.3-q13.4
by in situ hybridization. Genomics 14: 205-206, 1992.

9. Lee, M. Y. W. T.: Isolation of multiple forms of DNA polymerase
delta: evidence of proteolytic modification during isolation. Biochemistry 27:
5188-5193, 1988.

10. Lee, M. Y. W. T.; Toomey, N. L.: Human placental DNA polymerase
delta: identification of a 170-kilodalton polypeptide by activity
staining and immunoblotting. Biochemistry 26: 1076-1085, 1987.

11. Lestienne, P.: Evidence for a direct role of the DNA polymerase
gamma in the replication of the human mitochondrial DNA in vitro. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 146: 1146-1153, 1987.

12. Liu, G.; Warbrick, E.: The p66 and p12 subunits of DNA polymerase
delta are modified by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 349: 360-366, 2006.

13. Lydeard, J. R.; Jain, S.; Yamaguchi, M.; Haber, J. E.: Break-induced
replication and telomerase-independent telomere maintenance require
Pol32. Nature 448: 820-823, 2007.

14. Nishida, C.; Reinhard, P.; Linn, S.: DNA repair synthesis in
human fibroblasts requires DNA polymerase delta. J. Biol. Chem. 263:
501-510, 1988.

15. Palles, C.; Cazier, J.-B.; Howarth, K. M.; Domingo, E.; Jones,
A. M.; Broderick, P.; Kemp, Z.; Spain, S. L.; Almeida, E. G.; Salguero,
I.; Sherborne, A.; Chubb, D.; and 27 others: Germline mutations
affecting the proofreading domains of POLE and POLD1 predispose to
colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. Nature Genet. 45: 136-144, 2013.

16. Syvaoja, J.; Linn, S.: Characterization of a large form of DNA
polymerase delta from HeLa cells that is insensitive to proliferating
cell nuclear antigen. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 2489-2497, 1989.

17. Syvaoja, J.; Suomensaari, S.; Nishida, C.; Goldsmith, J. S.; Chui,
G. S. J.; Jain, S.; Linn, S.: DNA polymerases alpha, delta, and epsilon:
three distinct enzymes from HeLa cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
6664-6668, 1990.

18. Weedon, M. N.; Ellard, S.; Prindle, M. J.; Caswell, R.; Allen,
H. L.; Oram, R.; Godbole, K.; Yajnik, C. S.; Sbraccia, P.; Novelli,
G.; Turnpenny, P.; McCann, E.; and 10 others: An in-frame deletion
at the polymerase active site of POLD1 causes a multisystem disorder
with lipodystrophy. Nature Genet. 45: 947-950, 2013.

19. Yang, C.-L.; Chang, L.-S.; Zhang, P.; Hao, H.; Zhu, L.; Toomey,
N. L.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.: Molecular cloning of the cDNA for the catalytic
subunit of human DNA polymerase delta. Nucleic Acids Res. 20: 735-745,
1992.

20. Zhao, L.; Chang, L.-S.: The human POLD1 gene: identification
of an upstream activator sequence, activation by Sp1 and Sp3, and
cell cycle regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 4869-4882, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/27/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/18/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/15/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/7/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/27/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/8/1990

EDITED carol: 08/27/2013
ckniffin: 8/27/2013
carol: 2/19/2013
ckniffin: 2/18/2013
alopez: 10/26/2007
terry: 10/15/2007
wwang: 10/12/2007
wwang: 9/10/2007
carol: 1/22/2003
tkritzer: 1/17/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
terry: 12/2/1999
kayiaros: 7/12/1999
psherman: 5/7/1998
terry: 2/19/1998
mark: 3/18/1997
carol: 2/1/1995
warfield: 4/21/1994
carol: 9/21/1992
carol: 9/4/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

607873	TITLE *607873 SCAVENGER RECEPTOR CLASS F, MEMBER 1; SCARF1
;;SCAVENGER RECEPTOR EXPRESSED BY ENDOTHELIAL CELLS; SREC;;
SREC1;;
SREC I;;
KIAA0149
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Scavenger receptors mediate the endocytosis of chemically modified
lipoproteins. SCARF1 specifically mediates the selective uptake of
acetylated low density lipoprotein (Ac-LDL) into endothelial cells.

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a myeloid leukemia cell cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (1995) cloned SCARF1, which they designated KIAA0149. The
deduced 830-amino acid protein contains a putative transmembrane domain
and an EGF-like pattern of cysteine repeats. SCARF1 shares about 33%
identity over 147 amino acids with mouse Tie2 (600221), an epithelial
receptor tyrosine kinase. The 3-prime untranslated region contains an
Alu repeat. Northern blot analysis detected expression in most tissues
examined, with highest levels in lung and spleen. No expression was
detected in HeLa cells, pancreas, or colon.

Adachi et al. (1997) cloned SCARF1, which they designated SREC, using an
expression cloning strategy in which they assayed for uptake of
fluorescence-labeled Ac-LDL into CHO cells transfected with a human
umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) cDNA library. The deduced
830-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 86 kD.
SCARF1 contains a hydrophobic signal sequence followed by 5 EGF-like
cysteine pattern signatures in its extracellular N-terminal half, a
transmembrane region, and an intracellular C-terminal half containing a
serine/proline-rich region followed by a glycine-rich region. It has 3
potential N-glycosylation sites and several putative sites for serine
and threonine phosphorylation. Northern blot analysis revealed a 3.5-kb
transcript expressed in HUVECs and in coronary artery endothelial cells,
but not in coronary artery smooth muscle cells.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) identified several SCARF1 variants in a
peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA library. Alternative splicing introduces
a stop codon before the transmembrane region in 2 of the variants,
resulting in soluble forms of SCARF1.

GENE FUNCTION

Adachi et al. (1997) determined that CHO cells stably expressing SCARF1
bound radiolabeled Ac-LDL with high affinity and degraded it via an
endocytic pathway. The association between SCARF1 and Ac-LDL was
inhibited by oxidized LDL, malondialdehyde-modified LDL, dextran
sulfate, and polyinosinic acid, but not by natural LDL or heparin.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) determined that all membrane-bound splice
variants of SCARF1 showed receptor activity toward Ac-LDL. They
identified a transcriptional activator of SCARF1, ZNF444 (607874).
Overexpression of ZNF444 in HUVECs increased SCARF1 promoter activity
nearly 2.5-fold. An intact SP1 (189906) motif and an intact inverted
repeat sequence with a triple-nucleotide spacer (IR3), which binds
ZNF444, were required for maximal SCARF1 expression. Several
inflammatory cytokines inhibited SCARF1 promoter activity in vitro and
decreased Ac-LDL uptake in vivo.

Means et al. (2009) showed that the scavenger receptors Scarf1 and Cd36
(173510) mediated mouse defense against 2 fungal pathogens, Cryptococcus
neoformans and Candida albicans, by enabling production of antimicrobial
peptides. Studies in C. elegans indicated that the homologous proteins
protected nematodes. Macrophage binding and cytokine production required
Cd36, but not Tlr2 (603028), and binding was dependent on recognition of
pathogen beta-glucans. Mice lacking Cd36, but expressing other
beta-glucan receptors (e.g., CLEC7A; 606264), had a higher fungal burden
and greater mortality after intravenous infection with C. neoformans
compared with wildtype mice. Means et al. (2009) concluded that SCARF1
and CD36 are beta-glucan-binding receptors and are involved in an
evolutionarily conserved pathway for the innate sensing of fungal
pathogens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) determined that the SCARF1 gene contains 11
exons and spans 12 kb. The 5-prime flanking region lacks TATA and CCAAT
boxes, but it contains several putative motifs for DNA-binding elements,
including an SP1 motif and an IR3 sequence that binds ZNF444.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human/rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the
SCARF1 gene to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.: Characterization of the human gene
encoding the scavenger receptor expressed by endothelial cell and
its regulation by a novel transcription factor, endothelial zinc finger
protein-2. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 24014-24021, 2002.

2. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.; Arai, H.; Inoue, K.: Expression cloning
of a novel scavenger receptor from human endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 272: 31217-31220, 1997.

3. Means, T. K.; Mylonakis, E.; Tampakakis, E.; Colvin, R. A.; Seung,
E.; Puckett, L.; Tai, M. F.; Stewart, C. R.; Pukkila-Worley, R.; Hickman,
S. E.; Moore, K. J.; Calderwood, S. B.; Hacohen, N.; Luster, A. D.;
El Khoury, J.: Evolutionarily conserved recognition and innate immunity
to fungal pathogens by the scavenger receptors SCARF1 and CD36. J.
Exp. Med. 206: 637-653, 2009.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/30/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/11/2003

EDITED mgross: 12/02/2010
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 10/29/2010
mgross: 6/11/2003

610715	TITLE *610715 HEMOGEN; HEMGN
;;ERYTHROID DIFFERENTIATION-ASSOCIATED GENE; EDAG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Yang et al. (2001) cloned mouse Hemgn and, by database analysis and
RT-PCR of a K562 myelogenous leukemia cell line cDNA library, they
cloned human HEMGN, or EDAG. The deduced mouse and human proteins
contain 503 and 484 amino acids, respectively, and share 43% identity. A
coiled-coil region and bipartite nuclear localization signal are
conserved in the N termini of both proteins. Northern blot analysis
detected a major 2.4-kb transcript and a minor 1.8-kb transcript in
adult human bone marrow and fetal liver. RT-PCR detected high HEMGN
expression in untreated and mitogen-treated K562 cells, adult bone
marrow, and CD34 (142230)-positive progenitor cells. Lower expression
was detected in a child thymus and in a histiocyte lymphoma cell line,
but no expression was detected in cultured T cells, monocytes, and
nonhematopoietic cell lines examined. Northern blot analysis of adult
mice detected Hemgn expression in bone marrow and spleen, but not in
thymus and nonhematopoietic tissues. In situ hybridization of adult
spleen revealed Hemgn in red, but not white, pulp. In situ hybridization
of day-8.5 mouse embryos showed Hemgn in blood islands of the yolk sac
and in circulating primitive blood cells. Hemgn was expressed in
developing hepatic primordia at day 10.5 and, from day 11.5, it was
expressed exclusively in fetal liver. FACS analysis showed Hemgn in
hematopoietic precursors of adult mice, but not in mature blood cells.
Transfected COS-7 cells expressed mouse Hemgn in nuclei, but not in
nucleoli or cytoplasm.

By database analysis, Yang et al. (2003) identified a testis-specific
HEMGN splice variant that they called HEMGN-t. HEMGN-t and the
hematopoietic variant, HEMGN-h, differ in their 5-prime and 3-prime
UTRs, but they have the same coding region. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.9-kb HEMGN-t transcript in mouse and human testis. In situ
hybridization of adult mouse testis revealed Hemgn only in round
spermatids. Northern blot analysis showed that Hemgn expression in
prepubertal mouse testis correlated with the appearance of postmeiotic
cells, and Hemgn expression was weak in testis of mice lacking
postmeiotic germ cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2004) found that downregulation of EDAG in K562 cells
resulted in inhibition of growth and colony formation, as well as
enhancement of sensitivity to erythroid differentiation induced by
hemin. Overexpression of EDAG in a human myeloid leukemia cell line
significantly blocked expression of the monocyte/macrophage
differentiation marker CD11b (ITGAM; 120980) after mitogen exposure.
Moreover, overexpression of EDAG in a mouse pro-B cell line prolonged
survival and increased expression of Myc (190080), Bcl2 (151430), and
Bclxl (600039) in the absence of interleukin-3 (IL3; 147740). EDAG
enhanced the transcriptional activity of NF-kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011),
and high DNA-binding activity of Nfkb was sustained in EDAG-expressing
pre-B cells after IL3 withdrawal. In these cells, inhibition of Nfkb
activity promoted cell death. Li et al. (2004) concluded that EDAG
regulates proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells and
resists cell death through activation of NFKB.

By examining expression of a mouse Hemgn promoter-reporter plasmid in
transgenic mice, Yang et al. (2006) showed that the promoter was
transcriptionally active in embryonic yolk sac, fetal liver, and adult
spleen, bone marrow, brain, thymus, lung, and testis. Mutagenesis
analysis showed that 2 highly conserved GATA boxes were critical for
promoter activity. GATA1 (305371), but not GATA2 (137295), bound to the
GATA-binding sites and transactivated the Hemgn promoter in a
dose-dependent manner. Yang et al. (2006) also found that levels of
HEMGN and GATA1 transcripts closely correlated in human primary acute
myeloid leukemia specimens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2001) determined that the HEMGN gene spans 18 kb and
contains 5 exons. The first exon is specific to the HEMGN-t variant and
encodes an alternative 5-prime UTR. The donor-acceptor sequence used for
this alternative first exon is GC-AC instead of the canonical GT-AG. The
last exon of HEMGN contains 2 alternative noncanonical polyadenylation
sequences used by the HEMGN-t and HEMGN-h variants. Two promoters in the
5-prime region direct transcription of HEMGN-t and HEMGN-h and are
separated by 6 kb.

Yang et al. (2006) found that the region upstream of the HEMGN coding
sequence contains several evolutionarily conserved sequences and that
the proximal promoter contains a TATA box and 2 conserved GATA boxes.

MAPPING

By FISH, Yang et al. (2003) mapped the HEMGN gene to chromosome 9q22.
They mapped the mouse Hemgn gene to chromosome 4A5-B2.

REFERENCE 1. Li, C. Y.; Zhan, Y. Q.; Xu, C. W.; Xu, W. X.; Wang, S. Y.; Lv,
J.; Zhou, Y.; Yue, P. B.; Chen, B.; Yang, X. M.: EDAG regulates the
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells and resists
cell apoptosis through the activation of nuclear factor-kappa-B. Cell
Death Diff. 11: 1299-1308, 2004.

2. Yang, L. V.; Heng, H. H.; Wan, J.; Southwood, C. M.; Gow, A.; Li,
L.: Alternative promoters and polyadenylation regulate tissue-specific
expression of hemogen isoforms during hematopoiesis and spermatogenesis. Dev.
Dyn. 228: 606-616, 2003.

3. Yang, L. V.; Nicholson, R. H.; Kaplan, J.; Galy, A.; Li, L.: Hemogen
is a novel nuclear factor specifically expressed in mouse hematopoietic
development and its human homologue EDAG maps to chromosome 9q22,
a region containing breakpoints of hematological neoplasms. Mech.
Dev. 104: 105-111, 2001.

4. Yang, L. V.; Wan, J.; Ge, Y.; Fu, Z.; Kim, S. Y.; Fujiwara, Y.;
Taub, J. W.; Matherly, L. H.; Eliason, J.; Li, L.: The GATA site-dependent
hemogen promoter is transcriptionally regulated by GATA1 in hematopoietic
and leukemia cells. Leukemia 20: 417-425, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/23/2007

609294	TITLE *609294 SEMAPHORIN 6C; SEMA6C
;;KIAA1869
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned SEMA6C, which they designated
KIAA1869. The deduced protein contains 755 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected high expression in skeletal muscle and relatively low
expression in whole adult brain and pancreas. Expression was
intermediate in fetal brain and in all other tissues and specific adult
brain regions examined.

By searching a fetal liver cDNA library for sequences similar to rat
Sema6c, followed by PCR and 5-prime RACE of a human brain cDNA library,
Qu et al. (2002) cloned 3 SEMA6C splice variants. The longest deduced
protein, designated SEMA6C.1, has 962 amino acids and a calculated
molecular mass of 104.3 kD. SEMA6C.1 contains an N-terminal signal
sequence, followed by a SEMA domain, a PSI domain, a transmembrane
segment, and a proline-rich C terminus. SEMA6C.1 also has 3 potential
N-glycosylation sites. SEMA6C.2 contains 930 amino acids and has a
deletion between the extracellular PSI domain and the transmembrane
domain. SEMA6C.3 contains 922 amino acids and has an incomplete SEMA
domain. Northern blot analysis detected a major transcript of 4.0 kb and
a second transcript of 6.0 kb. Expression was high in skeletal muscle,
moderate in heart, brain, and kidney, low in liver and placenta, and
barely detectable in other tissues examined. In situ hybridization of
mouse embryos detected Sema6c expression beginning at embryonic day 13,
with widespread expression in brain and spinal cord. Labeling of
cultured rat spinal cord neurons showed expression in neural perikaryon,
processes, and termini, but no labeling of nuclei or axons. Transient
transfection of SEMA6C.1 in COS-7 cells resulted in expression of a
cytoplasmic protein of about 62.5 kD and a secreted protein of about 75
kD, suggesting modification after secretion. SEMA6C.1 was also expressed
on the cell surface. Both SEMA6C.3 and a SEMA6C.1 mutant lacking the PSI
domain were expressed in a punctate cytoplasmic distribution, with
accumulation at the 2 ends of many cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Qu et al. (2002) exposed chicken embryo dorsal root ganglion explants
and neonatal rat cortical and hippocampal neurons to SEMA6C secreted
from transfected COS-7 cells and found that SEMA6C induced growth cone
collapse. SEMA6C also inhibited axonal extension in a nerve growth
factor (NGF; see 162030)-differentiated rat pheochromocytoma cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Qu et al. (2002) determined that the SEMA6C contains at least 20 exons
and spans about 15 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the SEMA6C
gene to chromosome 10. However, Qu et al. (2002) mapped the SEMA6C gene
to chromosome 1q12-q21.1 by genomic sequence analysis. The International
Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SEMA6C gene to chromosome
1 (TMAP RH47819).

Qu et al. (2002) mapped the mouse Sema6c gene to chromosome 16.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XX.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 8: 85-95, 2001.

2. Qu, X.; Wei, H.; Zhai, Y.; Que, H.; Chen, Q.; Tang, F.; Wu, Y.;
Xing, G.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, S.; Fan, M.; He, F.: Identification, characterization,
and functional study of the two novel human members of the semaphorin
gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 35574-35585, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/1/2005

EDITED mgross: 04/01/2005

604447	TITLE *604447 GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN, BETA-5; GNB5
;;GB5
DESCRIPTION The beta subunits of the heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G
proteins) are important regulators of G protein alpha subunits as well
as of certain signal transduction receptors and effectors. For
structural information about these proteins, see 600874.

CLONING

Using a degenerate PCR approach to screen a human brain cDNA library,
Jones et al. (1998) cloned the beta-5 subunit, symbolized GNB5, of G
protein. In contrast to beta subunits 1 through 4, which are at least
83% homologous, GNB5 is only 50% homologous to the other beta subunits.
On the other hand, the predicted 353-amino acid protein sequence is
99.4% homologous to the mouse beta-5 protein, with only 2 conservative
amino acid differences. Northern blot analysis revealed that mouse Gnb5
is expressed predominantly in brain (Watson et al., 1994), whereas human
GNB5 is expressed at high levels not only in brain but also in pancreas,
kidney, and heart (Jones et al., 1998), as a major 3.0- and minor 2.0-
and 9.0-kb transcripts. Within the brain, (Jones et al., 1998) detected
highest expression in cerebellum, cerebral cortex, occipital pole,
frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and caudate putamen, and lowest expression
in corpus callosum and spinal cord.

Watson et al. (1996) reported the cloning of a retina-specific cDNA,
termed G-beta-5L, in the mouse, which is identical to GNB5 except for an
additional 126-bp 5-prime exon.

GENE FUNCTION

GNB5 interacts with regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins
containing the G protein gamma-like (GGL) domain: RGS6 (603894), RGS7
(602517), RGS9 (604067), and RGS11 (603895). Chen et al. (2003)
presented data indicating that GNB5 and GGL domain-containing RGS
proteins are obligate partners and supporting the notion that GNB5
functions as a component of the GTPase-accelerating protein (GAP)
complex.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rosskopf et al. (2003) determined that the GNB5 gene contains 12 exons.
The first exon is noncoding and exons 2 and 3 contain alternate ATG
translational start codons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GNB5
gene to chromosome 15 (TMAP sts-AA017518).

ANIMAL MODEL

The 'flailer' (flr) mouse exhibits a phenotype consisting of frequent
falling, convulsive limb movements (leg flailing), and ataxia persistent
into adulthood. Jones et al. (2000) determined that the flailer mouse
expresses a novel gene combining the promoter and first 2 exons of Gnb5
with the C-terminal exons of the closely linked myosin-5A (MyoVA) gene
(Myo5a; 160777). Biochemical and genetic studies indicated that the
flailer protein, which is expressed predominantly in brain, competes
with wildtype MyoVA in vivo, preventing the localization of smooth
endoplasmic reticulum vesicles in the dendritic spines of cerebellar
Purkinje cells. The flailer protein thus has a dominant-negative
mechanism of action with a recessive mode of inheritance due to the
dependence of competitive binding on the ratio between mutant and
wildtype proteins. The chromosomal arrangement of Myo5a upstream of Gnb5
is consistent with nonhomologous recombination as the mutational
mechanism.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, C.-K.; Eversole-Cire, P.; Zhang, H.; Mancino, V.; Chen, Y.-J.;
He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Simon, M. I.: Instability of GGL domain-containing
RGS proteins in mice lacking the G protein beta-subunit G-beta-5. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6604-6609, 2003.

2. Jones, J. M.; Huang, J.-D.; Mermall, V.; Hamilton, B. A.; Mooseker,
M. S.; Escayg, A.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Meisler, M. H.
: The mouse neurological mutant flailer expresses a novel hybrid gene
derived by exon shuffling between Gnb5 and Myo5a. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
821-828, 2000.

3. Jones, P. G.; Lombardi, S. J.; Cockett, M. I.: Cloning and tissue
distribution of the human G protein beta-5 cDNA. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1402: 288-291, 1998.

4. Rosskopf, D.; Nikula, C.; Manthey, I.; Joisten, M.; Frey, U.; Kohnen,
S.; Siffert, W.: The human G protein beta-4 subunit: gene structure,
expression, G-gamma and effector interaction. FEBS Lett. 544: 27-32,
2003.

5. Watson, A. J.; Aragay, A. M.; Slepak, V. Z.; Simon, M. I.: A novel
form of the G protein beta subunit G-beta-5 is specifically expressed
in the vertebrate retina. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 28154-28160, 1996.

6. Watson, A. J.; Katz, A.; Simon, M. I.: A fifth member of the mammalian
G-protein beta subunit family: expression in brain and activation
of the beta-2 isotype of phospholipase C. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 22150-22156,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/25/2003
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/19/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/25/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/19/2000

EDITED wwang: 03/20/2007
terry: 3/14/2007
tkritzer: 6/27/2003
tkritzer: 6/25/2003
joanna: 4/19/2002
alopez: 4/25/2000
carol: 1/19/2000

610207	TITLE *610207 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 4 (ANION EXCHANGER), MEMBER 9; SLC4A9
;;ANION EXCHANGE PROTEIN 4; AE4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, database analysis, and PCR of kidney and
fetal brain cDNA libraries, Lipovich et al. (2001) cloned SLC4A9. They
identified 14 different SLC4A9 splice variants, with most variation
involving the inclusion or exclusion of portions of exons 8, 10, 11, 19,
and 20. The major splice variant encodes a 990-amino acid protein that
shares 49% and 48% identity with SLC4A4 (603345) and SLC4A7 (603353),
respectively. It contains 12 transmembrane domains, intracellular N and
C termini, and several serine and threonine phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis detected transcripts of 4.3 and 6.0 kb in kidney
only.

By searching databases for homologs of bicarbonate transporters,
followed by PCR of a kidney cDNA library, Parker et al. (2001) cloned
SLC4A9, which they called AE4. The predicted protein contains 945 amino
acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 104 kD. AE4 has 14
transmembrane domains and intracellular N and C termini. It contains an
N-terminal leucine zipper motif, multiple intracellular phosphorylation
sites, and 2 extracellular N-glycosylation sites. It shares 84% amino
acid identity with rabbit Ae4, a sodium-independent Cl-/HCO3- exchanger
located on the apical membrane of beta-intercalated kidney cells.
SDS-PAGE following cell-free translation revealed AE4 at an apparent
molecular mass of 100 kD. AE4 did not appear to be N-glycosylated.
Northern blot analysis detected expression in kidney only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lipovich et al. (2001) determined that the SLC4A9 gene contains 23
exons. Parker et al. (2001) identified 22 exons in the SLC4A9 gene. A
CCAAT box, a GC box, and a TATA box are located upstream of the
transcriptional start site.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lipovich et al. (2001) mapped the SLC4A9
gene to chromosome 5q31, between the HEGFL (HBEGF; 126150) and FGF1
(131220) genes.

REFERENCE 1. Lipovich, L.; Lynch, E. D.; Lee, M. K.; King, M.-C.: A novel sodium
bicarbonate cotransporter-like gene in an ancient duplicated region:
SLC4A9 at 5q31. Genome Biol. 2: RESEARCH0011 only, 2001. Note: Electronic
Article.

2. Parker, M. D.; Ourmozdi, E. P.; Tanner, M. J. A.: Human BTR1,
a new bicarbonate transporter superfamily member and human AE4 from
kidney. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 282: 1103-1109, 2001.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 6/22/2006

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2006
mgross: 6/22/2006

102593	TITLE *102593 ACYLOXYACYL HYDROLASE; AOAH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) is a 2-subunit lipase present in phagocytic
cells. The enzyme specifically hydrolyzes the secondary acyl chains of
the lipopolysaccharide found in the walls of gram-negative bacteria
(summary by Whitmore et al., 1994).

CLONING

Hagen et al. (1991) cloned and characterized cDNA for human AOAH and
showed that its 2 subunits are translated from a single mRNA molecule
about 2.2 kb long.

GENE FUNCTION

Whitmore et al. (1994) stated the action of acyloxyacyl hydrolase on
lipopolysaccharide (or endotoxin) suggests that it modulates the host's
inflammatory response to gram-negative bacteria. This hypothesis was
supported by studies showing that the deacylation of lipopolysaccharide
by AOAH in vitro greatly reduces its toxicity and activity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Whitmore et al. (1994) mapped the
AOAH gene to 7p14-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Hagen, F. S.; Grant, F. J.; Kuijper, J. L.; Slaughter, C. A.; Moomaw,
C. R.; Orth, K.; O'Hara, P. J.; Munford, R. S.: Expression and characterization
of recombinant human acyloxyacyl hydrolase, a leukocyte enzyme that
deacylates bacterial lipopolysaccharides. Biochemistry 30: 8415-8423,
1991.

2. Whitmore, T. E.; Mathewes, S. L.; O'Hara, P. J.; Durnam, D. M.
: Chromosomal localization of the acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) gene
to 7p14-p12 using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 21:
457-458, 1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED terry: 05/22/2012
jason: 6/17/1994

602691	TITLE *602691 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 1; NCOA1
;;STEROID RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 1; SRC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Onate et al. (1995) identified steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC1), a
coactivator that is required for full transcriptional activity of the
steroid receptor superfamily. They isolated a cDNA encoding SRC1 using
the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with the
human progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311). The SRC1 protein has a
glutamine-rich region and a serine/threonine-rich region. SRC1 is
expressed as 2 mRNAs of approximately 5.5 and 7.5 kb in a variety of
human tissues and cell lines.

Using a Far Western-based approach to screen a HeLa cell cDNA expression
library with bacterially expressed rat thyroid hormone receptor (THRB;
190160), Takeshita et al. (1996) identified a partial SRC1 cDNA. They
isolated the remaining sequence by 5-prime RACE. The full-length cDNA
encodes a 1,440-amino acid protein with a mass of approximately 160 kD.

Hayashi et al. (1997) identified mRNA splicing variants encoding 3
isoforms: SRC1, SRC1E, and SRC1(-Q). SRC1(-Q) is identical to the
protein described by Takeshita et al. (1996). The C-terminal 56 amino
acids of SRC1 are replaced by 14 unique amino acids in SRC1E, while
SRC1(-Q) differs from SRC1 by deletion of a single glutamine residue.
RT-PCR analysis showed that SRC1E mRNA was more abundantly expressed
than SRC1 or SRC1(-Q) mRNAs in all the cell lines tested. SRC1E enhanced
thyroid hormone-dependent transactivation of reporter gene expression
more efficiently than SRC1 or SRC1(-Q).

GENE FUNCTION

Onate et al. (1995) showed that SRC1 enhances the transcriptional
activity of ligand-bound PGR but does not alter the basal activity of
the target promoter. SRC1 also enhances estrogen receptor (ESR; 133430),
glucocorticoid receptor (GRL; 138040), thyroid hormone receptor (e.g.,
190120), and retinoid X receptor (e.g., RXRA; 180245) transcriptional
activities through their cognate DNA response elements in the presence
of hormone. Studies of the effects of SRC1 on unrelated transactivators
showed that SRC1 can enhance the transcriptional activities of SP1
(189906) and the chimeric Gal4-VP16 protein, but not those of E2F (e.g.,
189971), E47 (147141), or CREB (123810). Coexpression of SRC1 with PGR
and ESR reversed the ability of ESR to squelch activation by PGR,
suggesting that SRC1 is a limiting factor necessary for efficient PGR
and ESR transactivation. A C-terminal form of SRC1 containing the
receptor-binding region acted as a dominant-negative repressor of
endogenous SRC1 function.

In vitro binding studies by Takeshita et al. (1996) showed that SRC1 can
bind to TBP (600075) and to TFIIB (189963), in addition to a variety of
nuclear hormone receptors in a ligand-dependent manner, suggesting that
SRC1 may play a role as a bridging molecule between nuclear hormone
receptors and general transcription factors. The conserved AF-2 region
of nuclear hormone receptors was not required for receptor-SRC1 binding.

To dissect the role of SRC1 in PGR transactivation, Liu et al. (1999)
used a cell-free transcription system with chromatin templates. They
reported the successful reconstitution of ligand-dependent and
PGR-dependent transcription using chromatin. They showed that,
consistent with their previously proposed hypothesis (Jenster et al.,
1997), the addition of liganded PGR to preassembled chromatin led to the
reconfiguration of nucleosome structure in the vicinity of its binding
site. This study suggested a dual role for SRC1 in PGR-mediated
transactivation: SRC1 is involved in both chromatin remodeling and the
process of recruitment/stabilization of general transcription factors.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2007) found that SIP
(KANK2; 614610) interacted with the N-terminal domain of SRC1. Western
blot analysis of MCF-7 human breast cancer cell immunoprecipitates
confirmed interaction between SIP and SRC1. Mutation analysis showed
that the ankyrin (612641) repeat domain of SIP was required for its
interaction with SRC1. Zhang et al. (2007) found that estrogen
stimulation of MCF-7 cells caused nuclear translocation of cytosolic
SRC1, while SIP remained cytosolic. Knockdown of SIP via RNA
interference resulted in SRC1 nuclear localization, independent of
estrogen treatment, and increased expression of an estrogen-dependent
reporter. Overexpression of SIP in MCF-7 cells reduced cell
proliferation and caused accumulation of cells in G0/G1 phase in
response to estrogen treatment. In contrast, knockdown of SIP led to an
increase of cells in S and G2/M phases following estrogen treatment.
Casein kinase II (see 115440) phosphorylated SIP in vitro, and
phosphorylated SIP no longer interacted with SRC1 in MCF-7 cells,
permitting SRC1 translocation to the nucleus. Zhang et al. (2007)
concluded that SIP sequesters SRC1 in the cytoplasm and thereby
regulates its transactivation activity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Carapeti et al. (1998) mapped the
NCOA1 gene to human chromosome 2p23.

ANIMAL MODEL

Picard et al. (2002) found that Tif2 (601993) -/- mice were protected
against obesity and displayed enhanced adaptive thermogenesis, whereas
Src1 -/- mice were prone to obesity due to reduced energy expenditure.
In white adipose tissue, lack of Tif2 decreased Pparg (601487) activity
and reduced fat accumulation, whereas in brown adipose tissue, it
facilitated the interaction between Src1 and Pgc1-alpha (604517), which
induced the thermogenic activity of Pgc1-alpha. A high-fat diet
increased the Tif2/Src1 expression ratio, which may have contributed to
weight gain. These results revealed that the relative level of TIF2/SRC1
can modulate energy metabolism.

Ye et al. (2005) developed transgenic androgen receptor (AR;
313700)-reporter mice and crossed them with Src1 or Tif2 knockout mice
to analyze the contributions of Src1 and Tif2 to AR activity in testis.
In vivo imaging and reporter gene assays showed that testicular AR
activity was decreased significantly in mice with the Tif2 +/- mutation,
but not in those with an Src1 +/- background, suggesting that Tif2 is
the preferential coactivator for AR in testis. Immunohistologic analysis
confirmed that AR and Tif2 coexist in mouse testicular Sertoli cell
nuclei under normal conditions. Although Src1 concentrated in Sertoli
cell nuclei in the absence of Tif2, nuclear Src1 did not rescue AR
activity in the Tif2 mutant background. Src1 appeared to negatively
influence AR activity, whereas Tif2 stimulated AR activity.

REFERENCE 1. Carapeti, M.; Aguiar, R. C. T.; Chase, A.; Goldman, J. M.; Cross,
N. C. P.: Assignment of the steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1)
gene to human chromosome band 2p23. Genomics 52: 242-244, 1998.

2. Hayashi, Y.; Ohmori, S.; Ito, T.; Seo, H.: A splicing variant
of steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1E): the major isoform of SRC-1
to mediate thyroid hormone action. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 236:
83-87, 1997.

3. Jenster, G.; Spencer, T. E.; Burcin, M. M.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai,
M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Steroid receptor induction of gene transcription:
a two-step model. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 7879-7884, 1997.

4. Liu, Z.; Wong, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M. J.; O'Malley, B. W.:
Steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) enhances ligand-dependent and
receptor-dependent cell-free transcription of chromatin. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 96: 9485-9490, 1999.

5. Onate, S. A.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Sequence
and characterization of a coactivator for the steroid hormone receptor
superfamily. Science 270: 1354-1357, 1995.

6. Picard, F.; Gehin, M.; Annicotte, J.-S.; Rocchi, S.; Champy, M.-F.;
O'Malley, B. W.; Chambon, P.; Auwerx, J.: SRC-1 and TIF2 control
energy balance between white and brown adipose tissues. Cell 111:
931-941, 2002.

7. Takeshita, A.; Yen, P. M.; Misiti, S.; Cardona, G. R.; Liu, Y.;
Chin, W. W.: Molecular cloning and properties of a full-length putative
thyroid hormone receptor coactivator. Endocrinology 137: 3594-3597,
1996.

8. Ye, X.; Han, S. J.; Tsai, S. Y.; DeMayo, F. J.; Xu, J.; Tsai, M.-J.;
O'Malley, B. W.: Roles of steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-1 and
transcriptional intermediary factor (TIF) 2 in androgen receptor activity
in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9487-9492, 2005.

9. Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Liang, J.; Yu, W.; Shang, Y.: SIP, a novel
ankyrin repeat containing protein, sequesters steroid receptor coactivators
in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 26: 2645-2657, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/15/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/19/1998

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 6/5/1998

EDITED alopez: 07/20/2012
terry: 7/19/2012
mgross: 4/30/2012
mgross: 8/15/2005
mgross: 1/15/2003
mgross: 10/18/2002
psherman: 12/17/1999
terry: 12/1/1999
carol: 10/21/1999
terry: 11/19/1998
carol: 11/19/1998
psherman: 6/8/1998
psherman: 6/5/1998

603458	TITLE *603458 EMBRYONIC LETHAL, ABNORMAL VISION, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE 3; ELAVL3
;;HU-ANTIGEN C; HUC;;
PARANEOPLASTIC LIMBIC ENCEPHALITIS ANTIGEN 21; PLE21
DESCRIPTION Paraneoplastic neurologic disorders (PNDs) are a group of neurologic
syndromes that arise when an immune response to systemic tumors
expressing neuronal proteins develops into an autoimmune neuronal
degeneration. Sakai et al. (1994) determined that the serum of a patient
with paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis (PLE) contained autoantibodies
that recognized a 38-kD nuclear antigen in neural cells. By screening a
hippocampus expression library with this serum, they isolated cDNAs
encoding a protein that they called PLE21. The predicted 350-amino acid
protein contains 3 RNA recognition motifs (RRMs). PLE21 shares 82% and
54% protein sequence identity with the human neural autoantigen HuD
(168360) and Drosophila ELAV protein, respectively. Northern blot
analysis revealed that PLE21 is expressed as an approximately 2-kb mRNA
exclusively in brain. Liu et al. (1995) stated that PLE21, or HuC, is
one of several Hu antigens, neuronal-specific RNA-binding proteins
recognized by the anti-Hu serum antibody present in sera from patients
with paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and sensory neuronopathy
(PEM/PSN). The Hu antigens HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1 (601673) each contain 2
tandemly arranged RRMs connected to a third RRM by a highly basic
segment.

Abe et al. (1996) cloned cDNAs encoding mouse HuC. The predicted mouse
and human proteins are 96% identical. These authors found that
alternative splicing generates 2 mouse HuC isoforms, both of which can
bind to AU-rich elements (AREs) within the 3-prime untranslated regions
of mRNAs. Functional domain mapping using mouse HuC deletion mutants
showed that the first RRM binds to ARE, that the second RRM has no
binding activity by itself but facilitates ARE binding by the first RRM,
and that the third RRM has specific binding activity for the poly(A)
sequence.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Van Tine et al. (1998)
mapped the ELAVL3 gene to 19p13.2. Using FISH and radiation hybrid
analysis, they demonstrated that ELAVL3 is centromeric to the ELAVL1
(HuR; 603466) gene located in the same chromosomal region. By analysis
of an interspecific backcross, Fletcher et al. (1997) mapped the mouse
HuC gene to chromosome 9, in a region showing homology of synteny to
human chromosome 19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Abe, R.; Sakashita, E.; Yamamoto, K.; Sakamoto, H.: Two different
RNA binding activities for the AU-rich element and the poly(A) sequence
of the mouse neuronal protein mHuC. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 4895-4901,
1996.

2. Fletcher, C. F.; Okano, H. J.; Gilbert, D. J.; Yang, Y.; Yang,
C.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Darnell, R. B.: Mouse chromosomal
locations of nine genes encoding homologs of human paraneoplastic
neurologic disorder antigens. Genomics 45: 313-319, 1997.

3. Liu, J.; Dalmau, J.; Szabo, A.; Rosenfeld, M.; Huber, J.; Furneaux,
H.: Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis antigens bind to the AU-rich
elements of mRNA. Neurology 45: 544-550, 1995.

4. Sakai, K.; Gofuku, M.; Kitagawa, Y.; Ogasawara, T.; Hirose, G.;
Yamazaki, M.; Koh, C.-S.; Yanagisawa, N.; Steinman, L.: A hippocampal
protein associated with paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome and small
cell lung carcinoma. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 199: 1200-1208,
1994.

5. Van Tine, B. A.; Knops, J. F.; Butler, A.; Deloukas, P.; Shaw,
G. M.; King, P. H.: Localization of HuC (ELAVL3) to chromosome 19p13.2
by fluorescence in situ hybridization utilizing a novel tyramide labeling
technique. Genomics 53: 296-299, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/25/1999

EDITED carol: 11/24/2001
alopez: 1/26/1999
alopez: 1/25/1999

605754	TITLE *605754 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL GLYCAN, CLASS Q; PIGQ
DESCRIPTION Many eukaryotic proteins are anchored to the membrane through the
hydrocarbon chains of a covalently bound glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) membrane anchor. GPI anchoring is important for regulation of cell
growth and activation. GPI biosynthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) is initiated by transfer of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from
UDP-GlcNAc to phosphatidylinositol (PI). This transfer is catalyzed by
GlcNAc transferase (GPI-GnT) and enzyme activity requires several genes
including PIGA (311770), PIGC (601730), and PIGH (600154) in mammals and
Gpi1, Gpi2 (PIGC homolog), and Gpi3 (PIGA homolog) in yeast. PIGQ is
involved in the first step of GPI biosynthesis (Tiede et al., 1998).

CLONING

In a database search for homologs of yeast Gpi1, Tiede et al. (1998) and
Watanabe et al. (1998) identified PIGQ, which they called hGPI1. The
full-length PIGQ cDNA encodes a deduced 581-amino acid protein that
shares 24% overall amino acid identity with yeast Gpi1. The C-terminal
half of PIGQ is better conserved than the N-terminal half. Watanabe et
al. (1998) predicted that PIGQ has several hydrophobic regions, some of
which may be transmembrane domains, and a potential tyrosine
phosphorylation site in the third cytoplasmic loop. Tiede et al. (1998)
predicted that most of the amino acids and conserved residues are on the
cytoplasmic face of the ER and that there are no significant domains in
the lumen of the ER. Tiede et al. (1998) and Hong et al. (1999)
independently cloned the mouse PIGQ homolog, which shares 85 to 89%
amino acid identity with human PIGQ.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation experiments, Watanabe et al. (1998)
demonstrated that PIGQ associates specifically with PIGA, PIGC, and PIGH
and that all 4 proteins form a complex that has GPI-GnT activity in
vitro. The authors concluded that these 4 proteins form part or all of
GPI-GnT.

By expressing the mouse and human PIGQ in Gpi1-deficient S. cerevisiae,
Tiede et al. (1998) demonstrated that PIGQ specifically rescues S.
cerevisiae Gpi1 mutants, indicating that mouse and human PIGQ are indeed
orthologs of yeast Gpi1 and that there is a high degree of evolutionary
conservation in GPI biosynthesis. Tiede et al. (1998) concluded that
PIGQ is involved in the first step of GPI biosynthesis and that the
specific function of PIGQ may be to stabilize the enzyme complex in the
ER rather than to participate in catalysis of GlcNAc transfer.

GENE STRUCTURE

By comparing cDNA and genomic sequence, Hong et al. (1999) predicted
that PIGQ is encoded by 11 exons.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Hong et al. (1999) mapped the
PIGQ gene to chromosome 16p13.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hong et al. (1999) disrupted the mouse Gpi1 gene in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells, which caused a severe but not complete defect in the
generation of GPI-anchored proteins. A complex of Piga, Pigh, and Pigc
decreased to a nearly undetectable level, whereas a complex of Piga and
Pigh was easily detected. A lack of Gpi1 also caused partial decreases
of Pigc and Pigh. Therefore, GPI1 stabilizes the enzyme by tying up Pigc
with a complex of Piga and Pigh.

REFERENCE 1. Hong, Y.; Ohishi, K.; Watanabe, R.; Endo, Y.; Maeda, Y.; Kinoshita,
T.: GPI1 stabilizes an enzyme essential in the first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 18582-18588, 1999.

2. Tiede, A.; Schubert, J.; Nischan, C.; Jensen, I.; Westfall, B.;
Taron, C. H.; Orlean, P.; Schmidt, R. E.: Human and mouse Gpi1p homologues
restore glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane anchor biosynthesis
in yeast mutants. Biochem. J. 334: 609-616, 1998.

3. Watanabe, R.; Inoue, N.; Westfall, B.; Taron, C. H.; Orlean, P.;
Takeda, J.; Kinoshita, T.: The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis is mediated by a complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1. EMBO
J. 17: 877-885, 1998.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 3/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 07/21/2009
carol: 3/22/2001

600729	TITLE *600729 NUCLEAR FACTOR I/C; NFIC
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR NFIC;;
CTF
DESCRIPTION For background information on nuclear factor I proteins, see NFIA
(600727).

GENE STRUCTURE

Grunder et al. (2003) determined that the NFIC gene contains 11 exons.
By ortholog comparisons using protein sequences from 7 vertebrate
species, they identified 11 NFIC variants that are produced by
alternative splicing.

MAPPING

Qian et al. (1995) localized the NFIC and NFIX (164005) genes to
chromosome 19p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By FISH,
Grunder et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Nfic gene to the distal region of
chromosome 10C.

ANIMAL MODEL

Steele-Perkins et al. (2003) found that the Nfic gene was expressed in
many mouse organ systems, including the developing tooth. They disrupted
the Nfic gene in mice and found that, while heterozygous animals
appeared normal, Nfic-null mice had unique tooth pathologies, primarily
defects in tooth root development. Molar crown development was normal,
but molars lacked roots, mandibular incisors were thin and brittle, and
maxillary incisors were weakened and appeared abnormal. Feeding in
Nfic-null mice was severely impaired; however, mutants well nourished by
a soft-dough diet were fertile and had normal life spans.

REFERENCE 1. Grunder, A.; Qian, F.; Ebel, T. T.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.;
Kruse, U.; Sippel, A. E.: Genomic organization, splice products and
mouse chromosomal localization of genes for transcription factor Nuclear
Factor One. Gene 304: 171-181, 2003.

2. Qian, F.; Kruse, U.; Lichter, P.; Sippel, A. E.: Chromosomal localization
of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human transcription
factor nuclear factor I by FISH. Genomics 28: 66-73, 1995.

3. Steele-Perkins, G.; Butz, K. G.; Lyons, G. E.; Zeichner-David,
M.; Kim, H.-J.; Cho, M.-I.; Gronostajski, R. M.: Essential role for
NFI-C/CTF transcription-replication factor in tooth root development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 1075-1084, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1995

EDITED terry: 04/04/2005
mgross: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
terry: 11/21/1997
mark: 10/16/1995

300061	TITLE *300061 ZINC FINGER, MYM-TYPE 3; ZMYM3
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 261; ZNF261;;
DXS6673E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported the cloning and characterization
of the ZNF261 gene, which the called DXS6673E. ZNF261 maps to the X
chromosome, is subject to X inactivation, and was disrupted in the
5-prime untranslated region by a balanced X;13 translocation in a
mentally retarded female. They identified a YAC clone that spanned the
breakpoint and used this YAC to isolate a cDNA from a fetal brain
library. The cDNA contains a 4,074-bp ORF encoding a predicted
1,358-amino acid polypeptide. By Northern analysis, van der Maarel et
al. (1996) showed that the DXS6673E gene is highly conserved among
vertebrates and that its expression is most abundant in brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Hakimi et al. (2003) identified a family of multiprotein corepressor
complexes that function through modifying chromatin structure to keep
genes silent. The polypeptide composition of these complexes includes a
common core of 2 subunits, HDAC1 (601241)/HDAC2 (605164) and the
FAD-binding protein BHC110 (AOF2; 609132). Other subunits of these
complexes include ZNF261, GTF2I (601679), and polypeptides associated
with cancer-causing chromosomal translocations.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported that the ZNF261 gene contains 25
exons, including 2 putative alternatively spliced noncoding exons (1A
and 1B).

MAPPING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) mapped the ZNF261 gene to chromosome
Xq13.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported a mentally retarded female whose
ZNF261 gene was disrupted in the 5-prime UTR by a balanced X;13
translocation. They noted that apart from mental retardation, the only
conspicuous clinical features in this patient were scoliosis and spotty
abdominal hypopigmentation.

REFERENCE 1. Hakimi, M.-A.; Dong, Y.; Lane, W. S.; Speicher, D. W.; Shiekhattar,
R.: A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene is a component of
a new family of histone deacetylase-containing complexes. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 7234-7239, 2003.

2. van der Maarel, S. M.; Scholten, I. H. J. M.; Huber, I.; Philippe,
C.; Suijkerbuijk, R. F.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Kere, J.; Cremers, F. P.
M.; Ropers, H.-H.: Cloning and characterization of DXS6673E, a candidate
gene for X-linked mental retardation in Xq13.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
887-897, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/3/2005

CREATED Moyra Smith: 8/8/1996

EDITED carol: 09/02/2010
mgross: 1/3/2005
alopez: 10/12/1999
terry: 8/15/1996
mark: 8/15/1996
marlene: 8/9/1996
mark: 8/8/1996

153370	TITLE *153370 INTEGRIN, ALPHA-L; ITGAL
;;LYMPHOCYTE FUNCTION-ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN, TYPE 1, ALPHA SUBUNIT; LFA1A;;
CD11A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Larson et al. (1989) isolated clones corresponding to the LFA1-alpha
subunit from a size-selected lambda-gt10 cDNA library constructed from
PMA-stimulated myeloid cells. The protein contains a 25-amino acid
hydrophobic signal sequence, a 1,063-amino acid extracellular domain, a
29-amino acid transmembrane domain, and a 53-amino acid cytoplasmic
tail. The extracellular region contains 7 repeats. The LFA1-alpha
protein shares 36% identity with the alpha subunits of MAC1 (ITGAM;
120980) and p150,95 (ITGAX; 151510); all 3 of these proteins contain an
approximately 200-amino acid insert in the N terminus relative to other
integrin alpha subunits. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a
5.5-kb transcript in lymphoid and myeloid cells but not in bladder
carcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA1) is a dimer consisting of
CD11A (ITGAL) and a beta subunit (ITGB2; 600065). ITGB2 also associates
with other alpha chains, e.g., with ITGAM (120980) to form MAC1 and with
ITGAX (151510) to form p150,95. LFA1 is expressed on lymphocytes and
phagocytic cells. The LFA1 molecule is involved in the adhesion of
cytotoxic T cells to their target cells. Patients with LFA1
immunodeficiency disease (116920) have recurrent life-threatening
infections, show deficiency of the beta chain of all 3 molecules, LFA1,
Mac1 (macrophage antigen-1), and p150,95, and display profound defects
in adhesion-dependent granulocyte, monocyte, and B- and T-lymphocyte
functions. The alpha subunits were designated by Marlin et al. (1986) as
alpha-L for LFA1, alpha-M for Mac1, and alpha-X for p150,95.

Marlin et al. (1986) showed that the genetic defect in LFA1
immunodeficiency disease resides in the common beta subunit of these 3
molecules. Furthermore, they were able to demonstrate that the beta
subunit is coded by chromosome 21, whereas the unique alpha subunit of
LFA1 is coded by chromosome 16. These results were obtained by
human-mouse T-cell fusion studies. Human LFA1 alpha and mouse beta
subunits joined in the interspecies hybrid cells to form alpha-beta
complexes. Surface expression of the alpha, but not of the beta, subunit
of patient cells was restored by the formation of interspecies
complexes. These findings showed that the LFA1 alpha subunit in
genetically deficient cells is competent for surface expression in the
presence of an appropriate beta subunit.

In the serum of a multiply transfused patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus (152700), Pischel et al. (1987) identified an antibody
directed at determinants of the LFA1 alpha-chain. Since the serum did
not immunoprecipitate LFA1 from autologous cells, even though LFA1
molecules were present, the serum identified 2 serologic phenotypes of
LFA1. The serum reacted with cells from 95% of normal individuals.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 (see
192975 and 135630) and that the marginal zone B cells bind to the
ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1 (192225). These ligands are expressed
within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner. Combined
inhibition of LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and selective
release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

Anikeeva et al. (2005) found that LFA1 engagement could be replaced by
other adhesion mechanisms, such as CD2 (186990)-CD58 (LFA3; 153420)
interaction, in antigen-induced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte granule
polarization and degranulation, but that LFA1 engagement was
indispensable for effective target cell lysis by the released granules.
LFA1-mediated adhesion to glass-supported bilayers resulted in a much
larger junction area and formation of a peripheral supramolecular
activation cluster compared with CD2-mediated adhesion. Anikeeva et al.
(2005) concluded that LFA1 delivers a distinct signal essential for
directing released granules to antigen-bearing target cells to mediate
their destruction.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Corbi et al. (1988) demonstrated that the
genes encoding the alpha subunits of LFA1, Mac1, and p150,95, all of
which play a part in leukocyte adhesion, constitute a cluster located on
16p13.1-p11. Callen et al. (1991) narrowed the localization to 16p11.2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Kim et al. (2003) investigated cytoplasmic conformational changes in the
integrin LFA1 (alpha-L; beta-2, 600065) in living cells by measuring
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between cyan fluorescent
protein-fused and yellow fluorescent protein-fused alpha-L and beta-2
cytoplasmic domains. In the resting state these domains were close to
each other, but underwent significant spatial separation upon either
intracellular activation of integrin adhesiveness (inside-out signaling)
or ligand binding (outside-in signaling). Thus, bidirectional integrin
signaling is accomplished by coupling extracellular conformational
changes to an unclasping and separation of the alpha and beta
cytoplasmic domains, which Kim et al. (2003) noted as a distinctive
mechanism for transmitting information across the plasma membrane.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Interactions between LFA1 and intercellular adhesion molecules are
important in the pathogenesis of psoriasis (see 177900). Lebwohl et al.
(2003) studied the therapeutic effects of efalizumab, a humanized
monoclonal antibody that binds to the alpha subunit of LFA1 and inhibits
the activation of T cells, in subjects with psoriasis. A significant
improvement in plaque psoriasis was observed in subjects with moderate
to severe disease. Extending treatment from 12 to 24 weeks resulted in
both maintenance and improvement of responses.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Fischer et al. (1986); Sanchez-Madrid et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Anikeeva, N.; Somersalo, K.; Sims, T. N.; Thomas, V. K.; Dustin,
M. L.; Sykulev, Y.: Distinct role of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 in mediating effective cytolytic activity by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6437-6442, 2005.

2. Callen, D. F.; Chen, L. Z.; Nancarrow, J.; Whitmore, S. A.; Apostolou,
S.; Thompson, A. D.; Lane, S. A.; Stallings, R. L.; Hildebrand, C.
E.; Harris, P. G.; Sutherland, G. R.: Current state of the physical
map of human chromosome 16. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1998 only, 1991.

3. Corbi, A. L.; Larson, R. S.; Kishimoto, T. K.; Springer, T. A.;
Morton, C. C.: Chromosomal location of the genes encoding the leukocyte
adhesion receptors LFA-1, Mac-1 and p150,95: identification of a gene
cluster involved in cell adhesion. J. Exp. Med. 167: 1597-1607,
1988.

4. Fischer, A.; Durandy, A.; Sterkers, G.; Griscelli, C.: Role of
the LFA-1 molecule in cellular interactions required for antibody
production in humans. J. Immun. 136: 3198-3203, 1986.

5. Kim, M.; Carman, C. V.; Springer, T. A.: Bidirectional transmembrane
signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins. Science 301:
1720-1725, 2003.

6. Larson, R. S.; Corbi, A. L.; Berman, L.; Springer, T.: Primary
structure of the leukocyte function-associated molecule-1 alpha subunit:
an integrin with an embedded domain defining a protein superfamily. J.
Cell Biol. 108: 703-712, 1989.

7. Lebwohl, M.; Tyring, S. K.; Hamilton, T. K.; Toth, D.; Glazer,
S.; Tawfik, N. H.; Walicke, P.; Dummer, W.; Wang, X.; Garovoy, M.
R.; Pariser, D.: A novel targeted T-cell modulator, efalizumab, for
plaque psoriasis. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 2004-2013, 2003.

8. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell retention
in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

9. Marlin, S. D.; Morton, C. C.; Anderson, D. C.; Springer, T. A.
: LFA-1 immunodeficiency disease: definition of the genetic defect
and chromosomal mapping of alpha and beta subunits of the lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) by complementation in hybrid
cells. J. Exp. Med. 164: 855-867, 1986.

10. Pischel, K. D.; Marlin, S. D.; Springer, T. A.; Woods, V. L.,
Jr.; Bluestein, H. G.: Polymorphism of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 demonstrated by a lupus patient's alloantiserum. J. Clin.
Invest. 79: 1607-1614, 1987.

11. Sanchez-Madrid, F.; Nagy, J.; Robbins, E.; Simon, P.; Springer,
T. A.: A human leukocyte differentiation antigen family with distinct
alpha subunits and a common beta subunit: the lymphocyte function-associated
antigen (LFA-1), the C3bi complement receptor (OKM1/Mac-1), and the
p150,95 molecule. J. Exp. Med. 158: 1785-1803, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 08/22/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED alopez: 08/22/2008
mgross: 5/22/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
carol: 5/15/2007
tkritzer: 1/9/2004
terry: 1/9/2004
terry: 9/26/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
mark: 6/12/1997
mimadm: 11/6/1994
carol: 5/4/1992
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

605722	TITLE *605722 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 16; KCNJ16
;;KIR5.1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels are important for
regulation of the resting membrane potential and control of cellular
electrical activity. KCNJ16, or Kir5.1, belongs to the Kir family, but
it does not produce functional potassium channels when expressed by
itself. Instead, Kir5.1 appears to coassemble selectively with either
Kir4.1 (KCNJ10; 602208) or Kir4.2 (KCNJ15; 602106) to form novel
heteromeric channels (summary by D'Adamo et al., 2011).

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences showing homology to mouse
Kir5.1, Liu et al. (2000) identified a human EST with 98% sequence
identity to a segment on chromosome 17. Using the full-length Kir5.1
mouse clone, they derived the human ortholog, designated KCNJ16, from
genomic sequence. The KCNJ16 gene encodes a deduced 418-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 48 kD. The protein shares
over 95% sequence identity with both mouse and rat Kir5.1. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of KCNJ16, whereas Northern blot
analysis detected significant expression of a 4.0-kb transcript in
kidney, pancreas, and thyroid gland. In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of KCNJ16 in convoluted tubule cells of the kidney and in
acinar and ductal cells of the pancreas. Liu et al. (2000) noted that
Kir1.1 (KCNJ1; 600359), Kir4.1, and Kir4.2 are all expressed in kidney.
They suggested that heteromultimers of these potassium channel proteins
in kidney and pancreas may play a role in ion transport, fluid
regulation, and pH balance.

By database searching with sequences from rat Kir5.1, Derst et al.
(2001) independently assembled a human KCNJ16 cDNA, which they called
Kir5.1. They predicted that Kir5.1 encodes a protein of 418 amino acids
that shares 91% amino acid identity with rat and mouse Kir5.1. They
noted that Kir5.1 shares 40 to 43% amino acid identity with members of
the Kir2 gene family, including Kir2.1 (KCNJ2; 600681), Kir2.2 (KCNJ12;
602323), Kir2.3, and Kir2.4 (KCNJ14; 603953).

Using in situ hybridization, Derst et al. (2001) detected Kir5.1
expression restricted to the hindbrain, midbrain, and diencephalon in
rat brain. Using RT-PCR, they detected KCNJ16 expression in human kidney
in the proximal tubule, the thick ascending limb, and the cortical
collecting duct. They noted that KCNJ16 expression overlaps with Kir2.1
expression in some regions of the brain and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Derst et al. (2001) found that when Kir5.1 was expressed in Xenopus
oocytes, it was targeted to the cell surface and formed electrically
silent channels together with Kir2.1, thus negatively controlling Kir2.1
channel activity in native cells.

By electrophysiologic recording of HEK293T cells transfected with rat
cDNAs, Tanemoto et al. (2000) showed that Kir4.1, but not Kir5.1, formed
functional homomeric K+ channels sensitive to intracellular, but not
extracellular, pH. Heteromeric Kir4.1/Kir5 channels were functional and
showed channel properties different than those of homomeric Kir4.1
channels. For both Kir4.1 and Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels, response to pH
disappeared at pH 5.5 and increased in a pH-dependent manner between pH
6.5 and pH 8.0. Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels had larger conductance, altered
kinetics, and greater sensitivity to pH than Kir4.1 channels.
Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels opened in bursts, and the closed period between
bursts was influenced by intracellular pH.

In cotransfection experiments, Tanemoto et al. (2002) showed that Kir5.1
assembles to form a functional homomeric potassium channel by
interacting with PSD95 (602887). Kir5.1 expressed alone was distributed
mostly in the cytoplasm, but Kir5.1 coexpressed with PSD95 was located
on the plasma membrane in a clustered manner. Using GST pull-down
studies, Tanemoto et al. (2002) identified domains responsible for
Kir5.1/PSD95 interaction. They found that protein kinase A
(PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of Kir5.1 disrupted the binding of Kir5.1
with PSD95. Tanemoto et al. (2002) hypothesized that Kir5.1/PSD95 forms
a functional brain potassium channel that may be a physiologic target of
PKA-mediated signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Derst et al. (2001) determined that the KCNJ16 gene is encoded by 5
exons spanning approximately 60 kb. They noted that KCNJ16 and KCNJ2 are
separated by only 34 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Liu et al. (2000) mapped the KCNJ16 gene
to chromosome 17q25. By the same method, Derst et al. (2001) assigned
KCNJ16 to chromosome 17q23.1-q24.2, near KCNJ2.

ANIMAL MODEL

D'Adamo et al. (2011) found that, despite widespread Kir5.1 expression,
Kir5.1 -/- mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, were viable
and fertile, and showed no behavioral or physical abnormalities.
However, whole-cell patch clamp experiments showed that neurons cultured
from the locus ceruleus (LC) of Kir5.1 -/- mice exhibited reduced
response to intracellular pH compared with wildtype LC neurons. Both the
kinetics and amplitude of firing of Kir5.1 -/- LC neurons were altered
in response to NH4Cl application or elevated soluble CO2. D'Adamo et al.
(2011) concluded that Kir5.1/Kir4.1 channels of the LC respond to
hypercapnic acidosis.

REFERENCE 1. D'Adamo, M. C.; Shang, L.; Imbrici, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Pessia,
M.; Tucker, S. J.: Genetic inactivation of Kcnj16 identifies Kir5.1
as an important determinant of neuronal PCO2/pH sensitivity. J. Biol.
Chem. 286: 192-198, 2011.

2. Derst, C.; Karschin, C.; Wischmeyer, E.; Hirsch, J. R.; Preisig-Muller,
R.; Rajan, S.; Engel, H.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Daut, J.; Karschin, A.
: Genetic and functional linkage of Kir5.1 and Kir2.1 channel subunits. FEBS
Lett. 491: 305-311, 2001.

3. Liu, Y.; McKenna, E.; Figueroa, D. J.; Blevins, R.; Austin, C.
P.; Bennett, P. B.; Swanson, R.: The human inward rectifier K+ channel
subunit Kir5.1 (KCNJ16) maps to chromosome 17q25 and is expressed
in kidney and pancreas. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90: 60-63, 2000.

4. Tanemoto, M.; Fujita, A.; Higashi, K.; Kurachi, Y.: PSD-95 mediates
formation of a functional homomeric Kir5.1 channel in the brain. Neuron 34:
387-397, 2002.

5. Tanemoto, M.; Kittaka, N.; Inanobe, A.; Kurachi, Y.: In vivo formation
of a proton-sensitive K+ channel by heteromeric subunit assembly of
Kir5.1 with Kir4.1. J. Physiol. 525: 587-592, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2011
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 3/8/2001

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/1/2011
carol: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2002
carol: 3/8/2001

607389	TITLE *607389 SINGLE-STRANDED DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 2; SSBP2
;;SENSOR OF SINGLE-STRANDED DNA COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2; SOSSB2;;
SOSS COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SSBP2 is a subunit of a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding complex
involved in the maintenance of genome stability (Huang et al., 2009).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Castro et al. (2002) identified a novel gene,
which they designated SSBP2, that is disrupted at the 5q13 breakpoint in
the acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line ML3. EST database searching
revealed that the transcript is similar to the chicken gene CSDP, which
encodes a protein that binds single-stranded pyrimidine-rich
mirror-repeat elements with high specificity. By further database
searching, they identified 2 additional cDNAs encoding single-stranded
DNA-binding proteins, SSBP3 (607390) and SSBP4 (607391). The deduced
362-amino acid SSBP2 protein shares 83% and 73% sequence identity with
SSBP3 and SSBP4, respectively, and 100% identity with the mouse Ssbp2
homolog. SSBP family members share a highly conserved N terminus
followed by a glycine- and proline-rich domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of a 1.9-kb SSBP2 transcript. Expression
was high in all hematopoietic tissues, including spleen, lymph node,
peripheral blood, bone marrow, thymus, and fetal liver, with highest
expression in thymus and fetal liver. Expression was also high in heart,
brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle. Of 5 leukemia cell lines tested,
expression was highest in pre-T lymphoblastic leukemia cell line CEM. No
gross inactivating mutations were found in leukemia cell lines or in
primary leukemic blasts from 4 patients.

GENE FUNCTION

Using HEK293 cells for tandem affinity purification, Huang et al. (2009)
identified SOSSA (INTS3; 611347) and SOSSC (613273) as common components
of 2 distinct and complementary ssDNA-binding heterotrimeric complexes
defined by their inclusion of either SOSSB1 (SSBP1; 600439) or SOSSB2
(SSBP2), but not both. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that
SOSS complexes formed in HeLa cells independent of DNA damage.
Recombinant heterotrimeric SOSS complexes specifically bound ssDNA, but
not double-stranded DNA. SOSSA served as the central assembly factor,
and SOSSB and SOSSC bound overlapping regions on SOSSA, but they did not
interact directly with each other. Depletion of SOSSA by small
interfering RNA led to dramatic decreases in SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 protein
levels, abrogated targeting of SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 to chromatin, increased
ionizing radiation sensitivity, caused defective G2/M checkpoint, and
impaired homologous recombination repair. Huang et al. (2009)
demonstrated that both SOSS complexes and the CTIP (RBBP8; 604124)/RPA
(see RPA1; 179835) complex acted downstream of the MRE11 (600814)-RAD50
(604040)-NBS1 (NBN; 602667) complex and functioned in DNA damage repair.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castro et al. (2002) determined that the SSBP2, SSBP3, and SSBP4 genes
all contain 17 exons and have identical intron/exon boundaries,
suggesting duplication from a common ancestral gene. They also
identified alternative splicing and additional internal exons for all 3
genes, suggesting the existence of multiple isoforms for each protein.
The SSBP2 gene spans more than 200 kb.

MAPPING

Castro et al. (2002) mapped the SSBP2 gene to chromosome 5q13.3, within
the critical breakpoint region in the AML cell line ML3.

REFERENCE 1. Castro, P.; Liang, H.; Liang, J. C.; Nagarajan, L.: A novel, evolutionarily
conserved gene family with putative sequence-specific single-stranded
DNA-binding activity. Genomics 80: 78-85, 2002.

2. Huang, J.; Gong, Z.; Ghosal, G.; Chen, J.: SOSS complexes participate
in the maintenance of genomic stability. Molec. Cell 35: 384-393,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 12/3/2002
carol: 12/2/2002

