605475	TITLE *605475 BAI1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; BAIAP2
;;INSULIN RECEPTOR SUBSTRATE p53; IRSP53
DESCRIPTION Brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor-1 (BAI1; 602682) is a secretin
receptor family member whose expression is induced by p53 (191170). Yeh
et al. (1996) cloned a hamster cDNA encoding a 53-kD BAI-associated
protein which, when expressed in mammalian cells, is tyrosine
phosphorylated by the insulin receptor. They termed the protein IRSp53
for insulin receptor substrate p53. The protein contains 521 amino acids
with a calculated molecular mass of 57 kD and is highly expressed in the
brain. The protein appears to be localized primarily in the particulate
fraction of cell lysates. The IRSp53 cDNA was found to encode an
additional protein product of 58 kD (p58) in vivo.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with cytoplasmic BAI1 as bait, followed by
screening of a human fetal brain cDNA library, Oda et al. (1999)
isolated a cDNA encoding BAIAP2 and a splice variant. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 520- and 521-amino acid proteins are homologous to
hamster IRSp53 with identity conserved in the C-terminal SH3 domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 3.2-kb transcript
primarily in brain with very low levels in placenta, prostate, and
testis as well as ubiquitous expression of a 2.2-kb transcript that is
relatively abundant in liver, prostate, testis, and placenta. The
expression of the 3.2-kb transcript overlaps that of BAI1 in brain
subregions, is similar to that of neuron- and neuroendocrine-restricted
NSE (ENO2; 131360), but different from that of astrocyte-specific GFAP
(137780). Yeast 2-hybrid and GST pull-down analyses with mutated
proteins confirmed that the SH3 domain of BAIAP2 interacts with the
proline-rich cytoplasmic portion of BAI1. Double immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated colocalization of BAI1 and BAIAP2 in the
cytoplasmic membrane, whereas cells expressing BAIAP2 alone showed
diffuse staining of the cytosol and nucleus.

Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA; 125370) is an autosomal
dominant, progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by
selective neuron death in the dentatorubral and pallidoluysian pathways
and is associated with CAG repeats in the DRPLA gene (607462). Using a
yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human fetal brain cDNA library with
N-terminus-deleted DRPLA as bait, Okamura-Oho et al. (1999) identified
cDNAs encoding human IRSP53. Sequence analysis identified deduced
proteins of 552 and 521 amino acids. The latter sequence is 94%
identical to hamster IRSp53. Northern blot analysis revealed expression
of a 3.0-kb transcript in most tissues examined and a 3.8-kb transcript
mainly in brain, suggesting alternative splicing. After stimulation of
cells with insulin, immunoblot analysis detected a phosphorylated 58-kD
IRSP53 protein which did not enhance binding to DRPLA.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis and reporter gene assays indicated that
DRPLA and IRSP53 do interact. Confocal microscopy demonstrated
colocalization in perinuclear dots. GST pull-down analysis determined
that the SH3 domain in the C terminus of IRSP53 binds to a proline-rich
region of DRPLA, which may be interfered with by extended polyglutamine
tracts in the form of CAG repeats.

Miki et al. (2000) demonstrated that IRSP53 is the critical linker
between RAC (see 602048) and WAVE2 (605875). Activated RAC binds to the
N terminus of IRSP53, and the C-terminal SH3 domain of IRSP53 binds to
WAVE2 to form a trimolecular complex. From studies of ectopic
expression, Miki et al. (2000) found that IRSP53 is essential for RAC to
induce membrane ruffling, probably because it recruits WAVE2, which
stimulates actin polymerization mediated by the ARP2/3 complex.

By FISH, Oda et al. (1999) mapped the BAIAP2 gene to chromosome 17q25.

REFERENCE 1. Miki, H.; Yamaguchi, H.; Suetsugu, S.; Takenawa, T.: IRSp53 is
an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of
membrane ruffling. Nature 408: 732-735, 2000.

2. Oda, K.; Shiratsuchi, T.; Nishimori, H.; Inazawa, J.; Yoshikawa,
H.; Taketani, Y.; Nakamura, Y.; Tokino, T.: Identification of BAIAP2
(BAI-associated protein 2), a novel human homologue of hamster IRSp53,
whose SH3 domain interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of BAI1. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 84: 75-82, 1999.

3. Okamura-Oho, Y.; Miyashita, T.; Ohmi, K.; Yamada, M.: Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy protein interacts through a proline-rich region near polyglutamine
with the SH3 domain of an insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 947-957, 1999.

4. Yeh, T. C.; Ogawa, W.; Danielsen, A. G.; Roth, R. A.: Characterization
and cloning of a 58/53-kDa substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 2921-2928, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 12/14/2000

EDITED carol: 01/24/2003
joanna: 4/24/2001
carol: 2/20/2001
mcapotos: 2/15/2001
carol: 2/13/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
carol: 12/14/2000

600514	TITLE *600514 REELIN; RELN
;;RL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RELN gene encodes reelin, a large secreted glycoprotein that is
produced by specific cell types within the developing brain and
activates a signaling pathway in postmitotic migrating neurons required
for proper positioning of neurons within laminated nervous system
parenchyma (summary by Zaki et al., 2007).

CLONING

The autosomal recessive mouse mutation 'reeler' (rl) leads to impaired
motor coordination, tremors, and ataxia. Neurons in affected mice fail
to reach their correct locations in the developing brain, disrupting the
organization of the cerebellar and cerebral cortices and other laminated
regions. D'Arcangelo et al. (1995) isolated a gene called reelin (Reln)
that was deleted in 2 reeler alleles. The allele used in cloning the
gene was produced by transgene insertion. Normal but not mutant mice
expressed reelin in embryonic and postnatal neurons during periods of
neuronal migration. The encoded protein resembled extracellular matrix
proteins involved in cell adhesion. D'Arcangelo et al. (1995) found that
the 10,383-bp reelin open reading frame (ORF) begins with a methionine
codon preceded by a consensus sequence for translation initiation. The
stop codon is followed by about 1 kb of 3-prime untranslated sequence
and a potential polyadenylation signal. The ORF encodes a protein of
3,461 amino acids with a relative molecular mass of 388 kD. A single
reelin transcript of about 12 kb was detected in RNA from the brains of
normal mice, but not from brains of affected mice.

Hirotsune et al. (1995) also identified a strong candidate cDNA for the
mouse reeler gene. This 5-kb transcript encoded a 94.4-kD protein
consisting of 881 amino acids and possessing 2 EGF-like motifs. They
analyzed 2 mutant alleles: 'Jackson reeler,' which was found to have a
deletion of the entire gene, and 'Orleans reeler,' which exhibited a
220-bp deletion in the ORF that included the second EGF-like motif and
resulted in a frameshift. In situ hybridization demonstrated that the
transcript is detected exclusively in the pioneer neurons that guide
neuronal cell migration along the radial array. The findings offered an
explanation of how the reeler mutant phenotype causes a disturbance of
the complex architecture of the neuronal network.

DeSilva et al. (1997) found that, like its murine counterpart, human
reelin (RELN) is large, encoding an mRNA of approximately 12 kb. The
mouse and human proteins, predicted from the ORF of the overlapping cDNA
clones, are similar in size (388 kD) and the amino acid and nucleotide
sequences are 94.2% and 87.2% identical, respectively. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that RELN is expressed in fetal and
postnatal brain as well as in liver. The expression of RELN in postnatal
human brain was high in the cerebellum.

GENE STRUCTURE

Royaux et al. (1997) described the genomic structure of the mouse Reln
gene and the 5-prime-flanking genomic DNA sequences. The gene contains
65 exons spanning approximately 450 kb of genomic DNA. They identified
different reelin transcripts, formed by alternative splicing of a
microexon as well as by use of 2 different polyadenylation sites. All
splice sites conform to the GT-AG rule, except for the splice donor site
of intron 30, which is GC instead of GT. A processed pseudogene was
present in intron 42. Its nucleotide sequence was 86% identical to the
sequence of the rat RDJ1 cDNA which codes for a DnaJ-like protein of the
Hsp40 family. The genomic structures of the mouse and human RELN genes
appear to be highly conserved. The presence of tandemly repeated regions
in the reelin protein suggested that gene duplication events occurred
during evolution. By comparison of the amino acid sequences of the 8
repeats and the positions of introns, Royaux et al. (1997) suggested a
model for the evolution of the repeat coding portion of the reelin gene
from a putative ancestral minigene.

MAPPING

To map the RL gene, D'Arcangelo (1995) used a mouse reelin probe to
isolate a human cDNA from a cerebellum phage library. A P1 clone was
then used for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The human
reelin gene maps to 7q22, a chromosomal region that had not yet been
linked to any human genetic disease (D'Arcangelo et al., 1995). RL was
also mapped to YAC contigs spanning the 7q22 region. In the mouse, the
rl gene maps to chromosome 5 (Green, 1989), which is known to have a
long region of homology to human chromosome 7. Based on both FISH and
localization within a well-positioned YAC contig, DeSilva et al. (1997)
mapped the RELN gene to chromosome 7q22.

GENE FUNCTION

Impagnatiello et al. (1998) suggested that reelin may have a role in
schizophrenia (181500) because it regulates positioning and/or trophism
of cortical pyramidal neurons, interneurons, and Purkinje cells during
brain development. Another factor that plays an important role in
guiding the migration of embryonic cortical neurons to their final
destinations in the subcortical plate is the gene that is mutant in the
mouse 'disabled-1' mutation. This gene encodes an adaptor protein (Dab1;
603448) that is a phosphorylation target for a signaling cascade
putatively triggered by the Reln protein interaction with extracellular
matrix (ECM) proteins. Dab1 expression is deficient in another
neurologic genetic phenotype, the 'scrambler' mouse, which is
neurologically and behaviorally similar to the reeler mouse. During
ontogenesis of a mammalian brain, including human brain, RELN is
abundantly synthesized by the Cajal-Retzius cells and other pioneer
neurons located in the telencephalic marginal zone and by granule cells
of the external granular layer of the cerebellum. In wildtype and
scrambler mice, Reln is secreted into the ECM, but the reeler mouse
neither synthesizes nor secretes typical Reln protein. During
development, telencephalic migrating neurons and interneurons express
DAB1, but they neither express nor secrete RELN. In the reeler mouse,
the telencephalic neurons (which are misplaced following migration)
express approximately 10-fold more Dab1 than their wildtype counterpart.
Such an increase in the expression of a protein that virtually functions
as a receptor is expected to occur when the specific signal for the
receptor is missing. The function of RELN in embryos may ultimately
depend on the phosphorylation of DAB1 expressed selectively in migrating
telencephalic pyramidal neurons and cerebellar Purkinje neurons.
Impagnatiello et al. (1998) studied postmortem prefrontal cortices,
temporal cortices, hippocampi, caudate nuclei, and cerebella of
schizophrenia patients and their matched nonpsychiatric subjects. In all
of the brain areas studied, RELN and its mRNA were significantly reduced
(approximately 50%) in patients with schizophrenia; this decrease was
similar in patients affected by undifferentiated or paranoid
schizophrenia. On the other hand, DAB1 was expressed at normal levels in
all of these areas that showed a decrease in RELN. The frequency of RELN
DNA polymorphism in schizophrenia patients and the location of this
variation in a stretch of genomic DNA important for the regulation of
RELN protein secretion (Royaux et al., 1997) increased the clinical
interest in RELN gene abnormalities as putative vulnerability factors in
schizophrenia.

Layering of neurons in the cerebral cortex and cerebellum requires RELN
and DAB1. By targeted disruption experiments in mice, Trommsdorff et al.
(1999) showed that 2 cell surface receptors, very low density
lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR; 192977) and apolipoprotein E receptor-2
(APOER2; 602600), are also required. Both receptors bound Dab1 on their
cytoplasmic tails and were expressed in cortical and cerebellar layers
adjacent to layers expressing Reln. Dab1 expression was upregulated in
knockout mice lacking both the Vldlr and Apoer2 genes. Inversion of
cortical layers, absence of cerebellar foliation, and the migration of
Purkinje cells in these animals precisely mimicked the phenotype of mice
lacking Reln or Dab1. These findings established novel signaling
functions for the LDL receptor gene family and suggested that VLDLR and
APOER2 participate in transmitting the extracellular RELN signal to
intracellular signaling processes initiated by DAB1.

Using in vitro binding experiments, Hiesberger et al. (1999) showed that
Reln binds directly and specifically to the extracellular domains of
Vldlr and ApoER2. In primary embryonic neuron cultures, they
demonstrated that blockade of Vldlr and ApoER2 ligand binding correlates
with loss of Reelin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1. With
Western blot analysis, they demonstrated that mice that lack either Reln
or Vldlr and ApoER2 (Trommsdorff et al., 1999) exhibit a dramatic
increase in the phosphorylation level of the microtubule-stabilizing
protein tau (MAPT; 157140). Hiesberger et al. (1999) concluded that Reln
acts via Vldlr and ApoER2 to regulate Dab1 tyrosine phosphorylation and
microtubule function in neurons.

D'Arcangelo et al. (1999) transfected 293T cells with expression
constructs encoding full-length VLDLR, APOER2, and LDLR (606945) cDNA.
Cells were incubated in the presence of reelin. By Western blotting, all
3 reelin isoforms (400, 250, and 180 kD) were found to associate with
293T cells expressing VLDLR and APOER2, and to a lower extent with cells
expressing LDLR; no binding was detected using mock transfected cells.
Binding required calcium and was inhibited in the presence of APOE
(107741). Furthermore, the CR-50 monoclonal antibody, which inhibits
reelin function, blocked the association of reelin with VLDLR. After
binding to VLDLR on the cell surface, reelin was internalized into
vesicles. In dissociated embryonic cortical neurons, APOE reduced the
level of reelin-induced intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1.
The authors suggested that reelin directs neuronal migration by binding
to VLDLR and APOER2.

Mutation of the Reln gene in the mouse disrupts neuronal migration in
several brain regions and gives rise to functional deficits, such as
ataxic gait and trembling. Thus, reelin is thought to control cell-cell
interactions critical for cell positioning in the brain. Although an
abundance of reelin transcript is found in the embryonic spinal cord, it
was generally thought that neuronal migration in the spinal cord is not
affected by reelin. However, Yip et al. (2000) showed that migration of
sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord is affected by
reelin. This study indicated that reelin affects neuronal migration
outside of the brain. Moreover, the relationship between reelin and
migrating preganglionic neurons suggests that reelin acts as a barrier
to neuronal migration.

Using neuronal precursors from postnatal mice in a Matrigel culture
system, Hack et al. (2002) showed that reelin acted as a detachment
signal for chain-migrating interneuron precursors in the olfactory bulb,
inducing their dispersal into individual cells. In vivo studies of
reeler mutant mice showed disrupted organization of the olfactory bulb
as well as failure of individual neuronal migration. Reelin did not act
as a stop signal, did not provide directional cues, and did not affect
migration distance.

Using in vitro and in vivo migration assays, Dulabon et al. (2000)
showed that reelin inhibits migration of cortical neurons in mouse
embryonic brain. Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that reelin
associates with alpha-3-beta-1 integrin (see 605025 and 135630), a
receptor that mediates neuronal adhesion to radial glial fibers and
radial migration. Using alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mouse embryos
for migration assays, Dulabon et al. (2000) showed that deficiency in
functional alpha-3-beta-1 integrins leads to deficiency in reelin
function. They observed reduced levels of Dab1 protein and elevated
expression of a 180-kD reelin fragment in cerebral cortices of
alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mice. Dulabon et al. (2000) concluded
that reelin may arrest neuronal migration and promote normal cortical
lamination by binding alpha-3-beta-1 integrin and modulating
integrin-mediated cellular adhesion.

By examining mice deficient in either Reln or Dab1, Rice et al. (2001)
found that expression of both genes was essential for the patterning of
synaptic connectivity in the retina. Physiologic studies of mice
deficient in either gene detected attenuated rod-driven retinal
responses that were associated with a decrease in rod bipolar cell
density and an abnormal distribution of processes in the inner plexiform
layer.

Grayson et al. (2005) found that postmortem brains from patients with
schizophrenia had increased methylation of the RELN gene within the
promoter region, particularly at positions -134 and -139, compared to
controls. The authors hypothesized that hypermethylation of this
promoter region results in decreased expression of RELN in
schizophrenia.

Botella-Lopez et al. (2006) found increased levels of a 180-kD reelin
fragment in CSF from 19 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)
compared to 11 nondemented controls. Western blot and PCR analysis
confirmed increased levels of reelin protein and mRNA in tissue samples
from the frontal cortex of AD patients. Reelin was not increased in
plasma samples, suggesting distinct cellular origins. The reelin 180-kD
fragment was also increased in CSF samples of other neurodegenerative
disorders, including frontotemporal dementia (600274), progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), and Parkinson disease (PD; 168600).

Using overexpression and knockdown studies with cultured rat and mouse
hippocampal and cortical neurons, Matsuki et al. (2010) found that a
signaling pathway containing Stk25 (602255), Lkb1 (STK11; 602216), Strad
(STRADA; 608626), and the Golgi protein Gm130 (GOLGA2; 602580) promoted
Golgi condensation and multiple axon outgrowth while inhibiting Golgi
deployment into dendrites and dendritic growth. This signaling pathway
acted in opposition to the reelin-Dab1 pathway, which tended to inhibit
Golgi condensation and axon outgrowth and favor Golgi deployment into
dendrites and dendrite outgrowth.

Thirty percent of all cortical interneurons arise from a relatively
novel source within the ventral telencephalon, the caudal ganglionic
eminence (CGE) (summary by De Marco Garcia et al., 2011). Owing to their
late birth date, these interneurons populate the cortex only after the
majority of other interneurons and pyramidal cells are already in place
and have started to functionally integrate. De Marco Garcia et al.
(2011) demonstrated in mice that for CGE-derived reelin-positive and
calretinin (114051)-positive, but not vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP; 192320)-positive, interneurons, activity is essential before
postnatal day 3 for correct migration, and that after postnatal day 3,
glutamate-mediated activity controls the development of their axons and
dendrites. Furthermore, De Marco Garcia et al. (2011) showed that the
engulfment and cell motility-1 gene (Elmo1; 606420), a target of the
transcription factor distal-less homeobox-1 (Dlx1; 600029), is
selectively expressed in reelin-positive and calretinin-positive
interneurons and is both necessary and sufficient for activity-dependent
interneuron migration. De Marco Garcia et al. (2011) concluded that
their findings revealed a selective requirement for activity in shaping
the cortical integration of specific neuronal subtypes.

Senturk et al. (2011) showed that the neuronal guidance cues ephrin B
proteins are essential for Reelin signaling during the development of
laminated structures in the brain. They showed that ephrin Bs
genetically interact with Reelin. Notably, compound mouse mutants (Reln
heterozygotes null for either Efnb2 (600527) or Efnb3 (602297)) and
triple Efnb1 (300035)/Efnb2/Efnb3 knockouts showed neuronal migration
defects that recapitulated the ones observed in the neocortex,
hippocampus, and cerebellum of the reeler mouse. Mechanistically,
Senturk et al. (2011) showed that Reelin binds to the extracellular
domain of ephrin Bs, which associate at the membrane with VLDLR (192977)
and ApoER2 (602600) in neurons. Clustering of ephrin Bs leads to the
recruitment and phosphorylation of Dab1 (603448) which is necessary for
Reelin signaling. Conversely, loss of function of ephrin Bs severely
impairs Reelin-induced Dab1 phosphorylation. Importantly, activation of
ephrin Bs can rescue the reeler neuronal migration defects in the
absence of Reelin protein. Senturk et al. (2011) concluded that their
results identified ephrin Bs as essential components of the Reelin
receptor/signaling pathway to control neuronal migration during the
development of the nervous system.

Shim et al. (2012) showed that SOX4 (184430) and SOX11 (600898) are
crucial in regulating reelin expression and the inside-out pattern of
cortical layer formation. This regulation is independent of E4, a
conserved nonexonic element required for the specification of
corticospinal neuron identity and connectivity, and Fezf2 (607414), and
probably involves interactions with distinct regulatory elements.
Cortex-specific double deletion of Sox4 and Sox11 in mice led to the
loss of Fezf2 expression, failed specification of corticospinal neurons
and, independent of Fezf2, a reeler-like inversion of layers.

CYTOGENETICS

Zaki et al. (2007) reported 2 sibs from a consanguineous Egyptian
marriage who had cortical lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia,
severe epilepsy, and mental retardation. Karyotype analysis identified a
homozygous, apparently balanced reciprocal translocation,
t(7;12)(q22;p13), in both children. Further analysis confirmed
disruption of the RELN gene at chromosome 7q22.1 and undetectable levels
of the protein in both children. The unaffected parents were related as
double first cousins were heterozygous for the translocation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Normal development of the cerebral cortex requires long-range migration
of cortical neurons from proliferative regions deep in the brain.
Lissencephaly ('smooth brain,' from 'lissos,' meaning 'smooth,' and
'encephalos,' meaning 'brain') is a severe developmental disorder in
which neuronal migration is impaired, leading to a thickened cerebral
cortex whose normally folded contour is simplified and smooth. X-linked
lissencephaly (300067) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding
doublecortin (DCX; 300121). Deletion of or mutation in the PAFAH1B1 gene
(601545), located on 17p, causes isolated lissencephaly sequence (LIS1;
607432), and haploinsufficiency of this and other neighboring genes is
responsible for the Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (247200), a
contiguous gene deletion syndrome. Hong et al. (2000) studied an
autosomal recessive form of lissencephaly associated with severe
abnormalities of the cerebellum, hippocampus, and brainstem; see
lissencephaly syndrome, Norman-Roberts type (LIS2; 257320). They tested
for linkage to markers near RELN on chromosome 7 and DAB1 on chromosome
1p32-p31, because mutations in the mouse homologs of these 2 genes cause
brain defects in mice that resemble lissencephaly, including hypoplasia
of the cerebellum, brainstem abnormalities, and a neuronal migration
disorder of the neocortex and hippocampus. In 2 unrelated pedigrees,
they found substantial regions of homozygosity in affected children near
the RELN gene on chromosome 7q22. In these 2 families, they demonstrated
different splice site mutations in the RELN gene (600514.0001 and
600514.0002, respectively). The study of these human patients pointed to
several previously unsuspected functions of reelin in and outside of the
brain. Although abnormalities of RELN mRNA had been reported in
postmortem brains of schizophrenic humans (Impagnatiello et al., 1998),
no evidence of schizophrenia was found in individuals with heterozygous
or homozygous RELN mutations. On the other hand, one of the
lissencephaly patients studied with a muscle biopsy showed evidence of
abnormal neuromuscular connectivity (Hourihane et al., 1993). Moreover,
at least 3 patients had persistent lymphedema neonatally, and one showed
accumulation of chylous (i.e., fatty) ascites fluid that required
peritoneal shunting (Hourihane et al., 1993). The apparent role for
reelin in serum homeostasis may reflect reelin interactions with LDL
superfamily receptors outside the brain, as well as in the brain.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the RELN
gene and otosclerosis, see 166800.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate Reln function, Magdaleno et al. (2002) generated
transgenic mice using the nestin (NES; 600915) promoter to drive ectopic
expression of Reln in the ventricular zone during early brain
development. Ectopic Reln expression in transgenic reelin mice, which
lack endogenous Reln expression, induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
Dab1 in the ventricular zone. The transgene also rescued some, but not
all, of the neuroanatomic and behavioral abnormalities characteristic of
the reeler phenotype, including ataxia and the migration of Purkinje
cells. Magdaleno et al. (2002) hypothesized that Reln functions in
concert with other positional cues to promote cell-cell interactions
that are required for layer formation during development.

Assadi et al. (2003) investigated interactions between the reelin
signaling pathway and Lis1 in brain development. Compound mutant mice
with disruptions in the Reln pathway and heterozygous mutations in the
Pafah1b1 gene, which encodes Lis1, had a higher incidence of
hydrocephalus and enhanced cortical and hippocampal layering defects.
The Dab1 signaling molecule and Lis1 bound in a reelin-induced
phosphorylation-dependent manner. These data indicated genetic and
biochemical interaction between the reelin signaling pathway and LIS1.

In the mouse ventral spinal cord, Hochstim et al. (2008) identified 3
subtypes of white matter astrocytes with differential gene expression
corresponding to position. Astrocytes expressing both Reln and Slit1
(603742) were in the ventrolateral domain, those expressing Reln only
were at the dorsolateral domain, and those expressing Slit1 only were at
the ventromedial domain. The distinct positions of these astrocytes were
specified by varying expression of the homeodomain transcription factors
Pax6 (607108) and Nkx6.1 (602563). The findings indicated that
positional identity is an organizing principle underlying phenotypic
diversity among white matter astrocytes, as well as among neurons, and
that this diversity is prespecified within precursor cells in the
germinal zone of the CNS.

Miller and Sweatt (2007) found that DNA methylation, which is mediated
by DNA methyltransferase, was dynamically regulated during learning and
memory consolidation in adult rats. Animals exposed to an associative
context plus shock showed increased Dnmt3a (602769) and Dnmt3b (602900)
mRNA in hippocampal area CA1 compared to context-only animals. Context
plus shock rats showed increased methylation and decreased mRNA of the
memory suppressor gene PP1C-beta (PPP1CB; 600590) compared to shock-only
controls, as well as increased demethylation and increased mRNA levels
of reelin, which is involved in synaptic plasticity, compared to
controls. The methylation levels of both these target genes returned to
baseline within a day, indicating rapid and dynamic changes. Treatment
with a DNMT inhibitor blocked the methylation changes and prevented
memory consolidation of fear-conditioned learning, but the memory
changes were plastic, and memory consolidation was reestablished after
the inhibitor wore off. Miller and Sweatt (2007) noted that DNA
methylation has been viewed as having an exclusive role in development,
but they emphasized that their findings indicated that rapid and dynamic
alteration of DNA methylation can occur in the adult central nervous
system in response to environmental stimuli during associative learning
in the hippocampus.

HISTORY

Quattrocchi et al. (2003) concluded that mouse reelin functions
postnatally to regulate the development of the neuromuscular junction.
Because these results could not be replicated, Quattrocchi et al. (2004)
retracted their paper from Science of 2003. The results had been called
into question by Bidoia et al. (2004) and others. D'Arcangelo (2004)
could not reproduce the findings described by Quattrocchi et al. (2003)
and concluded that reelin does not regulate the development of the
neuromuscular junction.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LISSENCEPHALY SYNDROME, NORMAN-ROBERTS TYPE
RELN, IVS37AS, G-A, -1

In a Saudi Arabian family with first-cousin parents and 3 children with
lissencephaly-2 (257320), Hong et al. (2000) found a splice acceptor
site mutation in the RELN gene: IVS37AS, G-A, -1. The patients were
homozygous for the splice acceptor mutation and both parents were
heterozygous. In their paper Hong et al. (2000) referred to this
mutation as IVS36AS, G-A, -1; however, in an erratum, they noted that
their system for exon numbering differed from that adopted in the mouse
and clarified the human-mouse comparison so that a single numbering
system could be used in both species.

.0002
LISSENCEPHALY SYNDROME, NORMAN-ROBERTS TYPE
RELN, 148-BP DEL

Hong et al. (2000) studied a family in which 3 brothers, including a set
of identical twins, had lissencephaly-2 (257320) and the parents were
related as half first cousins. The brothers were found to have a 148-bp
deletion in the RELN gene corresponding to the removal of exon 42
(EX42DEL). The family was British and had previously been reported by
Hourihane et al. (1993). At birth, affected children showed normal head
size, congenital lymphedema, and hypotonia. Brain MRI showed moderate
lissencephaly and profound cerebellar hypoplasia. Cognitive development
was delayed for all affected children, with little or no language and no
ability to sit or stand unsupported. There was also myopia, nystagmus,
and generalized seizures that could be controlled with medication. In
one patient in this family muscle biopsy showed evidence of abnormal
neuromuscular connectivity. Patients from this family had persistent
lymphedema neonatally, and 1 showed accumulation of chylous (that is,
fatty) ascites fluid that required peritoneal shunting.

REFERENCE 1. Assadi, A. H.; Zhang, G.; Beffert, U.; McNeil, R. S.; Renfro, A.
L.; Niu, S.; Quattrocchi, C. C.; Antalffy, B. A.; Sheldon, M.; Armstrong,
D. D.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Herz, J.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Clark, G. D.
: Interaction of reelin signaling and Lis1 in brain development. Nature
Genet. 35: 270-276, 2003.

2. Bidoia, C.; Misgeld, T.; Weinzierl, E.; Buffelli, M.; Feng, G.;
Cangiano, A.; Lichtman, J. W.; Sanes, J. R.: Comment on 'reelin promotes
peripheral synapse elimination and maturation.' Science 303: 1977b,
2004.

3. Botella-Lopez, A.; Burgaya, F.; Gavin, R.; Garcia-Ayllon, M. S.;
Gomez-Tortosa, E.; Pena-Casanova, J.; Urena, J. M.; Del Rio, J. A.;
Blesa, R.; Soriano, E.; Saez-Valero, J.: Reelin expression and glycosylation
patterns are altered in Alzheimer's disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
5573-5578, 2006.

4. D'Arcangelo, G.: Personal Communication. Nutley, N. J.  6/2/1995.

5. D'Arcangelo, G.: Response to comment on 'reelin promotes peripheral
synapse elimination and maturation.' Science 303: 1977c only, 2004.

6. D'Arcangelo, G.; Homayouni, R.; Keshvara, L.; Rice, D. S.; Sheldon,
M.; Curran, T.: Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors. Neuron 24:
471-479, 1999.

7. D'Arcangelo, G.; Miao, G. G.; Chen, S.-C.; Soares, H. D.; Morgan,
J. I.; Curran, T.: A protein related to extracellular matrix proteins
deleted in the mouse mutant reeler. Nature 374: 719-723, 1995.

8. De Marco Garcia, N. V.; Karayannis, T.; Fishell, G.: Neuronal
activity is required for the development of specific cortical interneuron
subtypes. Nature 472: 351-355, 2011.

9. DeSilva, U.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Braden, V. V.; Chen, J.; Miao, G.
G.; Curran, T.; Green, E. D.: The human reelin gene: isolation, sequencing,
and mapping on chromosome 7. Genome Res. 7: 157-164, 1997.

10. Dulabon, L.; Olson, E. C.; Taglienti, M. G.; Eisenhuth, S.; McGrath,
B.; Walsh, C. A.; Kreidberg, J. A.; Anton, E. S.: Reelin binds alpha-3-beta-1
integrin and inhibits neuronal migration. Neuron 27: 33-44, 2000.

11. Grayson, D. R.; Jia, X.; Chen, Y.; Sharma, R. P.; Mitchell, C.
P.; Guidotti, A.; Costa, E.: Reelin promoter hypermethylation in
schizophrenia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9341-9346, 2005.

12. Green, M. C.: Catalog of mutant genes and polymorphic loci.In:
Lyon, M. F.; Searle, A. G.: Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory
Mouse.  Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  (2nd ed.): 1989.

13. Hack, I.; Bancila, M.; Loulier, K.; Carroll, P.; Cremer, H.:
Reelin is a detachment signal in tangential chain-migration during
postnatal neurogenesis. Nature Neurosci. 5: 939-945, 2002.

14. Hiesberger, T.; Trommsdorff, M.; Howell, B. W.; Goffinet, A.;
Mumby, M. C.; Cooper, J. A.; Herz, J.: Direct binding of reelin to
VLDL receptor and apoE receptor 2 induces tyrosine phosphorylation
of disabled-1 and modulates tau phosphorylation. Neuron 24: 481-489,
1999.

15. Hirotsune, S.; Takahara, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirose, K.; Yoshiki,
A.; Ohashi, T.; Kusakabe, M.; Murakami, Y.; Muramatsu, M.; Watanabe,
S.; Nakao, K.; Katsuki, M.; Hayashizaki, Y.: The reeler gene encodes
a protein with an EGF-like motif expressed by pioneer neurons. Nature
Genet. 10: 77-83, 1995.

16. Hochstim, C.; Deneen, B.; Lukaszewicz, A.; Zhou, Q.; Anderson,
D. J.: Identification of positionally distinct astrocyte subtypes
whose identities are specified by a homeodomain code. Cell 133:
510-522, 2008.

17. Hong, S. E.; Shugart, Y. Y.; Huang, D. T.; Al Shahwan, S.; Grant,
P. E.; Hourihane, J. O.; Martin, N. D. T.; Walsh, C. A.: Autosomal
recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia is associated with
human RELN mutations. Nature Genet. 26: 93-96, 2000. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 27: 225 only, 2001.

18. Hourihane, J. O.; Bennett, C. P.; Chaudhuri, R.; Robb, S. A.;
Martin, N. D. T.: A sibship with a neuronal migration defect, cerebellar
hypoplasia and congenital lymphedema. Neuropediatrics 24: 43-46,
1993.

19. Impagnatiello, F.; Guidotti, A. R.; Pesold, C.; Dwivedi, Y.; Caruncho,
H.; Pisu, M. G.; Uzunov, D. P.; Smalheiser, N. R.; Davis, J. M.; Pandey,
G. N.; Pappas, G. D.; Tueting, P.; Sharma, R. P.; Costa, E.: A decrease
of reelin expression as a putative vulnerability factor in schizophrenia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15718-15723, 1998.

20. Magdaleno, S.; Keshvara, L.; Curran, T.: Rescue of ataxia and
preplate splitting by ectopic expression of reelin in reeler mice. Neuron 33:
573-586, 2002.

21. Matsuki, T.; Matthews, R. T.; Cooper, J. A.; van der Brug, M.
P.; Cookson, M. R.; Hardy, J. A.; Olson, E. C.; Howell, B. W.: Reelin
and Stk25 have opposing roles in neuronal polarization and dendritic
Golgi deployment. Cell 143: 826-836, 2010.

22. Miller, C. A.; Sweatt, J. D.: Covalent modification of DNA regulates
memory formation. Neuron 53: 857-869, 2007. Note: Erratum: Neuron
59: 1051 only, 2008.

23. Quattrocchi, C. C.; Huang, C.; Niu, S.; Sheldon, M.; Benhayon,
D.; Cartwright, J., Jr.; Mosier, D. R.; Keller, F.; D'Arcangelo, G.
: Reelin promotes peripheral synapse elimination and maturation. Science 301:
649-653, 2003. Note: Erratum: Science 301: 1849 only, 2003. Retraction:
Science 303: 1974 only, 2004.

24. Quattrocchi, C. C.; Huang, C.; Niu, S.; Sheldon, M.; Benhayon,
D.; Cartwright, J., Jr.; Mosier, D. R.; Keller, F.; D'Arcangelo, G.
: Retraction. (Letter) Science 303: 1974 only, 2004.

25. Rice, D. S.; Nusinowitz, S.; Azimi, A. M.; Martinez, A.; Soriano,
E.; Curran, T.: The reelin pathway modulates the structure and function
of retinal synaptic circuitry. Neuron 31: 929-941, 2001.

26. Royaux, I.; Lambert de Rouvroit, C.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Demirov,
D.; Goffinet, A. M.: Genomic organization of the mouse reelin gene. Genomics 46:
240-250, 1997.

27. Senturk, A.; Pfennig, S.; Weiss, A.; Burk, K.; Acker-Palmer, A.
: Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate
neuronal migration. Nature 472: 356-360, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature
478: 274 only, 2011.

28. Shim, S.; Kwan, K. Y.; Li, M.; Lefebvre, V.; Sestan, N.: Cis-regulatory
control of corticospinal system development and evolution. Nature 486:
74-79, 2012.

29. Trommsdorff, M.; Gotthardt, M.; Hiesberger, T.; Shelton, J.; Stockinger,
W.; Nimpf, J.; Hammer, R. E.; Richardson, J. A.; Herz, J.: Reeler/Disabled-like
disruption of neuronal migration in knockout mice lacking the VLDL
receptor and ApoE receptor 2. Cell 97: 689-701, 1999.

30. Yip, J. W.; Yip, Y. P. L.; Nakajima, K.; Capriotti, C.: Reelin
controls position of autonomic neurons in the spinal cord. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 8612-8616, 2000.

31. Zaki, M.; Shehab, M.; El-Aleem, A. A.; Abdel-Salam, G.; Koeller,
H. B.; Ilkin, Y.; Ross, M. E.; Dobyns, W. B.; Gleeson, J. G.: Identification
of a novel recessive RELN mutation using a homozygous balanced reciprocal
translocation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 939-944, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/17/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/10/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/18/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/11/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/31/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/12/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/31/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/16/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 6/13/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/25/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/6/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/4/1995

EDITED alopez: 07/17/2012
carol: 5/24/2012
alopez: 11/29/2011
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
carol: 6/2/2011
mgross: 2/16/2011
terry: 2/10/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
carol: 11/15/2010
carol: 11/11/2010
wwang: 1/13/2010
wwang: 4/14/2009
terry: 4/13/2009
carol: 7/8/2008
wwang: 6/16/2008
ckniffin: 5/15/2008
wwang: 7/19/2007
ckniffin: 7/18/2007
wwang: 5/25/2006
ckniffin: 5/24/2006
wwang: 12/15/2005
wwang: 12/7/2005
wwang: 7/28/2005
ckniffin: 7/11/2005
terry: 6/3/2004
alopez: 4/8/2004
terry: 4/7/2004
tkritzer: 11/3/2003
terry: 10/31/2003
mgross: 8/12/2003
terry: 8/12/2003
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/31/2002
alopez: 10/18/2002
carol: 9/16/2002
ckniffin: 9/16/2002
cwells: 6/13/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
carol: 11/25/2001
carol: 3/13/2001
alopez: 1/29/2001
mcapotos: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 10/10/2000
terry: 9/27/2000
alopez: 8/31/2000
terry: 8/29/2000
carol: 4/7/2000
terry: 4/6/2000
mgross: 7/8/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
terry: 3/1/1999
alopez: 1/19/1999
carol: 8/12/1998
mark: 7/22/1997
mark: 4/8/1997
terry: 4/2/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mark: 5/23/1995
mark: 5/4/1995

301000	TITLE #301000 WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME; WAS
;;WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME 1; WAS1;;
ALDRICH SYNDROME;;
ECZEMA-THROMBOCYTOPENIA-IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME;;
IMMUNODEFICIENCY 2; IMD2
DESCRIPTION A number sign (#) is used with this entry because Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome is caused by mutation in the WAS gene (300392).

See 614493 for information on a similar disorder, Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome-2 (WAS2), caused by mutation in the WIPF1 gene (602357).

DESCRIPTION

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked recessive immunodeficiency
characterized by thrombocytopenia, eczema, and recurrent infections
(Lemahieu et al., 1999).

CLINICAL FEATURES

The manifestations of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome are eczema,
thrombocytopenia, proneness to infection, and bloody diarrhea. Death
usually occurs before age 10 years. The original American kindred
reported by Aldrich et al. (1954) was of Dutch extraction; the 3
patients of Wiskott (1937) were German. Wiskott, who worked in Munich,
referred to the disorder in his patients as 'Werlhof's disease,' the
eponymic designation for thrombocytopenic purpura. Van den Bosch and
Drukker (1964) described several families in the Netherlands. In 3 of 5
female carriers, the platelet count was below the lower limit of normal.

Perry et al. (1980) reported that median survival increased from 8
months for patients born before 1935 to 6.5 years for those born after
1964. One patient had survived to age 36 years at the time of the
survey. Causes of death were mainly infections or bleeding, but 36 of
the 301 patients (12%) developed malignancies: lymphoreticular tumors in
23 and leukemia in 7. Ten Bensel et al. (1966) called attention to the
occurrence of malignancy of the reticuloendothelial system, which they
saw in 2 of 4 sibs and found in 5 reported cases.

Capsoni et al. (1986) described a 19-year-old man with WAS. Only 7
affected persons over age 18 had been described previously. Standen et
al. (1986) reported a kindred with 13 males in 6 sibships, related
through females, with inherited thrombocytopenia thought to be a variant
of WAS because it was associated with elevated serum IgA and mild
nephropathy. Five suffered from severe eczema since infancy but had no
unusual susceptibility to infections. Platelet volume was reduced.
Gutenberger et al. (1970) reported a similar family. Renal biopsy was
performed in 3 patients. In the first, advanced membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis was found with deposition of complement and IgG on
the basement membrane. In the second, mesangial glomerulonephritis with
focal glomerulosclerosis and deposition of complement and IgA were
found. The third showed minimal glomerulonephritis. Standen et al.
(1986) concluded that despite the clinical similarities and the elevated
IgA in both conditions, the disorder is distinct from Berger disease
(161950). Spitler et al. (1980) found nephropathy in 5 of 32 patients
with WAS who participated in a study of treatment with transfer factor,
a dialyzable extract of leukocytes that enhances cellular immunity.
Although nephropathy occurred without such treatment, the temporal
relationships suggested that transfer factor aggravated the problem.

McEnery and Nash (1973) described 2 unrelated males with the association
of WAS and infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey disease; 114000), and
Abinun et al. (1988) also described a case. Thus, an immunologic defect
may play a role in the pathogenesis of infantile cortical hyperostosis.
Meropol et al. (1992) reported the case of a 24-year-old man with WAS
complicated by T-cell large cell lymphoma and Kaposi sarcoma (148000).
Kaposi sarcoma is well known in connection with the immunosuppression
used with allograft transplantation and in patients with HIV infection,
but this was the first incidence of its occurrence in this form of
immunodeficiency.

Sullivan et al. (1994) reported on a multiinstitutional survey of WAS in
the U.S. in which laboratory and clinical data were collected on 154
affected individuals. There was a family history of the disorder in the
case of 74 of the patients. Thrombocytopenia was a prerequisite for
entry into the study; however, only 27% of patients had the typical set
of 3 symptoms described originally by Aldrich et al. (1954). The
immunologic findings in particular varied considerably with the most
distinctive finding: that 61% of the patients had a low CD8+ count.
Eczema developed in 81% but was not always present at diagnosis. In
those patients in whom platelet size was measured, Sullivan et al.
(1994) found them to be small, although they did increase in size
following splenectomy. The average age at diagnosis was 21 months; the
average age at death was 8 years. There were 16 patients who lived
beyond 18 years, and the prognosis for the disorder had improved
considerably in recent years. Bone marrow transplantation had been
carried out in 47 cases and a good outcome was reported in two-thirds of
them. Autoimmune disorders occurred in 40% of patients; this group had a
poor prognosis as they were more likely to develop a malignancy.
Malignancies were seen in 13% of patients and were mainly of the
lymphoreticular system.

Du et al. (2006) described somatic mosaicism in a 15-year-old male WAS
patient due to a second-hit mutation in the initiation codon. See
300392.0019-300392.0020. The patient had no clear family history.
Thrombocytopenia was noticed at 1 month of age and thereafter eczema and
recurrent infections were clinical features. At 8 years of age, he had
persistent cough due to pulmonary hilar lymph node swelling. From the
result of hilar lymph node biopsy, he was diagnosed with Hodgkin disease
and received chemotherapy and local radiotherapy (Sasahara et al., 2001;
Sasahara et al., 2002). The patient had remained in complete remission
thereafter. His platelet count was in the range of
6,000-15,000/microliter. Episodes of respiratory infections occurred
less frequently, although severe eczema and thrombocytopenia persisted.

DIAGNOSIS

In an obligate heterozygote who was heterozygous for the AB polymorphism
of G6PD, Gealy et al. (1980) found that only the B isoenzyme was present
in platelets and T lymphocytes, although both were present in
erythrocytes and neutrophils. Prchal et al. (1980) pursued the
implications of this finding for genetic counseling. Although G6PD is
likely to be useful in only a limited number of potential carriers, the
large number of X-chromosome markers, DNA polymorphisms and other
markers now available make it likely that carrier detection will be
possible. Shapiro et al. (1978) concluded that carriers can be
identified by study of platelets, which show a defect in oxidative
phosphorylation.

Fearon et al. (1988) studied the pattern of X-chromosome inactivation in
various cell populations from female relatives of patients with WAS,
through analysis of the methylation patterns of X-linked genes that
display RFLPs. They found that carriers could be accurately identified
by the fact that peripheral blood T cells, granulocytes, and B cells of
obligate heterozygotes display specific patterns of X-chromosome
inactivation that are clearly different from those of normal controls.

Puck et al. (1990) pointed out that the diagnosis of WAS may be
difficult in infancy when sporadic thrombocytopenia with no, or only
questionable, immunologic abnormalities are present. In the case of 2
unrelated males with this problem, X-chromosome inactivation in the T
cells of the mothers showed each of them to have a highly skewed
X-chromosome inactivation pattern typical of WAS carriers. In one of the
patients, a T-cell defect was subsequently demonstrated directly by
studies of the lymphocytes, which failed to proliferate in periodate and
anti-CD43. Notarangelo et al. (1991) reported a similar case of a boy
with WAS presenting as idiopathic thrombocytopenia.

Notarangelo et al. (1991) studied a presumably heterozygous,
thrombocytopenic female from a WAS pedigree. Her carrier status was
confirmed by linkage studies. Both small-sized and normal-sized
platelets were present, suggesting that, unlike the vast majority of WAS
carriers, she did not manifest nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation in
the thrombopoietic cell lineage. Studies of X-chromosome inactivation by
means of RFLP and methylation analysis showed that the pattern of
X-chromosome inactivation was nonrandom in T lymphocytes but random in
granulocytes. Notarangelo et al. (1993) reviewed the use of the biased
inactivation of the X chromosome in hematopoietic cells as a tool for
carrier detection in connection with genetic counseling. A closely
linked hypervariable marker, M27-beta (DXS255), was used.

Yamada et al. (1999) showed that flow cytometric analysis of WASP
expression in lymphocytes is useful in the diagnosis of WAS. They found
that intracellular WASP is expressed as distinctly 'bright' and 'dim'
phenotypes in lymphocytes from normal individuals and WAS patients,
respectively. Yamada et al. (2000) demonstrated that WAS carriers could
also be identified by flow cytometric analysis of monocytes but not
lymphocytes. Bright and dim phenotypes for normal individuals and
patients, respectively, were observed in monocytes, whereas in carriers,
mixed populations (to varying degrees) of bright- and dim-staining cells
were detected. The authors noted that flow cytometry is a simpler and
more rapid method of diagnosis than molecular methods but may not be
sensitive enough to detect carriers with low percentages of WASP-dim
monocytes.

- Prenatal Diagnosis

Holmberg et al. (1983) found that normal midtrimester fetuses have
platelets of the same size as normal newborns and adults. They used
these data 'to exclude Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in an 18-week fetus at
50% risk of being affected.' Unfortunately, we do not know that the
platelets of the WAS fetus are abnormally small.

Schwartz et al. (1989) described the first-trimester diagnosis and
exclusion of WAS by means of closely linked DNA markers.

In 2 unrelated families, Giliani et al. (1999) performed successful
prenatal diagnosis of WAS at week 12 of gestation, using a combined
nonradioactive analysis of SSCP and heteroduplex formation, followed by
automated sequencing.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Corash et al. (1985) studied the mechanism of the usual improvement in
thrombocytopenia in WAS after splenectomy. The thrombocytopenia is
accompanied by elevated platelet-associated IgG and low mean platelet
size. Both return to normal after splenectomy. Patients who relapse
redevelop elevated IgG but maintain normal platelet size.

Webb et al. (1993) described their experience with renal transplantation
in a 46-year-old man with the syndrome of thrombocytopenia with raised
IgA levels and impaired renal function. The man had a strong family
history of hereditary thrombocytopenia and had presented in early
childhood with allergic eczema, asthma, thrombocytopenic purpura, and
recurrent middle ear infections. He had a normal platelet count after
splenectomy was performed at the age of about 30. In his mid-thirties,
he had subtotal colectomy and ileostomy for severe ulcerative colitis.
This disorder later recurred, associated with keratitis and arthritis of
large joints. He was later admitted to the hospital with a febrile
illness, biopsy-proven cutaneous vasculitis, raised IgA levels, and
impaired renal function. Renal biopsy demonstrated mesangioproliferative
glomerulonephritis, old crescents, and mesangial IgA deposition. After
renal transplant, a 'reduced immunosuppressive protocol' was instituted
because of his underlying immunologic disorder. Despite this, no
rejection episodes occurred.

The first reports of successful bone marrow transplantation for severe
combined immunodeficiency (XSCID; 300400) and for WAS were provided by
Gatti et al. (1968) and Bach et al. (1968). Fischer et al. (1986) gave a
retrospective analysis of results in 162 patients who had undergone
transplantation in 14 European centers between 1969 and 1985. Brochstein
et al. (1991) reported on the bone marrow transplantation in 17 patients
with WAS.

Boztug et al. (2010) reported successful treatment of 2 patients with
Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome with transfusion of autologous, genetically
modified hematopoietic stem cells. They found sustained expression of
WAS protein expression in hematopoietic stem cells, lymphoid and myeloid
cells, and platelets after gene therapy. T and B cells, natural killer
cells, and monocytes were functionally corrected. After treatment, the
patients' clinical condition markedly improved, with resolution of
hemorrhagic diathesis, eczema, autoimmunity, and predisposition to
severe infection. Comprehensive insertion-site analysis showed vector
integration that targeted multiple genes controlling growth and
immunologic responses in a persistently polyclonal hematopoiesis that
was followed for 3 years in both boys.

POPULATION GENETICS

Perry et al. (1980) found an incidence of 4.0 per million live male
births in the United States.

PATHOGENESIS

Several groups (Blaese et al., 1968; Cooper et al., 1968) presented
evidence that the immune defect is in the afferent limb, i.e., is one of
antigen processing or recognition. In an obligate heterozygote who was
heterozygous for the AB polymorphism of G6PD (305900), Gealy et al.
(1980) found that only the B isoenzyme was present in platelets and T
lymphocytes, although both were present in erythrocytes and neutrophils.
The findings suggested selection against the WAS gene in these tissues,
which are also the ones that express the defect in the hemizygous
affected male.

Parkman et al. (1981) studied the surface proteins of lymphocytes and
platelets by radioiodination followed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and autoradiography. All 3 WAS patients studied showed,
in lymphocytes, absence of a protein, molecular weight 115,000, found in
normals. Platelets also showed an abnormality of surface glycoproteins.
CD43 (182160), or sialophorin, is a cell-surface sialoglycoprotein that
is deficient in quantity and/or is defective in lymphocytes of patients
with this disorder (Parkman et al., 1981; Remold-O'Donnell et al.,
1984). Mentzer et al. (1987) suggested that sialophorin functions in
T-cell activation.

Simon et al. (1992) presented experimental results indicating the
association of WAS with a defect in the coupling of surface
immunoglobulin (sIg) on B cells to signal transduction pathways
considered prerequisite for B-cell activation, probably at the level of
tyrosine phosphorylation.

Symons et al. (1996) proposed that the Wiskott-Aldrich protein provides
a link between CDC42 and the actin cytoskeleton. T lymphocytes of
affected males with WAS exhibit a severe disturbance of the actin
cytoskeleton, suggesting that the WAS protein may regulate its
organization. Kolluri et al. (1996) showed that WAS protein interacts
with Cdc42, a member of the RHO family of GTPases. This interaction,
which is GTP-dependent, was detected in cell lysates, in transient
transfections, and with purified recombinant proteins. Different mutant
WAS proteins from 3 unrelated affected males retained their ability to
interact with Cdc42 but the level of expression of the WAS protein in
these mutants was only 2 to 5% of normal. Taken together, these data
suggested to Kolluri et al. (1996) that the WAS protein may function as
a signal transduction adaptor downstream of Cdc42, and that, in affected
males, the cytoskeletal abnormalities may result from a defect in Cdc42
signaling.

MAPPING

Peacocke and Siminovitch (1987) studied 10 kindreds for linkage with
RFLPs. Significant linkage was found between WAS and 2 loci, DXS14 and
DXS7, that mapped to the proximal short arm of the X chromosome. Maximal
lod scores were 4.29 (at theta = 0.03) and 4.12 (at theta = 0.00),
respectively. Arveiler et al. (1987) found a strong suggestion of
linkage between IMD2 and DXS1, which is located in Xq11-q12. Kwan et al.
(1988) concluded from linkage studies that the WAS gene lies between
DXS7 (Xp11.3) and DXS14 (Xp11); the likelihood of this position was at
least 128 times higher than that of any other interval studied. In a
study of 12 WAS families, Kwan et al. (1989) demonstrated linkage to
another DNA marker, DXS255, located at Xp11.22; peak lod score = 4.65 at
theta = 0.05. Greer et al. (1989) showed linkage between WAS and DXZ1
(lod score = 7.08 at theta = 0.03) and between WAS and the TIMP (305370)
locus (lod score = 5.09 at theta = 0.0). Greer et al. (1990) extended
the linkage studies, demonstrating strongest linkage (maximum lod score
= 10.19 at theta = 0.0) between WAS and the hypervariable DXS255 locus,
a marker already mapped between DXS7 and DXS14. De Saint Basile et al.
(1989) found close linkage of WAS to DXS255 (maximum lod = 5.42 at theta
= 0.00). Kwan et al. (1991) likewise concluded that DXS255 is the
closest marker identified; WAS showed a multipoint maximum lod score of
8.59 at 1.2 cM distal to DXS255. Furthermore, they concluded that the
TIMP gene must lie distal to WAS; thus, WAS was thought to lie between
DXS255 (Xp11.22) and TIMP (Xp11.3). Greer et al. (1992) demonstrated
close linkage between the WAS and OATL1 (311240) loci; maximum lod =
6.08 at theta = 0.00. The finding localized the TIMP, OATL1, and WAS
loci distal to DXS146 and the OATL1 and WAS loci proximal to TIMP.

Arveiler et al. (1990) showed that failure to demonstrate linkage of WAS
to markers known from other families to be closely situated was
attributable to germ cell mosaicism in the grandfather of affected
males. The same phenomenon has been described in X-linked
agammaglobulinemia; see 300300.

De Saint-Basile et al. (1991) studied a family in which 4 members had
X-linked thrombocytopenia. Linkage studies showed mapping to the same
region of the X chromosome as that found in WAS. Although
polymorphonuclear leukocytes showed a normal pattern of X-inactivation,
a skewed pattern was demonstrated in lymphocytes. De Saint-Basile et al.
(1991) concluded that this was consistent with allelic mutations at the
same locus, with the severity of disease varying according to the
distinct patterns of hematopoietic cell involvement in obligate
carriers.

Kwan et al. (1995) isolated and characterized a polymorphic CA
dinucleotide repeat, DXS6940, that lies within 30 kb of the WAS gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Derry et al. (1994) found that the WAS gene was not expressed in 2
unrelated patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 1 of whom had a single
base deletion that produced a frameshift and premature termination of
translation (300392.0001). Two additional patients were identified with
point mutations that changed the same arginine residue to either a
histidine or a leucine (300392.0002-300392.0003).

Villa et al. (1995) presented proof that mutations in the WAS gene can
result in X-linked thrombocytopenia characterized by thrombocytopenia
with small-sized platelets as an isolated finding (313900). Why some
mutations impair only the megakaryocytic lineage and have no apparent
effect on the lymphoid lineage was unclear. In a study of 16 WAS
patients and 4 X-linked thrombocytopenia patients, Thompson et al.
(1999) identified 14 distinct mutations, including 7 novel gene defects.

In an affected grandson of a female first cousin of the 3 patients
described originally by Wiskott (1937), Binder et al. (2006) found a
2-nucleotide deletion in exon 1 of the WAS gene (300392.0021).

Dobbs et al. (2007) identified 2 different but contiguous single
basepair deletions in maternal cousins with WAS (300392.0022 and
300392.0023, respectively). Their maternal grandmother was found to be a
mosaic for the deletions, both of which occurred on the haplotype from
the unaffected maternal great-grandfather, consistent with a bichromatid
mutation in a male gamete.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Schindelhauer et al. (1996) found no genotype/phenotype correlation
emerge after a comparison of the identified mutations with the resulting
clinical picture for a classical WAS phenotype. A mild course,
reminiscent of X-linked thrombocytopenia, or an attenuated phenotype was
more often associated with missense than with the other types of
mutations.

Greer et al. (1996) examined the genotypes and phenotypes of 24 patients
with WAS and compared them with other known mutations of the WASP gene.
They demonstrated clustering of WASP mutations within the 4 most
N-terminal exons of the gene and identified arg86 as the most prominent
hotspot for WASP mutations. They noted the prominence of missense
mutations among patients with milder forms of WAS, while noting that
missense mutations also comprise a substantial portion of mutations in
patients with severe forms of the disease. Greer et al. (1996) concluded
that phenotypes and genotypes of WAS are not well correlated; phenotypic
outcome cannot be reliably predicted on the basis of WASP genotype.

Lemahieu et al. (1999) identified 17 WASP gene mutations, 12 of which
were novel. All missense mutations were located in exons 1 to 4. Most of
the nonsense, frameshift, and splice site mutations were found in exons
6 to 11. Mutations that alter splice sites led to the synthesis of
several types of mRNAs, a fraction of which represented the normally
spliced product. The presence of normally spliced transcripts was
correlated with a milder phenotype. When one such case was studied by
Western blot analysis, reduced amounts of normal-sized WASP were
present. In other cases as well, a correlation was found between the
amount of normal or mutant WASP present and the phenotypes of the
affected individuals. No protein was detected in 2 individuals with
severe Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Reduced levels of a normal-sized WASP
with a missense mutation were seen in 2 individuals with X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Lemahieu et al. (1999) concluded that mutation
analysis at the DNA level is not sufficient for predicting clinical
course, and that studies at the transcript and protein levels are needed
for a better assessment.

Wada et al. (2001) provided evidence that in vivo reversion had occurred
in the WAS gene in a patient with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, resulting in
somatic mosaicism. The mutation was a 6-bp insertion (ACGAGG;
300392.0013) which abrogated expression of the WAS protein. Most of the
patient's T lymphocytes expressed nearly normal levels of WAS protein.
These lymphocytes were found to lack the deleterious mutation and showed
a selective growth advantage in vivo. Analysis of the sequence
surrounding the mutation site showed that the 6-bp insertion followed a
tandem repeat of the same 6 nucleotides. These findings strongly
suggested that DNA polymerase slippage was the cause of the original
germline insertion mutation in this family and that the same mechanism
was responsible for its deletion in one of the proband's T-cell
progenitors, thus leading to reversion mosaicism.

That some mutations in WASP result in X-linked thrombocytopenia without
the associated features of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is well
established. Devriendt et al. (2001) demonstrated, furthermore, that a
constitutively activating mutation in WASP can cause X-linked severe
congenital neutropenia (SCNX; 300299). See 300392.0012 for the L270P
mutation in WASP demonstrated by Devriendt et al. (2001).

Wada et al. (2004) described 2 additional patients from the same family
of the man with revertant T-cell lymphocytes reported by Wada et al.
(2001). Somatic mosaicism was demonstrated in leukocytes from the first
patient that were cryopreserved when he was 22 years old, 11 years
before his death from kidney failure. The second patient, 16 years old
at the time of report, had a moderate clinical phenotype and developed
revertant cells after the age of 14 years. T lymphocytes showed
selective in vivo advantage. These results supported DNA polymerase
slippage as a common underlying mechanism and indicated that T-cell
mosaicism may have different clinical effects in WAS. Wada et al. (2004)
stated that sibs with revertant mosaicism had previously been reported
(Wada et al., 2003; Waisfisz et al., 1999), but 3 patients with
revertant disease in a single kindred was unprecedented.

Boztug et al. (2008) reported 2 Ukrainian brothers, aged 3 and 4 years,
respectively, with WAS due to somatic mosaicism for a truncation
mutation and multiple different second-site mutations. Flow cytometric
analysis of peripheral blood cells showed that each patient had
WAS-negative cells resulting from the truncation mutation and a subset
of WAS-positive cells that expressed second-site missense WAS mutations.
The second-site mutations resulted in the production of altered, but
possibly functional, protein. All second-site mutations in both patients
occurred in the same nucleotide triplet in which the truncation mutation
occurred. Over time, both boys had a decrease in bleeding diathesis and
eczema, and normalization of platelet counts. Boztug et al. (2008)
suggested that the second-site mutations may confer a proliferative
advantage to the affected cells in these patients.

- X-Inactivation Status

Wengler et al. (1995) stated that obligate female carriers of the gene
for X-linked agammaglobulinemia (300300) show nonrandom X-chromosome
inactivation only in B lymphocytes, and obligate female carriers of the
gene for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID) show
nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation in both T and B lymphocytes, as well
as natural killer cells. However, all formed elements of the blood
appear to be affected, as a rule, in obligate carriers of WAS, as judged
by the criteria of nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation and segregation
of G6PD alleles in informative females. Wengler et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells collected from
obligate carriers of WAS by apheresis showed nonrandom inactivation.
They used PCR analysis of a polymorphic VNTR within the X-linked
androgen receptor gene (313700) to demonstrate nonrandom inactivation
which clearly must occur early during hematopoietic differentiation.

Parolini et al. (1998) reported X-linked WAS in an 8-year-old girl. She
had a sporadic mutation, glu133 to lys, on the paternally derived X
chromosome, but had nonrandom X inactivation of the maternal X
chromosome in both blood and buccal mucosa. Her mother and maternal
grandmother also had nonrandom X inactivation, which suggested to the
authors the possibility of a defect in XIST (314670) or some other gene
involved in the X-inactivation process. Puck and Willard (1998)
commented on the subject of X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease in reference to the paper by Parolini et al. (1998).

Lutskiy et al. (2002) described a female heterozygote for a splice site
mutation (300392.0017) who presented at 14 months of age with features
of WAS (thrombocytopenia, small platelets, and immunologic dysfunction)
and had random inactivation of the X chromosome. She appeared to have a
defect in the mechanisms that, in disease-free WAS carriers, lead to
preferential survival/proliferation of cells bearing the active wildtype
X chromosome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Derry et al. (1995) stated that Wasp may be a candidate for involvement
in 'scurfy,' a T cell-mediated fatal lymphoreticular disease of mice
that had previously been proposed as a mouse homolog of Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome (Lyon et al., 1990). Northern analysis of sf tissue samples
indicated the presence of Wasp mRNA in liver and skin, presumably as a
consequence of lymphocyte infiltration, but no abnormalities in the
amount or size of mRNA were identified.

HISTORY

Puck and Candotti (2006) reviewed lessons from the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome. Alfred Wiskott (1898-1978) was a German authority on childhood
pneumonias who reported 3 affected brothers in 1937. In 1954, Robert
Aldrich (1917-1998) and colleagues published an independent description
of a large Dutch kindred in which segregation analysis showed X-linked
recessive inheritance (Aldrich et al., 1954). By 2006, more than 160
different WAS mutations spanning all 12 exons of the gene had been found
in more than 270 unrelated families and functional domains had been
defined. Binder et al. (2006) described an affected member from the
family reported by Wiskott (1937) and defined the specific mutation
(300392.0021). The patient studied was a first cousin twice removed of
the originally reported brothers. In a span of 2 generations, a fatal
condition had become treatable. The patient had been successfully cured
by transplantation by bone marrow from a matched, unrelated donor.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Blaese et al. (1971); Diaz-Buxo et al. (1974); Filipovich et al. (1979);
Gelzer and Gasser (1961); Hutter and Jones (1981); Kapoor et al. (1981);
Knox-Macaulay et al. (1993); Krivit and Good (1959); Levin et al.
(1970); Lum et al. (1980); Nathan  (1980); Ochs et al. (1980); Parkman
et al. (1978); Steinberg  (1959); Weiden and Blaese (1972); Wolff
(1967)
REFERENCE 1. Abinun, M.; Mikuska, M.; Filipovic, B.: Infantile cortical hyperostosis
associated with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Europ. J. Pediat. 147:
518-519, 1988.

2. Aldrich, R. A.; Steinberg, A. G.; Campbell, D. C.: Pedigree demonstrating
a sex-linked recessive condition characterized by draining ears, eczematoid
dermatitis and bloody diarrhea. Pediatrics 13: 133-139, 1954.

3. Arveiler, B.; de Saint-Basile, G.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.;
Mandel, J. L.: Germ-line mosaicism simulates genetic heterogeneity
in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 906-911, 1990.

4. Arveiler, B.; de Saint Basile, G.; Debre, M.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli,
C.; Mandel, J. L.: Linkage analysis of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(IMD2) using X-linked DNA polymorphisms. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 46: 573 only, 1987.

5. Bach, F. H.; Albertini, R. J.; Anderson, J. L.; Joo, P.; Bortin,
M.: Bone marrow transplantation in a patient with the Wiskott Aldrich
syndrome. Lancet 292: 1364-1366, 1968. Note: Originally Volume II.

6. Binder, V.; Albert, M. H.; Kabus, M.; Bertone, M.; Meindl, A.;
Belohradsky, B. H.: The genotype of the original Wiskott phenotype. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 1790-1793, 2006.

7. Blaese, R. M.; Strober, W.; Brown, R. S.; Waldmann, T. A.: The
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a disorder with a possible defect in antigen
processing or recognition. Lancet 292: 1056-1060, 1968. Note: Originally
Volume I.

8. Blaese, R. M.; Strober, W.; Levy, A. L.; Waldmann, T. A.: Hypercatabolism
of IgG, IgA, IgM, and albumin in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a unique
disorder of serum protein metabolism. J. Clin. Invest. 50: 2331-2338,
1971.

9. Boztug, K.; Germeshausen, M.; Avedillo Diez, I.; Gulacsy, V.; Diestelhorst,
J.; Ballmaier, M.; Welte, K.; Marodi, L.; Chernyshova, L. I.; Klein,
C.: Multiple independent second-site mutations in two siblings with
somatic mosaicism for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Clin. Genet. 74:
68-74, 2008.

10. Boztug, K.; Schmidt, M.; Schwarzer, A.; Banerjee, P. P.; Diez,
I. A.; Dewey, R. A.; Bohm, M.; Nowrouzi, A.; Ball, C. R.; Glimm, H.;
Naundorf, S.; Kuhlcke, K.; Blasczyk, R.; Kondratenko, I.; Marodi,
L.; Orange, J. S.; von Kalle, C.; Klein, C.: Stem-cell gene therapy
for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 363: 1918-1927,
2010.

11. Brochstein, J. A.; Gillio, A. P.; Ruggiero, M.; Kernan, N. A.;
Emanuel, D.; Laver, J.; Small, T.; O'Reilly, R. J.: Marrow transplantation
from human leukocyte antigen-identical or haploidentical donors for
correction of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 119: 907-912,
1991.

12. Capsoni, F.; Acerbi, L.; Bonora, G.; Perletti, L.; Ongari, A.
M.; Vanoli, M.; Zanussi, C.: Phagocyte function and immunological
findings in a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome long-term survivor. J. Lab.
Clin. Immun. 19: 91-97, 1986.

13. Cooper, M. D.; Chae, H. P.; Lowman, J. T.; Krivit, W.; Good, R.
A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: an immunologic deficiency disease involving
the afferent limb of immunity. Am. J. Med. 44: 499-513, 1968.

14. Corash, L.; Shafer, B.; Blaese, R. M.: Platelet-associated immunoglobulin,
platelet size, and the effect of splenectomy in the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome. Blood 65: 1439-1443, 1985.

15. Derry, J. M. J.; Ochs, H. D.; Francke, U.: Isolation of a novel
gene mutated in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Cell 78: 635-644, 1994.
Note: Erratum: Cell 79: following 922, 1994.

16. Derry, J. M. J.; Wiedemann, P.; Blair, P.; Wang, Y.; Kerns, J.
A.; Lemahieu, V.; Godfrey, V. L.; Wilkinson, J. E.; Francke, U.:
The mouse homolog of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) gene
is highly conserved and maps near the scurfy (sf) mutation on the
X chromosome. Genomics 29: 471-477, 1995.

17. de Saint-Basile, G.; Schlegel, N.; Caniglia, M.; Le Deist, F.;
Kaplan, C.; Lecompte, T.; Piller, F.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.:
X-linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: similar regional
assignment but distinct X-inactivation pattern in carriers. Ann.
Hemat. 63: 107-110, 1991.

18. de Saint Basile, G.; Arveiler, B.; Fraser, N. F.; Boyd, Y.; Graig,
I. W.; Griscelli, G.; Fischer, A.: Close linkage of hypervariable
marker DXS255 to disease locus of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Lancet 334:
1319-1321, 1989. Note: Originally Volume II.

19. Devriendt, K.; Kim, A. S.; Mathijs, G.; Frints, S. G. M.; Schwartz,
M.; Van den Oord, J. J.; Verhoef, G. E. G.; Boogaerts, M. A.; Fryns,
J.-P.; You, D.; Rosen, M. K.; Vandenberghe, P.: Constitutively activating
mutation in WASP causes X-linked severe congenital neutropenia. Nature
Genet. 27: 313-317, 2001.

20. Diaz-Buxo, J. A.; Hermans, P. E.; Ritts, R. E., Jr.: Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome in an adult. Mayo Clin. Proc. 49: 455-459, 1974.

21. Dobbs, A. K.; Yang, T.; Farmer, D. M.; Howard, V.; Conley, M.
E.: A possible bichromatid mutation in a male gamete giving rise
to a female mosaic for two different mutations in the X-linked gene
WAS. Clin. Genet. 71: 171-176, 2007.

22. Du, W.; Kumaki, S.; Uchiyama, T.; Yachie, A.; Looi, C. Y.; Kawai,
S.; Minegishi, M.; Ramesh, N.; Geha, R. S.; Sasahara, Y.; Tsuchiya,
S.: A second-site mutation in the initiation codon of WAS (WASP)
results in expansion of subsets of lymphocytes in an Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome patient. Hum. Mutat. 27: 370-375, 2006.

23. Fearon, E. R.; Kohn, D. B.; Winkelstein, J. A.; Vogelstein, B.;
Blaese, R. M.: Carrier detection in the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome. Blood 72:
1735-1739, 1988.

24. Filipovich, A. H.; Krivit, W.; Kersey, J. H.; Burke, B. A.: Fatal
arteritis as a complication of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 95:
742-744, 1979.

25. Fischer, A.; Friedrich, W.; Levinsky, R.; Vossen, J.; Griscelli,
C.; Kubanek, B.; Morgan, G.; Wagemaker, G.; Landais, P.: Bone-marrow
transplantation for immunodeficiencies and osteopetrosis: European
survey, 1968-1985. Lancet 328: 1080-1084, 1986. Note: Originally
Volume II.

26. Gatti, R. A.; Meuwissen, J. J.; Allen, H. D.; Hong, R.; Good,
R. A.: Immunological reconstitution of sex-linked lymphopenic immunological
deficiency. Lancet 292: 1366-1369, 1968. Note: Originally Volume
I.

27. Gealy, W. J.; Dwyer, J. M.; Harley, J. B.: Allelic exclusion
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in platelets and T lymphocytes
from a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome carrier. Lancet 315: 63-65, 1980.
Note: Originally Volume I.

28. Gelzer, J.; Gasser, C.: Wiskott-Aldrich-Syndrom. Helv. Paediat.
Acta 16: 17-39, 1961.

29. Giliani, S.; Fiorini, M.; Mella, P.; Candotti, F.; Schumacher,
R. F.; Wengler, G. S.; Lalatta, F.; Fasth, A.; Badolato, R.; Ugazio,
A. G.; Albertini, A.; Notarangelo, L. D.: Prenatal molecular diagnosis
of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by direct mutation analysis. Prenatal
Diag. 19: 36-40, 1999.

30. Greer, W. L.; Mahtani, M. M.; Kwong, P. C.; Rubin, L. A.; Peacocke,
M.; Willard, H. F.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage studies of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: polymorphisms at TIMP and the X chromosome centromere are
informative markers for genetic prediction. Hum. Genet. 83: 227-230,
1989.

31. Greer, W. L.; Peacocke, M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: The Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: refinement of the localization on Xp and identification
of another closely linked marker locus, OATL1. Hum. Genet. 88: 453-456,
1992.

32. Greer, W. L.; Shehabeldin, A.; Schulman, J.; Junker, A.; Siminovitch,
K. A.: Identification of WASP mutations, mutation hotspots and genotype-phenotype
disparities in 24 patients with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Hum.
Genet. 98: 685-690, 1996.

33. Greer, W. L.; Somani, A.-K.; Kwong, P. C.; Peacocke, M.; Rubin,
L. A.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage relationships of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome to 10 loci in the pericentromeric region of the human X chromosome. Genomics 6:
568-571, 1990.

34. Gutenberger, J.; Trygstad, C. W.; Stiehm, E. R.; Opitz, J. M.;
Thatcher, L. G.; Bloodworth, J. M. B.: Familial thrombocytopenia,
elevated serum IgA and renal disease. Am. J. Med. 49: 729-741, 1970.

35. Holmberg, L.; Gustavii, B.; Jonsson, A.: A prenatal study of
fetal platelet count and size with application to fetus at risk for
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 102: 773-776, 1983.

36. Hutter, J. J., Jr.; Jones, J. F.: Results of a thymic epithelial
transplant in a child with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and central nervous
system lymphoma. Clin. Immun. Immunopath. 18: 121-125, 1981.

37. Kapoor, N.; Kirkpatrick, D.; Blaese, R. M.; Oleske, J.; Hilgartner,
M. H.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Good, R. A.; O'Reilly, R. J.: Reconstitution
of normal megakaryocytopoiesis and immunologic functions in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome by marrow transplantation following myelo-ablation and immunosuppression
with busulphan and cyclophosphamide. Blood 57: 692-696, 1981.

38. Knox-Macaulay, H. H. M.; Bashawri, L.; Davies, K. E.: X linked
recessive thrombocytopenia. J. Med. Genet. 30: 968-969, 1993.

39. Kolluri, R.; Tolias, K. F.; Carpenter, C. L.; Rosen, F. S.; Kirchhausen,
T.: Direct interaction of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein with
the GTPase Cdc42. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5615-5618, 1996.

40. Krivit, W.; Good, R. A.: Aldrich's syndrome (thrombocytopenia,
eczema and infection in infants). Studies of the defense mechanisms. Am.
J. Dis. Child. 97: 137-153, 1959.

41. Kwan, S.-P.; Hagemann, T. L.; Radtke, B. E.; Blaese, R. M.; Rosen,
F. S.: Identification of mutations in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
gene and characterization of a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat at
DXS6940, adjacent to the disease gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92:
4706-4710, 1995.

42. Kwan, S.-P.; Lehner, T.; Hagemann, T.; Lu, B.; Blaese, M.; Ochs,
H.; Wedgwood, R.; Ott, J.; Craig, I. W.; Rosen, F. S.: Localization
of the gene for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome between two flanking
markers, TIMP and DXS255, on Xp11.22-Xp11.3. Genomics 10: 29-33,
1991.

43. Kwan, S.-P.; Lehner, T.; Lu, B.; Raghu, G.; Blaese, M.; Sandkuyl,
L. A.; Ott, J.; Fraser, N.; Boyd, Y.; Craig, I. W.; Fischer, S.; Rosen,
F.: Linkage of DXS255 to the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome gene. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1027 only, 1989.

44. Kwan, S.-P.; Sandkuyl, L. A.; Blaese, M.; Kunkel, L. M.; Bruns,
G.; Parmley, R.; Skarshaug, S.; Page, D. C.; Ott, J.; Rosen, F. S.
: Genetic mapping of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with two highly-linked
polymorphic DNA markers. Genomics 3: 39-43, 1988.

45. Lemahieu, V.; Gastier, J. M.; Francke, U.: Novel mutations in
the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene and their effects on transcriptional,
translational, and clinical phenotypes. Hum. Mutat. 14: 54-66, 1999.

46. Levin, A. S.; Spitler, L. E.; Stiles, D. P.; Fudenberg, H. H.
: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a genetically determined cellular immunologic
deficiency: clinical and laboratory responses to therapy with transfer
factor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 67: 821-828, 1970.

47. Lum, L. G.; Tubergen, D. G.; Corash, L.; Blaese, R. M.: Splenectomy
in the management of the thrombocytopenia of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 302: 892-896, 1980.

48. Lutskiy, M. I.; Sasahara, Y.; Kenney, D. M.; Rosen, F. S.; Remold-O'Donnell,
E.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in a female. Blood 100: 2763-2768,
2002.

49. Lyon, M. F.; Peters, J.; Glenister, P. H.; Ball, S.; Wright, E.
: The scurfy mouse mutant has previously unrecognized hematological
abnormalities and resembles Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 2433-2437, 1990.

50. McEnery, G.; Nash, F. W.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome associated
with idiopathic infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey's disease). Arch.
Dis. Child. 48: 818-821, 1973.

51. Mentzer, S. J.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Crimmins, M. A. V.; Bierer,
B. E.; Rosen, F. S.; Burakoff, S. J.: Sialophorin, a surface sialoglycoprotein
defective in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, is involved in human T
lymphocyte proliferation. J. Exp. Med. 165: 1383-1392, 1987.

52. Meropol, N. J.; Hicks, D.; Brooks, J. J.; Siminovitch, K. A.;
Fishman, N. O.; Kant, J. A.; Bennett, J. S.: Coincident Kaposi sarcoma
and T-cell lymphoma in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Am.
J. Hemat. 40: 126-134, 1992.

53. Nathan, D. G.: Splenectomy in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. (Editorial) New
Eng. J. Med. 302: 916-917, 1980.

54. Notarangelo, L. D.; Candotti, F.; Parolini, O.; Mantuano, E.;
Giliani, S.; Lanfranchi, A.; Albertini, A.: Application of molecular
analysis to genetic counseling in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS). DNA
Cell Biol. 12: 645-649, 1993.

55. Notarangelo, L. D.; Parolini, O.; Faustini, R.; Porteri, V.; Albertini,
A.; Ugazio, A. G.: Presentation of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as isolated
thrombocytopenia. (Letter) Blood 77: 1125-1126, 1991.

56. Notarangelo, L. D.; Parolini, O.; Porta, F.; Locatelli, F.; Lanfranchi,
A.; Marconi, M.; Nespoli, L.; Albertini, A.; Craig, I. W.; Ugazio,
A. G.: Analysis of X-chromosome inactivation and presumptive expression
of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) gene in hematopoietic cell lineages
of a thrombocytopenic carrier female of WAS. Hum. Genet. 88: 237-241,
1991.

57. Ochs, H. D.; Slichter, S. J.; Harker, L. A.; Von Behrens, W. E.;
Clark, R. A.; Wedgwood, R. J.: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: studies
of lymphocytes, granulocytes, and platelets. Blood 55: 243-252,
1980.

58. Parkman, R.; Kenney, D. M.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Perrine, S.;
Rosen, F. S.: Surface protein abnormalities in lymphocytes and platelets
from patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Lancet 318: 1387-1389,
1981. Note: Originally Volume II.

59. Parkman, R.; Rappeport, J.; Geha, R.; Belli, J.; Cassady, R.;
Levey, R.; Nathan, D. G.; Rosen, F. S.: Complete correction of the
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. New
Eng. J. Med. 298: 921-927, 1978.

60. Parolini, O.; Ressmann, G.; Haas, O. A.; Pawlowsky, J.; Gadner,
H.; Knapp, W.; Holter, W.: X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in a
girl. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 291-295, 1998.

61. Peacocke, M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome with polymorphic DNA sequences from the human X chromosome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 3430-3433, 1987.

62. Perry, G. S., III; Spector, B. D.; Schuman, L. M.; Mandel, J.
S.; Anderson, V. E.; McHugh, R. B.; Hanson, M. R.; Fahlstrom, S. M.;
Krivit, W.; Kersey, J. H.: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in the United
States and Canada (1892-1979). J. Pediat. 97: 72-78, 1980.

63. Prchal, J. T.; Carroll, A. J.; Prchal, J. F.; Crist, W. M.; Skalka,
H. W.; Gealy, W. J.; Harley, J.; Malluh, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
cellular impairments and their implication for carrier detection. Blood 56:
1048-1054, 1980.

64. Puck, J. M.; Candotti, F.: Lessons from the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 1759-1761, 2006.

65. Puck, J. M.; Siminovitch, K. A.; Poncz, M.; Greenberg, C. R.;
Rottem, M.; Conley, M. E.: Atypical presentation of Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: diagnosis in two unrelated males based on studies of maternal
T cell X chromosome inactivation. Blood 75: 2269-2374, 1990.

66. Puck, J. M.; Willard, H. F.: X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 325-327, 1998.

67. Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Kenney, D. M.; Parkman, R.; Cairns, L.;
Savage, B.; Rosen, F. S.: Characterization of a human lymphocyte
surface sialoglycoprotein that is defective in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J.
Exp. Med. 159: 1705-1723, 1984.

68. Sasahara, Y.; Fujie, H.; Kumaki, S.; Ohashi, Y.; Minegishi, M.;
Tsuchiya, S.: Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin's disease in
a patient with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Acta Pediat. 90: 1348-1351,
2001.

69. Sasahara, Y.; Rachid, R.; Byrne, M. J.; de la Fuente, M. A.; Abraham,
R. T.; Ramesh, N.; Geha, R. S.: Mechanism of recruitment of WASP
to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation. Molec.
Cell 10: 1269-1281, 2002.

70. Schindelhauer, D.; Weiss, M.; Hellebrand, H.; Golla, A.; Hergersberg,
M.; Seger, R.; Belohradsky, B. H.; Meindl, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
no strict genotype-phenotype correlations but clustering of missense
mutations in the amino-terminal part of the WASP gene product. Hum.
Genet. 98: 68-76, 1996.

71. Schwartz, M.; Mibashan, R. S.; Nicolaides, K. H.; Millar, D. S.;
Jenkins, E.; Rodeck, C. H.; Orstavik, K. H.; Stormorken, H.: First-trimester
diagnosis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by DNA markers. (Letter) Lancet 334:
1405 only, 1989. Note: Originally Volume II.

72. Shapiro, R. S.; Perry, G. S., III; Krivit, W.; Gerrard, J. M.;
White, J. G.; Kersey, J. H.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: detection
of carrier state by metabolic stress of platelets. Lancet 311: 121-123,
1978. Note: Originally Volume I.

73. Simon, H.-U.; Mills, G. B.; Hashimoto, S.; Siminovitch, K. A.
: Evidence for defective transmembrane signaling in B cells from patients
with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 1396-1405, 1992.

74. Spitler, L. E.; Wray, B. B.; Mogerman, S.; Miller, J. J., III;
O'Reilly, R. J.; Lagios, M.: Nephropathy in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Pediatrics 66:
391-398, 1980.

75. Standen, G. R.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Matthews, N.; Bloom, A. L.:
Inherited thrombocytopenia, elevated serum IgA and renal disease:
identification as a variant of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Quart.
J. Med. 59: 401-408, 1986.

76. Steinberg, A. G.: Methodology in human genetics. J. Med. Educ. 34:
315-334, 1959.

77. Sullivan, K. E.; Mullen, C. A.; Blaese, R. M.; Winkelstein, J.
A.: A multiinstitutional survey of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J.
Pediat. 125: 876-885, 1994.

78. Symons, M.; Derry, J. M. J.; Karlak, B.; Jiang, S.; Lemahieu,
V.; McCormick, F.; Francke, U.; Abo, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
protein, a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs, is implicated in
actin polymerization. Cell 84: 723-734, 1996.

79. ten Bensel, R. W.; Stadlan, E. M.; Krivit, W.: The development
of malignancy in the course of the Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 68:
761-767, 1966.

80. Thompson, L. J.; Lalloz, M. R. A.; Layton, D. M.: Unique and
recurrent WAS gene mutations in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Blood Cells Molec. Dis. 25: 218-226, 1999.

81. Van den Bosch, J.; Drukker, J.: Het Syndroom van Aldrich: een
klinisch en genetisch Onderzoek van enige nederlandse Families. Maandschr.
Kindergeneesk. 32: 359-373, 1964.

82. Villa, A.; Notarangelo, L.; Macchi, P.; Mantuano, E.; Cavagni,
G.; Brugnoni, D.; Strina, D.; Patrosso, M. C.; Ramenghi, U.; Sacco,
M. G.; Ugazio, A.; Vezzoni, P.: X-linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome are allelic diseases with mutations in the WASP gene. Nature
Genet. 9: 414-417, 1995.

83. Wada, T.; Konno, A.; Schurman, S. H.; Garabedian, E. K.; Anderson,
S. M.; Kirby, M.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Second-site mutation
in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) protein gene causes somatic
mosaicism in two WAS siblings. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 1389-1397,
2003.

84. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Jagadeesh, G. J.; Garabedian, E. K.;
Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Multiple patients with revertant mosaicism
in a single Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome family. Blood 104: 1270-1272,
2004.

85. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Otsu, M.; Garabedian, E. K.; Ochs,
H. D.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Somatic mosaicism in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome suggests in vivo reversion by a DNA slippage mechanism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8697-8702, 2001.

86. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Otsu, M.; Garabedian, E. K.; Ochs,
H. D.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Somatic mosaicism in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome suggests in vivo reversion by a DNA slippage mechanism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8697-8702, 2001.

87. Waisfisz, Q.; Morgan, N. V.; Savino, M.; de Winter, J. P.; van
Berkel, C. G. M.; Hoatlin, M. E.; Ianzano, L.; Gibson, R. A.; Arwert,
F.; Savoia, A.; Mathew, C. G.; Pronk, J. C.; Joenje, H.: Spontaneous
functional correction of homozygous Fanconi anaemia alleles reveals
novel mechanistic basis for reverse mosaicism. Nature Genet. 22:
379-383, 1999.

88. Webb, M. C.; Andrews, P. A.; Koffman, C. G.; Cameron, J. S.:
Renal transplantation in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Transplantation 56:
747-748, 1993.

89. Weiden, P. L.; Blaese, R.: Hereditary thrombocytopenia: relation
to Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with special reference to splenectomy. J.
Pediat. 80: 226-234, 1972.

90. Wengler, G.; Gorlin, J. B.; Williamson, J. M.; Rosen, F. S.; Bing,
D. H.: Nonrandom inactivation of the X chromosome in early lineage
hematopoietic cells in carriers of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Blood 85:
2471-2477, 1995.

91. Wiskott, A.: Familiarer, angeborener Morbus Werlhofii? Mschr.
Kinderheilk. 68: 212-216, 1937.

92. Wolff, J. A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: clinical, immunologic,
and pathologic observations. J. Pediat. 70: 221-232, 1967.

93. Yamada, M.; Ariga, T.; Kawamura, N.; Yamaguchi, K.; Ohtsu, M.;
Nelson, D. L.; Kondoh, T.; Kobayashi, I.; Okano, M.; Kobayashi, K.;
Sakiyama, Y.: Determination of carrier status for the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome by flow cytometric analysis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J. Immun. 165:
1119-1122, 2000.

94. Yamada, M.; Ohtsu, M.; Kobayashi, I.; Kawamura, N.; Kobayashi,
K.; Ariga, T.; Sakiyama, Y.; Nelson, D. L.; Tsuruta, S.; Anakura,
M.; Ishikawa, N.: Flow cytometric analysis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(WAS) protein in lymphocytes from WAS patients and their familial
carriers. Blood 93: 756-759, 1999.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
X-linked recessive

HEAD AND NECK:
[Head];
Sinusitis;
[Ears];
Otitis media;
[Nose];
Epistaxis;
[Mouth];
Oral bleeding

RESPIRATORY:
[Airways];
Upper respiratory tract infections;
Lower respiratory tract infections;
[Lung];
Pneumonia

ABDOMEN:
[Gastrointestinal];
Diarrhea;
Hematemesis;
Melena;
Inflammatory bowel disease

GENITOURINARY:
[Kidneys];
Nephropathy

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
[Skin];
Eczema;
Petechiae;
Purpura

NEUROLOGIC:
[Central nervous system];
Meningitis

HEMATOLOGY:
Thrombocytopenia;
Small platelets size;
Hemolytic anemia;
Small and large vessel vasculitis;
Iron deficiency anemia;
CD43 (sialophorin) defectively expressed on surface of blood cells

IMMUNOLOGY:
Moderately depressed antibody response to polysaccharide antigens;
Lymphopenia;
Abnormal delayed hypersensitivity skin test;
Absent microvilli on the surface of peripheral blood lymphocytes

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Prolonged bleeding time;
Normal IgG levels;
Increased IgA levels;
Increased IgE levels;
Reduced IgM levels;
Raised ESR;
Raised CRP

MOLECULAR BASIS:
Caused by mutation in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene (WASP,
301000.0001)

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - reviewed: 1/4/2001
Assil Saleh - revised: 8/25/2000

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 10/22/2013
joanna: 7/23/2013
joanna: 1/5/2001
joanna: 1/4/2001
kayiaros: 8/25/2000

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/27/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 5/13/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/21/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 6/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1998
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/1998
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 6/9/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/14/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/23/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 4/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 03/28/2013
mgross: 2/23/2012
terry: 1/27/2012
carol: 6/7/2011
alopez: 11/16/2010
terry: 11/11/2010
wwang: 5/13/2009
ckniffin: 4/27/2009
terry: 3/27/2009
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
alopez: 12/8/2006
terry: 11/30/2006
alopez: 6/13/2006
tkritzer: 12/27/2004
tkritzer: 2/18/2004
tkritzer: 1/23/2003
tkritzer: 1/13/2003
terry: 1/10/2003
carol: 5/13/2002
ckniffin: 5/10/2002
ckniffin: 5/9/2002
mgross: 2/21/2002
carol: 2/12/2002
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
mcapotos: 6/8/2001
mcapotos: 5/25/2001
terry: 5/18/2001
alopez: 3/5/2001
alopez: 3/1/2001
terry: 2/28/2001
mgross: 9/21/2000
alopez: 5/16/2000
mcapotos: 1/27/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
alopez: 8/24/1999
jlewis: 8/24/1999
terry: 8/16/1999
jlewis: 6/30/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
terry: 5/20/1999
dkim: 11/13/1998
carol: 11/12/1998
terry: 11/4/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
dkim: 7/21/1998
alopez: 6/9/1998
alopez: 4/23/1998
jenny: 8/27/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
jamie: 10/18/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
jamie: 10/14/1996
mark: 8/12/1996
terry: 7/16/1996
terry: 7/15/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/25/1996
mark: 6/19/1996
terry: 6/11/1996
carol: 4/26/1996
mark: 4/23/1996
carol: 4/22/1996
mark: 2/5/1996
mark: 1/8/1996
mark: 10/25/1995
terry: 7/28/1995
carol: 12/14/1994
davew: 7/6/1994
pfoster: 7/1/1994
jason: 6/17/1994

