612890	TITLE *612890 LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8D; LRRC8D
;;LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; LRRC5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching protein and nucleotide databases for sequences similar to
LRRC8 (LRRC8A; 608360), followed by RT-PCR of peripheral blood
mononuclear cell and monocyte total RNA, Kubota et al. (2004) identified
LRRC8D as LRRC5. The deduced 858-amino acid protein contains 4
N-terminal transmembrane domains and 16 C-terminal leucine-rich repeats.
LRRC8D shares 55% identity with LRRC8A and 95% identity with the
859-amino acid mouse ortholog. Semiquantitative PCR detected variable
LRRC8D expression in all tissues examined except skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Kubota et al. (2004) found that expression of LRRC8D in isolated human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells or monocytes was increased following
exposure to phytohemagglutinin, phorbol ester, or lipopolysaccharide.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kubota et al. (2004) mapped the LRRC8D
gene to chromosome 1p22.2. They mapped the mouse Lrrc8d gene to
chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Kubota, K.; Kim, J. Y.; Sawada, A.; Tokimasa, S.; Fujisaki, H.;
Matsuda-Hashii, Y.; Ozono, K.; Hara, J.: LRRC8 involved in B cell
development belongs to a novel family of leucine-rich repeat proteins. FEBS
Lett. 564: 147-152, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/30/2009

EDITED alopez: 07/06/2009
alopez: 6/30/2009

611883	TITLE *611883 BRCA2- AND CDKN1A-INTERACTING PROTEIN; BCCIP
;;p21- AND CDK-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; TOK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the C-terminal half of p21 (CDK1A; 116899) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library, Ono et al. (2000) cloned BCCIP,
which they called TOK1. EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA
library revealed 2 TOK1 variants, TOK1-alpha and -beta. The deduced
proteins contain 322 and 314 amino acids, respectively, and are
identical for the first 259 amino acids. Northern blot analysis using a
probe common to both TOK1 variants detected a major 1.5-kb transcript
and a minor 3-kb transcript. Specific probes detected both TOK1 variants
as 1.5-kb transcripts. TOK1-alpha was highly expressed in skeletal
muscle, with little to no expression in other tissues examined.
TOK1-beta was highly expressed in skeletal muscle and heart, moderately
expressed in placenta and pancreas, and weakly expressed in brain,
kidney, and liver. Western blot analysis detected TOK1-alpha and
TOK1-beta as 50- and 45-kD proteins, respectively. In synchronized HeLa
cells, expression of TOK1-alpha began after G2/M phase and peaked before
S phase. TOK1-beta was expressed throughout the cell cycle, but like
TOK1-alpha, its expression increased before S phase.

Using an internal conserved region of BRCA2 (600185) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen, followed by database analysis, Liu et al. (2001) cloned
BCCIP-alpha and -beta, which correspond to TOK1-alpha and -beta,
respectively. Both BCCIP isoforms have an N-terminal acidic domain and
an evolutionarily conserved internal domain, followed by the C-terminal
variable domain. The internal domain contains a putative calcium-binding
domain. Western blot analysis detected both BCCIP proteins in all
tissues examined. Immunohistochemical analysis of several human cell
lines showed nuclear expression of endogenous BCCIP.

GENE FUNCTION

Using mutation analysis, Ono et al. (2000) found that TOK1-alpha bound
to the C-terminal proximal region of p21. However, TOK1-beta did not
bind p21. TOK1-alpha formed a ternary complex with p21 and an active
form of CDK2 (116953) in human embryonic kidney cells via its
interaction with p21. TOK1-alpha enhanced the inhibitory activity of p21
toward the histone H1 (see 142709) kinase activity of CDK2.

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis of transfected human embryonic kidney
cells, Liu et al. (2001) confirmed that BCCIP-alpha interacted with
endogenous BRCA2. Expression of BCCIP-beta protein was relatively
consistent among various tumor cell lines examined. In contrast,
expression of BCCIP-alpha protein was reduced in some brain, breast, and
endometrial tumor cell lines and increased in some endometrial tumor
cell lines, with relatively consistent expression among lung cancer cell
lines. BCCIP-alpha expression inhibited growth of some breast and brain
tumor cells, but it had no effect on other types of cancer cells.

Lu et al. (2007) stated that BCCIP regulates BRCA2 and RAD51 (179617)
nuclear focus formation, DNA double-strand break-induced homologous
recombination, and cell cycle progression. They transfected full-length
and truncated fragments of BCCIP into a human fibrosarcoma cell line and
found that BCCIP fragments that interacted with either BRCA2 or p21
inhibited homologous recombination similarly. Transient downregulation
of BCCIP in human cells did not affect nonspecific integration of
transfected DNA, but it significantly inhibited homology-directed gene
targeting. Cells with constitutive downregulation of BCCIP showed
increased levels of spontaneous single-stranded DNA and double-strand
breaks. Lu et al. (2007) concluded that multiple domains of BCCIP are
involved in homologous recombination and that BCCIP plays a critical
role in resolving spontaneous DNA damage.

Using a matched normal/tumor cDNA array, Meng et al. (2003) found
reduced expression of both BCCIP-alpha and -beta in kidney tumors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Meng et al. (2003) determined that the BCCIP gene contains 9 exons and
spans about 30 kb. The 5-prime end of the BCCIP gene abuts the UROS gene
(606938) on the opposite strand in a head-to-head manner. BCCIP and UROS
share a functional intergenic bidirectional promoter that contains
binding sites for various transcription factors. The last 3 exons of
BCCIP overlap with seven 3-prime exons of the DHX32 gene (607960) on the
opposite strand.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the
BCCIP gene to chromosome 10q25.3-q26.2.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, J.; Yuan, Y.; Huan, J.; Shen, Z.: Inhibition of breast and
brain cancer cell growth by BCCIP-alpha, an evolutionarily conserved
nuclear protein that interacts with BRCA2. Oncogene 20: 336-345,
2001.

2. Lu, H.; Yue, J.; Meng, X.; Nickoloff, J. A.; Shen, Z.: BCCIP regulates
homologous recombination by distinct domains and suppresses spontaneous
DNA damage. Nucleic Acids Res. 35: 7160-7170, 2007.

3. Meng, X.; Liu, J.; Shen, Z.: Genomic structure of the human BCCIP
gene and its expression in cancer. Gene 302: 139-146, 2003.

4. Ono, T.; Kitaura, H.; Ugai, H.; Murata, T.; Yokoyama, K. K.; Iguchi-Ariga,
S. M. M.; Ariga, H.: TOK-1, a novel p21(Cip1)-binding protein that
cooperatively enhances p21-dependent inhibitory activity toward CDK2
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 31145-31154, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/7/2008

EDITED wwang: 03/31/2010
mgross: 3/7/2008

607657	TITLE *607657 CYSTATHIONINE GAMMA-LYASE; CTH
;;CYSTATHIONASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CTH gene encodes cystathionine gamma-lyase (EC 4.4.1.1.), an enzyme
that transforms cystathionine derived from methionine into cysteine.
This reaction is preceded by the condensation of homocysteine and serine
to form cystathionine, a process catalyzed by cystathionine
beta-synthase (CBS; 613381). Cysteine is considered a nonessential amino
acid because it can be synthesized in the body in this way.
Biosynthesized cysteine is further metabolized in the liver to yield
glutathione and taurine (summary by Ishii et al., 2010).

CLONING

Lu et al. (1992) cloned and sequenced a 1,083-bp cDNA encoding human
liver cystathionine gamma-lyase. The human sequence presented a deletion
of 132 bases (44 amino acids) compared to the cystathionase sequence
reported for the rat, and a deletion of 135 bases (45 amino acids)
compared to the sequence reported for yeast. After realignment for the
missing nucleotides, the human cDNA sequence showed significant amino
acid homology to the rat (85%) and yeast (50%) enzymes. Using PCR, Lu et
al. (1992) isolated a second clone which contained the missing 132
bases. Flanking nucleotides in the latter clone were identical to those
in the cDNA clone containing the deletion. Alternative splicing as the
basis of the 2 forms of cystathionase is plausible.

GENE FUNCTION

Yang et al. (2008) demonstrated that hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is
physiologically generated by CTH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wang and Hegele (2003) sequenced the CTH gene in 4 unrelated patients
with cystathioninuria (219500) and identified 2 nonsense and 2 missense
mutations (607657.0001-607657.0004). All affected subjects were either
simple homozygotes or compound heterozygotes. The authors also
identified a common nonsynonymous SNP in exon 12, a 1364G-T transition
in the cDNA sequence, resulting in a ser403-to-ile (S403I) mutation, in
4 ethnic groups.

In 496 Caucasian subjects, Wang et al. (2004) studied the association of
genotypes of the S403I SNP in the CTH gene with plasma total
homocysteine concentrations. T/T homozygotes had significantly higher
mean plasma total homocysteine concentrations than subjects with other
genotypes, and this association had approximately the same effect size
as the association between plasma total homocysteine concentration and
MTHFR (607093) genotype.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CTH
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG39248). The CTH gene had earlier been
assigned to chromosome 16 by study of somatic cell hybrids (Donald et
al., 1982).

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang et al. (2008) demonstrated that hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is
physiologically generated by CTH and that genetic deletion of this
enzyme in mice markedly reduced H2S levels in the serum, heart, aorta,
and other tissues. Mutant mice lacking CTH displayed pronounced
hypertension and diminished endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation.
Cystathionine was physiologically activated by calcium and calmodulin
(see 114180), which is a mechanism for H2S formation in response to
vascular activation. Yang et al. (2008) concluded that their findings
provided direct evidence that H2S is a physiologic vasodilator and
regulator of blood pressure.

In contrast to the findings of Yang et al. (2008), Ishii et al. (2010)
found that Cth-null mice mice developed normally and did not show
hypertension. Both male and female mutant mice showed
hypercystathioninemia and hyperhomocysteinemia, but not
hypermethioninemia. Ishii et al. (2010) also found that Cth-null mice
developed acute skeletal muscle atrophy and myopathy resulting in severe
paralysis and death when fed a low cysteine diet. Both Cth-null mice and
hepatocytes derived from these mice showed increased vulnerability to
oxidative injury. Glutathione levels were reduced in liver and skeletal
muscle. The findings indicated that cysteine is an essential amino acid
in Cth-null mice. The phenotype of Cth-null mice differed from that of
Cbs-null mice (613381; Namekata et al., 2004), who showed abnormal lipid
metabolism. Ishii et al. (2010) postulated that the severe myopathic
reaction in Cth-null mice may be present in unknown cases of human CTH
deficiency, and noted that these patients may have hyperhomocysteinemia,
which may be an independent risk factor for disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CYSTATHIONINURIA
CTH, 2-BP DEL, 940CT

In an Oriental patient with cystathioninuria (219500), Wang and Hegele
(2003) identified a 2-bp deletion in exon 8 of the CTH cDNA sequence,
940-941delCT, in homozygous state.

.0002
CYSTATHIONINURIA
CTH, 1-BP DEL, 1220C

In a proband of European descent with cystathioninuria (219500), Wang
and Hegele (2003) identified a 1-bp deletion in exon 11 of the CTH cDNA
sequence, 1220delC, which the patient carried in compound heterozygous
state with a thr67-to-ile mutation (T67I; 607657.0003). Each parent was
heterozygous for one or the other of the mutations.

.0003
CYSTATHIONINURIA
CTH, THR67ILE (dbSNP rs28941785)

In a patient of European descent with cystathioninuria (219500), Wang
and Hegele (2003) found homozygosity for a 356C-T transition in exon 2
of the CTH cDNA sequence, resulting in a thr67-to-ile (T67I) mutation.
The same mutation was found in compound heterozygosity with a
gln240-to-glu mutation (Q240E; 607657.0004) in another patient of
European descent.

Espinos et al. (2010) identified a homozygous T67I mutation in 3
unrelated Spanish girls with cystathioninuria. Haplotype analysis of
these 3 patients and of 2 Czech patients with the mutation suggested a
founder effect, and the age of the mutation was estimated at 7,336 years
(262 generations old). The event may have occurred during the spread of
the European population in the Neolithic era. Espinos et al. (2010)
noted that the 200C-T transition, which is the most common change in the
CTH gene and has been observed in the heterozygous state in 1.5% of
controls in the Czech population, has been considered a polymorphism
(dbSNP rs28941785).

.0004
CYSTATHIONINURIA
CTH, GLN240GLU

In a patient of European descent with cystathioninuria (219500), Wang
and Hegele (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for an 874C-G
transversion in exon 7 of the CTH cDNA sequence, resulting in a
gln240-to-glu (Q240E) mutation, and a T67I mutation (607657.0003).

.0005
HOMOCYSTEINE, TOTAL PLASMA, ELEVATED
CTH, 1364G-T, SER403ILE

Wang et al. (2004) found a relationship between the common SNP
polymorphism in exon 12 of CTH and plasma total homocysteine
concentration in a study of 496 Caucasian subjects. CTH 1364T/T
homozygotes had significantly higher concentrations than did subjects
with other genotypes.

REFERENCE 1. Donald, L. J.; Wang, H. S.; Hamerton, J. L.: Assignment of the
gene for cystathionase (CYS) to human chromosome 16. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 32: 268 only, 1982.

2. Espinos, C.; Garcia-Cazorla, A.; Martinez-Rubio, D.; Martinez-Martinez,
E.; Vilaseca, M. A.; Perez-Duenas, B.; Kozich, V.; Palau, F.; Artuch,
R.: Ancient origin of the CTH alelle (sic) carrying the c.200C-T
(p.T67I) variant in patients with cystathioninuria. Clin. Genet. 78:
554-559, 2010.

3. Ishii, I.; Akahoshi, N.; Yamada, H.; Nakano, S.; Izumi, T.; Suematsu,
M.: Cystathionine gamma-Lyase-deficient mice require dietary cysteine
to protect against acute lethal myopathy and oxidative injury. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 26358-26368, 2010.

4. Lu, Y.; O'Dowd, B. F.; Orrego, H.; Israel, Y.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of human liver cDNA encoding for cystathionine gamma-lyase. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 189: 749-758, 1992.

5. Namekata, K.; Enokido, Y.; Ishii, I.; Nagai, Y.; Harada, T.; Kimura,
H.: Abnormal lipid metabolism in cystathionine beta-synthase-deficient
mice, an animal model for hyperhomocysteinemia. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
52961-52969, 2004.

6. Wang, J.; Hegele, R. A.: Genomic basis of cystathioninuria (MIM
219500) revealed by multiple mutations in cystathionine gamma-lyase
(CTH). Hum. Genet. 112: 404-408, 2003.

7. Wang, J.; Huff, A. M.; Spence, J. D.; Hegele, R. A.: Single nucleotide
polymorphism in CTH associated with variation in plasma homocysteine
concentration. Clin. Genet. 65: 483-486, 2004.

8. Yang, G.; Wu, L.; Jiang, B.; Yang, W.; Qi, J.; Cao, K.; Meng, Q.;
Mustafa, A. K.; Mu, W.; Zhang, S.; Snyder, S. H.; Wang, R.: H2S as
a physiologic vasorelaxant: hypertension in mice with deletion of
cystathionine gamma-lyase. Science 322: 587-590, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/17/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/22/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/26/2003

EDITED carol: 09/26/2012
ckniffin: 5/17/2012
wwang: 11/1/2010
ckniffin: 10/22/2010
alopez: 11/19/2008
terry: 11/12/2008
tkritzer: 6/28/2004
terry: 6/23/2004
carol: 3/27/2003
tkritzer: 3/26/2003

176992	TITLE *176992 S100 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN A3; S100A3
;;S100E
DESCRIPTION Engelkamp et al. (1993) demonstrated that the S100E protein is encoded
by a gene located in a tight cluster of genes of similar structure in a
15-kb region of 1q21. The order of the genes from 5-prime to 3-prime was
found to be S100E, CAPL (S100A4; 114210), S100D (S100A5; 176991), CACY
(S100A6; 114110). The product of the S100E gene is cysteine-rich. The 4
genes were arranged in head-to-tail order. Despite the tight clustering,
each of the genes was expressed in different human tissues and probably
even at different times. Disruption of the cluster may occur in
neoplasia since the region 1q21 often shows structural alterations.

Schafer et al. (1995) isolated a YAC clone from 1q21 on which 9
different genes coding for S100 calcium-binding proteins could be
localized. Clustered organization allowed introduction of a new logical
nomenclature for these genes, based on their physical arrangement on the
chromosome. S100E became S100A3 in the new nomenclature. The 9 genes are
in sequence with S100A1 (176940) being closest to the telomere and
S100A9 (123886) being closest to the centromere.

REFERENCE 1. Engelkamp, D.; Schafer, B. W.; Mattei, M. G.; Erne, P.; Heizmann,
C. W.: Six S100 genes are clustered on human chromosome 1q21: identification
of two genes coding for the two previously unreported calcium-binding
proteins S100D and S100E. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 6547-6551, 1993.

2. Schafer, B. W.; Wicki, R.; Engelkamp, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Heizmann,
C. W.: Isolation of a YAC clone covering a cluster of nine S100 genes
on human chromosome 1q21: rationale for a new nomenclature of the
S100 calcium-binding protein family. Genomics 25: 638-643, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/25/1993

EDITED alopez: 10/12/1998
mark: 12/21/1996
mark: 6/15/1995
carol: 1/23/1995
carol: 8/25/1993

605936	TITLE *605936 BRIDGING INTEGRATOR 2; BIN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BAR proteins, such as BIN2, which are characterized by a common
N-terminal BAR domain, are adaptor proteins involved in diverse cellular
processes. BIN1 (601248), a member of the BAR family, interacts with and
inhibits the oncogenic properties of MYC (190080) (summary by Ge and
Prendergast, 2000).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to BIN1, followed by
screening a leukocyte phage cDNA library, Ge and Prendergast (2000)
identified a cDNA encoding BIN2. Sequence analysis predicted that the
564-amino acid protein has a BAR motif that is 61% identical to that of
BIN1 and slightly less similar to that of AMPH (600418). BIN2 has acidic
and serine/proline-rich stretches but lacks a C-terminal SH3 domain or a
MYC-interacting region. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a
major 2.6-kb transcript that was highest in spleen and peripheral blood
leukocytes and also high in thymus, colon, and placenta, suggesting
preferential expression in hematopoietic tissues. Strong expression was
detected in lymphoid and granulocytic cell lines but not other cell
lines. Coimmunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses showed expression
of an 80-kD protein that interacts with the N-terminal portion of the
BAR domain of BIN1 isoforms but not with AMPH. Immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated cytosolic expression and lack of
receptor-mediated endocytic function for BIN2. Functional analysis
showed that BIN2 lacks tumor suppressor features.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Ge and Prendergast (2000) mapped the BIN2 gene to 4q22.1.

REFERENCE 1. Ge, K.; Prendergast, G. C.: Bin2, a functionally nonredundant
member of the BAR adaptor gene family. Genomics 67: 210-220, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/15/2001

EDITED alopez: 03/22/2012
mgross: 5/15/2001

602026	TITLE *602026 PHYTANOYL-CoA HYDROXYLASE; PHYH
;;PAHX;;
LNAP1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PHYH gene encodes phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase, a peroxisomal protein
that catalyzes the first step in the alpha-oxidation of phytanic acid, a
branched-chain fatty acid. Because beta-oxidation is blocked by the
methyl group at C-3, phytanic acid must first undergo decarboxylation
via an alpha-oxidation mechanism catalyzed by PHYH (Jansen et al.,
1997).

CLONING

The gene encoding the PHYH enzyme was identified by Mihalik et al.
(1997) starting from studies of peroxisomal genes and gene defects in
yeast and independently by Jansen et al. (1997) working back from the
partial amino acid sequence of the purified rat protein. Both groups
made use of expressed sequence tag (EST) database searching for
identification of the full-length human cDNA sequence. The open reading
frame encodes a 41.2-kD protein of 338 amino acids, which contains a
cleavable peroxisomal targeting signal type 2 (PTS2).

GENE STRUCTURE

Jansen et al. (2000) determined that the PHYH gene spans approximately
21 kb and contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

Radiation hybrid data studies by Mihalik et al. (1997) placed the PAHX
gene on chromosome 10 between markers D10S249 and D10S466.

GENE FUNCTION

The structure and subcellular localization of the phytanic acid
alpha-oxidation pathway long remained enigmatic, although it was
generally assumed to involve phytanic acid and not its CoA-ester.
However, this view was challenged by the finding in rat liver that
phytanic acid must first be activated to its CoA ester, phytanoyl-CoA,
before it can be oxidized (Watkins et al., 1994).

Mihalik et al. (1995) identified an enzyme activity (phytanoyl-CoA
hydroxylase) in rat-liver peroxisomes by which phytanoyl-CoA is
converted to 2-hydroxyphytanoyl-CoA. Jansen et al. (1996) showed that
phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase is present in human liver. Furthermore, they
showed that it is located in peroxisomes and is deficient in liver from
Zellweger syndrome (see 214100) patients, who lack morphologically
distinguishable peroxisomes, providing an explanation for the long-known
deficient oxidation of phytanic acid in these patients. They also showed
that phytanic acid alpha-oxidation is peroxisomal and that it utilizes
the CoA derivative as substrate, thus giving support in favor of the
revised pathway of phytanic acid alpha-oxidation.

Mihalik et al. (1997) found that human PAHX is targeted to peroxisomes,
requires the PTS2 receptor PEX7 (601757) for peroxisomal localization,
interacts with the PTS2 receptor in the yeast 2-hybrid assay, and has
intrinsic phytanoyl-CoA alpha-hydroxylase activity that requires the
dioxygenase cofactor iron and cosubstrate 2-oxoglutarate.

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system to investigate the physiologic function
of FKBP52 (600611), Chambraud et al. (1999) found that PAHX is an
FKBP-associated protein. They found, furthermore, that the protein
corresponds to the mouse protein Lnap1, which, based on studies of the
MRL/lpr mouse, may be involved in the progression of lupus nephritis
(Iwano et al., 1996). Chambraud et al. (1999) suggested that PAHX is a
serious candidate for studying the cellular signaling pathway(s)
involving FKBP52 in the presence of immunosuppressant drugs.

McDonough et al. (2005) stated that both the pro and mature forms of
human PAHX are enzymatically active and show similar substrate
specificity.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

McDonough et al. (2005) solved the x-ray crystallographic structure of
human PAHX complexed with Fe(2+) and 2-oxoglutarate to 2.5-angstrom
resolution. PAHX has a double-stranded beta-helix core with 3
iron-binding residues, his175, asp177, and his264. The 2-oxoacid group
of 2-oxoglutarate binds to Fe(2+) in a bidentate manner. Cys191 is
positioned 6.7-angstrom from Fe(2+), and his155 and his281 form part of
the active site. Of the 15 PAHX residues mutated in Refsum disease
(266500) patients, 11 cluster in 2 distinct groups around the binding
sites for Fe(2+) (e.g., gln176; see 602026.0007) and 2-oxoglutarate
(e.g., gly204; see 602026.0008).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mihalik et al. (1997) and Jansen et al. (1997) identified homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutations in the PHYH gene
(602026.0001-602026.0004) in a total of 7 patients with Refsum disease
(266500).

In 22 patients with Refsum disease, Jansen et al. (2000) identified
mutations in the PHYH gene, including 14 different missense mutations, a
3-bp insertion, and a 1-bp deletion, which were all confirmed at the
genome level. A 111-bp deletion identified in the PHYH cDNA of several
patients with Refsum disease was due to either 1 of 2 different
mutations in the same splice acceptor site, which result in skipping of
exon 3. Six mutations were expressed in S. cerevisiae, and all led to an
enzymatically inactive PhyH protein.

Mukherji et al. (2001) relied on crystallographic data for other members
of the 2-oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenase superfamily to generate
secondary structural predictions for the PHYH gene, which were tested by
site-directed mutagenesis. Constructed H175A and D177A mutants did not
catalyze hydroxylation of phytanoyl-CoA, consistent with the assigned
role of these residues as iron(II) binding ligands. The clinically
observed mutations pro29 to ser (P29S; 602026.0006), gln176 to lys
(Q176K; 602026.0007), gly204 to ser (G204S; 602026.0008), asn269 to his
(N269H; 602026.0004), arg275 to gln (R275Q; 602026.0009), and arg275 to
trp (R275W; 602026.0001) were assayed for both 2-oxoglutarate and
phytanoyl-CoA oxidation. The P29S mutant was fully active, implying that
the mutation may result in defective targeting of the protein to
peroxisomes. Mutation of arg275 resulted in impaired 2-oxoglutarate
binding. The Q176K, G204S, and N269H mutations caused partial uncoupling
of 2-oxoglutarate conversion from phytanoyl-CoA oxidation. The authors
cautioned that the diagnosis of Refsum disease should not solely rely
upon PHYH assays for 2-oxoglutarate or phytanoyl-CoA oxidation.

Jansen et al. (2004) reviewed mutations in the PHYH gene causing Refsum
disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, ARG275TRP

In a Ukrainian patient with Refsum disease (266500), whose parents
originated from the same region, Mihalik et al. (1997) identified a
homozygous 823C-T transition in the PHYH gene, predicted to result in an
arg275-to-trp (R275W) amino acid substitution. The mutation also
eliminated a unique BspEI restriction site. The arginine-275 residue is
conserved in both the mouse and the C. elegans forms of the protein. In
vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant enzyme was
inactive.

Jansen et al. (2000) expressed the mutant R275W allele in S. cerevisiae
and determined that no enzymatic activity was present.

.0002
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, IVS2AS, A-G, -2

In a patient with Refsum disease (266500), Mihalik et al. (1997)
discovered a truncated form of PHYH mRNA lacking 111 nucleotides of the
open reading frame (residues 158-269 of the cDNA sequence), deleting
codons 46-82. (Jansen et al. (1997) stated that this nucleotide
numbering was incorrect; see below.) Sequence analysis of genomic DNA
spanning this region of the gene revealed the absence of a single exon
in the cDNA. An A-to-G transition was found at the penultimate residue
of the upstream intron, altering the consensus splice acceptor sequence
of AG to GG. The patient was homozygous for the mutation.

In 3 unrelated patients with Refsum disease, Jansen et al. (1997)
observed a 111-bp deletion covering residues 135 to 246 of their PHYH
cDNA. The deletion did not cause a frameshift, but resulted in a protein
lacking 37 internal amino acids (Y46-R82del) that was presumed to be
enzymatically inactive. The deletion was thought to be the result of the
missplicing and skipping of 1 or more exons, as analysis of the putative
exon boundaries showed a perfect match with the 5-prime exon boundary
consensus. The deletion was homozygous in 2 patients and present in
compound heterozygous state in the third.

.0003
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, 1-BP DEL, 164T

In a brother and sister with Refsum disease (266500) born to healthy
first-cousin Pakistani parents, Jansen et al. (1997) identified a
homozygous deletion of nucleotide 164T in the PHYH gene, leading to a
frameshift and a premature stop codon after amino acid 66. The first
manifestation in the sister was nystagmus at the age of 6 months. Night
blindness and retinitis pigmentosa were found at the age of 8 years. At
the age of 10 years, she had ataxia, deafness, ichthyosis, and short
metacarpal bones, as well as peripheral neuropathy but normal
intellectual performance. Plasma phytanic acid level was elevated. The
brother showed elevated plasma phytanic acid when first measured at 7
weeks. He was placed on a low phytanic acid diet with vitamin C
supplement. His development was good and he appeared to see well.
Although the appearance of his retina was normal, visual evoked
responses were delayed and ERG response was poor.

.0004
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, ASN269HIS

In a Caucasian male with Refsum disease (266500) reported by Skjeldal et
al. (1987), Jansen et al. (1997) identified a heterozygous 805A-C
transition in the PHYH gene, resulting in an asn269-to-his (N269H)
substitution. The patient was a compound heterozygote for this missense
mutation and for a 111-bp deletion (602026.0002), which was observed in
2 other unrelated patients.

.0005
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, 3-BP INS, 576GCC

In 2 sibs with Refsum disease (266500), Jansen et al. (2000)
demonstrated homozygosity for a 3-bp insertion (576insGCC) in exon 6 of
the PHYH gene, resulting in addition of an alanine residue after amino
acid 192.

.0006
RECLASSIFIED - PHYTANOYL-CoA HYDROXYLASE POLYMORPHISM (dbSNP rs28938169)
PHYH, PRO29SER

This variant, formerly titled REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1, has been
reclassified as a polymorphism. As of December 2012, the pro29-to-ser
(P29S) variant had an overall population frequency of 20% (Exome Variant
Server, 2012). In addition, the patients reported by Jansen et al.
(2000) with this mutation had additional mutations in the PHYH gene that
may have been causative and the P29S mutant was found to be fully
active.

In 2 patients with Refsum disease (266500), Jansen et al. (2000) found
an 85C-T transition in the PHYH gene, leading to a P29S substitution.
The patients also had a truncating mutation (602026.0002) and either
589G-C or 648C-T leading to missense mutations E197Q or H220Y,
respectively.

.0007
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, GLN176LYS

In the cDNA of a patient with Refsum disease (266500), Jansen et al.
(2000) described a 526C-A transversion in the PHYH gene, leading to a
gln176-to-lys (Q176K) substitution.

.0008
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, GLY204SER

In the cDNA of a patient with Refsum disease (266500), Jansen et al.
(2000) described a 610G-A transition in the PHYH gene, leading to a
gly204-to-ser (G204S) substitution.

.0009
REFSUM DISEASE, ADULT, 1
PHYH, ARG275GLN

In the cDNA of patients with Refsum disease (266500), Jansen et al.
(2000) described an 824G-A transition in the PHYH gene, leading to an
arg275-to-gln (R275Q) mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chambraud, B.; Radanyi, C.; Camonis, J. H.; Rajkowski, K.; Schumacher,
M.; Baulieu, E.-E.: Immunophilins, Refsum disease, and lupus nephritis:
the peroxisomal enzyme phytanoyl-COA alpha-hydroxylase is a new FKBP-associated
protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2104-2109, 1999.

2. Exome Variant Server: NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project (ESP),
Seattle, WA. http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/ , 12/2012.

3. Iwano, M.; Ueno, S.; Miyazaki, M.; Harada, T.; Nagai, Y.; Hirano,
M.; Dohi, Y.; Akai, Y.; Kurioka, H.; Dohi, K.: Molecular cloning
and expression of a novel peptide (LN1) gene: reduced expression in
the renal cortex of lupus nephritis in MRL/lpr mouse. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 229: 355-360, 1996.

4. Jansen, G. A.; Hogenhout, E. M.; Ferdinandusse, S.; Waterham, H.
R.; Ofman, R.; Jakobs, C.; Skjeldal, O. H.; Wanders, R. J. A.: Human
phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase: resolution of the gene structure and the
molecular basis of Refsum's disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1195-1200,
2000.

5. Jansen, G. A.; Mihalik, S. J.; Watkins, P. A.; Moser, H. W.; Jakobs,
C.; Denis, S.; Wanders, R. J. A.: Phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase is present
in human liver, located in peroxisomes, and deficient in Zellweger
syndrome: direct, unequivocal evidence for the new, revised pathway
of phytanic acid alpha-oxidation in humans. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 229: 205-210, 1996.

6. Jansen, G. A.; Ofman, R.; Ferdinandusse, S.; Ijlst, L.; Muijsers,
A. O.; Skjeldal, O. H.; Stokke, O.; Jakobs, C.; Besley, G. T. N.;
Wraith, J. E.; Wanders, R. J. A.: Refsum disease is caused by mutations
in the phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase gene. Nature Genet. 17: 190-193,
1997.

7. Jansen, G. A.; Waterham, H. R.; Wanders, R. J. A.: Molecular basis
of Refsum disease: sequence variations in phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase
(PHYH) and the PTS2 receptor (PEX7). Hum. Mutat. 23: 209-218, 2004.

8. McDonough, M. A.; Kavanagh, K. L.; Butler, D.; Searls, T.; Oppermann,
U.; Schofield, C. J.: Structure of human phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase
identifies molecular mechanisms of Refsum disease. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
41101-41110, 2005.

9. Mihalik, S. J.; Morrell, J. C.; Kim. D.; Sacksteder, K. A.; Watkins,
P. A.; Gould, S. J.: Identification of PAHX, a Refsum disease gene. Nature
Genet. 17: 185-189, 1997.

10. Mihalik, S. J.; Rainville, A. M.; Watkins, P. A.: Phytanic acid
alpha-oxidation in rat liver peroxisomes: production of alpha-hydroxyphytanoyl-CoA
and formate is enhanced by dioxygenase cofactors. Europ. J. Biochem. 232:
545-551, 1995.

11. Mukherji, M.; Chien, W.; Kershaw, N. J.; Clifton, I. J.; Schofield,
C. J.; Wierzbicki, A. S.; Lloyd, M. D.: Structure-function analysis
of phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase mutations causing Refsum's disease. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 1971-1982, 2001.

12. Skjeldal, O. H.; Stokke, O.; Refsum, S.; Norseth, J.; Petit, H.
: Clinical and biochemical heterogeneity in conditions with phytanic
acid accumulation. J. Neurol. Sci. 77: 87-96, 1987.

13. Watkins, P. A.; Howard, A. E.; Mihalik, S. J.: Phytanic acid
must be activated to phytanoyl-CoA prior to its alpha-oxidation in
rat liver peroxisomes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1214: 288-294, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 12/4/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/11/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 11/25/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/19/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/7/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/4/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/7/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/30/1997

EDITED carol: 12/10/2012
alopez: 12/5/2012
carol: 12/5/2012
carol: 12/4/2012
joanna: 12/4/2012
alopez: 10/25/2012
carol: 1/12/2012
mgross: 3/15/2010
terry: 3/11/2010
carol: 11/25/2009
ckniffin: 11/19/2009
wwang: 10/4/2007
carol: 5/6/2004
terry: 4/7/2004
cwells: 2/6/2002
cwells: 2/4/2002
alopez: 6/7/2000
jlewis: 7/28/1999
terry: 7/13/1999
alopez: 3/23/1998
terry: 2/27/1998
mark: 10/23/1997
terry: 10/7/1997
mark: 10/1/1997
jenny: 9/30/1997

614259	TITLE *614259 WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 65; WDR65
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis and PCR of human and mouse testis cDNA libraries,
Rorick et al. (2011) cloned 2 splice variants of human and mouse WDR65.
The deduced full-length human protein contains 1,283 amino acids and has
2 WD repeat domains. The shorter human variant encodes a deduced
698-amino acid protein that is truncated after the 2 WD repeat domains.
PCR analysis of mouse tissues revealed highest Wdr65 expression in lung,
testis, and skin. Weaker expression was detected in brain and kidney,
and no expression was detected in heart, liver, skeletal muscle, and
spleen. Wdr65 was expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells and in whole
mouse embryos beginning at about 15 days postcoitum. In situ
hybridization revealed Wdr65 expression in mouse nasal epithelium and
medial edge epithelium at 14.5 days postcoitum, and in nasal respiratory
epithelium and epidermis, but not oral epithelium, at 15.5 days
postcoitum. The increase in Wdr65 expression in these embryonic mouse
craniofacial tissues correlated with development and dissolution of the
epithelial seam.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rorick et al. (2011) determined that the WDR65 gene contains 24 exons.

MAPPING

Rorick et al. (2011) reported that the WDR65 gene maps to chromosome
1p34.2. The mouse Wdr65 gene maps to a region of chromosome 4 that
shares homology of synteny with human chromosome 1p36-p32.

GENE FUNCTION

Using microarray analysis, Rorick et al. (2011) showed that expression
of Wdr65 was significantly downregulated in Irf6 (607199)-deficient
mouse embryos compared with wildtype embryos. Database analysis revealed
an IRF6-binding site for WDR65 in an exon of the EBNA1BP2 gene (614443),
which is located 63 bp upstream of WDR65 on the opposite strand.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Brazilian patient with van der Woude syndrome (606713), Rorick et
al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a possibly causative missense
mutation at a conserved residue in the WDR65 gene (614259.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
WDR65, ASP523TYR

This variant, formerly titled VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 2 (606713), has
been reclassified because its contribution to the phenotype has not been
confirmed.

In a Brazilian patient with van der Woude syndrome-2, Rorick et al.
(2011) identified a heterozygous 1567G-T transversion in exon 10 of the
WDR65 gene, resulting in an asp523-to-tyr (D523Y) substitution at a
conserved residue. Because the mutation was not found in controls and
significantly changes the biochemical properties of a conserved residue,
Rorick et al. (2011) concluded that it was potentially etiologic.

REFERENCE 1. Rorick, N. K.; Kinoshita, A.; Weirather, J. L.; Peyrard-Janvid,
M.; de Lima, R. L. L. F.; Dunnwald, M.; Shanske, A. L.; Moretti-Ferreira,
D.; Koillinen, H.; Kere, J.; Mansilla, M. A.; Murray, J. C.; Goudy,
S. L.; Schutte, B. C.: Genomic strategy identifies a missense mutation
in WD-repeat domain 65 (WDR65) in an individual with van der Woude
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 1314-1321, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/14/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/30/2011

EDITED carol: 12/11/2012
mgross: 1/24/2012
carol: 10/14/2011
mgross: 9/30/2011

