610325	TITLE *610325 NUCLEAR DISTRIBUTION GENE C, A. NIDULANS, HOMOLOG OF; NUDC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NudC was first identified as a regulator of nuclear movement in the
asexual reproductive cycle of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus
nidulans. Human NUDC is a nuclear movement protein that associates with
dynein (see DYNC1H1; 600112) (Aumais et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to A. nidulans NudC,
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a heart cDNA library, Miller et
al. (1999) cloned human NUDC. Northern blot analysis detected NUDC
expression in all tissues examined, with highest levels in heart and
skeletal muscle. However, Western blot analysis showed highest NUDC
protein expression in brain and erythroid cells, with lower expression
in other tissues examined. Immunohistochemical analysis of bone marrow
biopsies detected high NUDC levels in early erythroid and myeloid cells,
but little to none in most differentiated cells. Expression was
primarily cytoplasmic, although punctate nuclear staining was also
observed. In cultured human erythroid cells, NUDC mRNA and protein were
highly expressed in rapidly proliferating cells and declined upon
terminal differentiation.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to mouse and rat NudC
Matsumoto and Ledbetter (1999) identified human NUDC. The deduced
331-amino acid protein contains a basic stretch from lys68 to arg76, an
acidic region from asp144 to asp155, and a 94-amino acid C terminus that
is highly homologous to A. nidulans NudC. Human NUDC shares 94% and 95%
amino acid identity with mouse and rat NudC, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 1.6-kb transcript and a minor 2.0-kb
transcript in all adult and fetal human tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Miller et al. (1999) found that granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (CSF2; 138960) increased expression of NUDC
mRNA and protein in a human erythroleukemia cell line. NUDC expression
was also significantly enhanced in lysates of bone marrow aspirates from
patients with acute myelogenous and acute lymphoblastic leukemia
compared with normal controls.

Aumais et al. (2003) noted that, in rat T cells, NudC is an early
mitogen-responsive gene and, in synchronized cultures, NudC mRNA
increases during mid-G1 and protein levels double during G2/M. They
found that silencing of NUDC through small interfering RNA or
overexpression of rat NudC inhibited HeLa cell proliferation and led to
an increase in the proportion of multinucleated cells. Complementary
studies in C. elegans embryos demonstrated that cytokinetic furrows
regressed when Nud1, the C. elegans ortholog of NUDC, was silenced by
RNA-mediated interference, resulting in 1-celled embryos containing 2
nuclei. Loss of midzone microtubule organization was observed in both
HeLa cells and C. elegans embryos. Altering NUDC levels in HeLa cells
resulted in mislocalization of PLK1 (602098) from mitotic structures,
including the midbody during cytokinesis. Aumais et al. (2003) concluded
that NUDC is crucial for mitotic progression and completion of
cytokinesis.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, pull-down assays, and immunoprecipitation
analysis, Pan et al. (2005) demonstrated that the extracellular domain
of thrombopoietin receptor (MPL; 159530) bound amino acids 100 to 238 of
NUDC. Immunofluorescence staining of a human megakaryocyte cell line
showed colocalization of NUDC and MPL at all stages of megakaryocyte
development. Substantial colocalization of NUDC with microtubules was
detected around nuclei and elongated microtubular structures, especially
in proplatelet extensions. Pan et al. (2005) also found that NUDC was
secreted by human megakaryocyte cell lines and that Nudc was present in
mouse sera. Administration of human NUDC protein enhanced the number of
circulating platelets in mice.

By mass spectrometry analysis of HeLa cell proteins that
immunoprecipitated with NUDC, Zhu et al. (2010) found that NUDC
interacted with about 130 different proteins, including chaperones,
cytoskeletal proteins, and proteins involved in signal transduction,
trafficking, protein synthesis, nucleic acid management, metabolism, and
proteolysis. Some of these proteins were also HSP90-alpha (HSP90AA1;
140571)-interacting proteins. Zhu et al. (2010) found that NUDC and
HSP90-alpha interacted directly and formed an ATPase-dependent chaperone
complex with LIS1 (PAFAH1B1; 601545). An inactivating mutation in the
p23 (PTGES3; 607061) domain of NUDC or pharmacologic inhibition of
HSP90-alpha resulted in LIS1 destabilization. Zhu et al. (2010)
concluded that NUDC is a protein of diverse functions that acts as a
cochaperone for HSP90-alpha.

GENE STRUCTURE

Matsumoto and Ledbetter (1999) determined that the NUDC gene contains at
least 9 exons and spans about 8 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Matsumoto and Ledbetter (1999) mapped the NUDC gene to
chromosome 1p35-p34. They mapped 2 intronless NUDC pseudogenes, NUDCP1
and NUDCP2, to chromosomes 2q23-q24 and 2q31, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Aumais, J. P.; Williams, S. N.; Luo, W.; Nishino, M.; Caldwell,
K. A.; Caldwell, G. A.; Lin, S.-H.; Yu-Lee, L.: Role for NudC, a
dynein-associated nuclear movement protein, in mitosis and cytokinesis. J.
Cell Sci. 116: 1991-2003, 2003.

2. Matsumoto, N.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of the human NUDC gene. Hum. Genet. 104: 498-504, 1999.

3. Miller, B. A.; Zhang, M.-Y.; Gocke, C. D.; De Souza, C.; Osmani,
A. H.; Lynch, C.; Davies, J.; Bell, L.; Osmani, S. A.: A homolog
of the fungal nuclear migration gene nudC is involved in normal and
malignant human hematopoiesis. Exp. Hemat. 27: 742-750, 1999.

4. Pan, R.-M.; Yang, Y.; Wei, M.-X.; Yu, X.-B.; Ge, Y.-C.; Xu, P.
: A microtubule associated protein (hNUDC) binds to the extracellular
domain of thrombopoietin receptor (Mpl). J. Cell. Biochem. 96: 741-750,
2005.

5. Zhu, X.-J.; Liu, X.; Jin, Q.; Cai, Y.; Yang, Y.; Zhou, T.: The
L279P mutation of nuclear distribution gene C (NudC) influences its
chaperone activity and lissencephaly protein 1 (LIS1) stability. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 29903-29910, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2006

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2012
terry: 2/9/2012
mgross: 8/16/2006

109280	TITLE *109280 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 4 (ANION EXCHANGER), MEMBER 2; SLC4A2
;;ANION EXCHANGER, NONERYTHROID; AE2;;
ERYTHROCYTE MEMBRANE PROTEIN BAND 3-LIKE 1; EPB3L1;;
BAND 3-LIKE PROTEIN; BND3L;;
NONERYTHROID BAND 3; NBND3;;
HKB3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Demuth et al. (1986) isolated a cDNA clone, designated pHKB3, encoding a
human erythrocyte surface protein band 3-like gene product. Peptide
mapping shows substantial sequence homology between the erythrocyte band
3 protein (109270) and a band 3-like protein found in leukocytes.
Palumbo et al. (1986) described the partial sequence of a 2.7-kb human
cDNA clone encoding a band 3-related protein in nonerythroid cells.
Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence for this cDNA with the
amino acid sequences of mouse and human erythroid band 3 proteins
confirmed that the human clone is related to but distinct from erythroid
band 3. Palumbo et al. (1986) symbolized the gene as HKB3, in part after
the name of the human cell line studied.

Tanner (1993) referred to this nonerythroid anion exchanger as AE2. The
ability of AE2 to mediate anion transport has been confirmed. Northern
blotting studies showed that the AE2 gene is transcribed in a wide
variety of tissues. In the mouse, Lindsey et al. (1990) found that AE2
is expressed only in choroid plexus, the site of cerebrospinal fluid
production. Kudrycki et al. (1990) found that, in the rat, AE2 is
particularly abundant in the stomach and portions of the
gastrointestinal tract.

GENE STRUCTURE

Medina et al. (1997) determined that the AE2 gene spans approximately 17
kb and consists of 23 exons.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell genetics and in situ hybridization, Palumbo et al.
(1986) mapped the HKB3 gene to 7q35-q36. Showe et al. (1993) identified
an MboI RFLP in the EPB3L1 gene. White et al. (1994) demonstrated that
the murine AE2 gene is located on chromosome 5. This result was obtained
by analysis of recombinant inbred lines and by interspecific backcross
analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Medina et al. (2003) disrupted the mouse Ae2 gene in a manner that
prevented the expression of 3 Ae2 isoforms normally found in testis.
Male Ae2 -/- mice, but not female Ae2 -/- mice, were infertile.
Histopathologic analysis of mutant testis showed an interruption in
spermiogenesis, with only a few late spermatids and a complete absence
of spermatozoa in the seminiferous tubules. The number of apoptotic
bodies was increased in the seminiferous tubules and in the epididymis,
which also showed squamous metaplasia of the epididymal epithelium.

REFERENCE 1. Demuth, D. R.; Showe, L. C.; Ballantine, M.; Palumbo, A.; Fraser,
P. J.; Cioe, L.; Rovera, G.; Curtis, P. J.: Cloning and structural
characterization of a human non-erythroid band 3-like protein. EMBO
J. 5: 1205-1214, 1986.

2. Kudrycki, K. E.; Newman, P. R.; Schull, G. E.: cDNA cloning and
tissue distribution of mRNAs for two proteins that are related to
the band 3 chloride-bicarbonate exchanger. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 462-471,
1990.

3. Lindsey, A. E.; Schneider, K.; Simmons, D. M.; Baron, R.; Lee,
B. S.; Kopito, R. R.: Functional expression and subcellular localization
of an anion exchanger cloned from choroid plexus. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 87: 5278-5282, 1990.

4. Medina, J. F.; Acin, A.; Prieto, J.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of the human AE2 anion exchanger (SLC4A2) gene. Genomics 39: 74-85,
1997. Note: Erratum: Genomics 46: 535 only, 1997.

5. Medina, J. F.; Recalde, S.; Prieto, J.; Lecanda, J.; Saez, E.;
Funk, C. D.; Vecino, P.; van Roon, M. A.; Ottenhoff, R.; Bosma, P.
J.; Bakker, C. T.; Oude Elferink, R. P. J.: Anion exchanger 2 is
essential for spermiogenesis in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
15847-15852, 2003.

6. Palumbo, A. P.; Isobe, M.; Huebner, K.; Shane, S.; Rovera, G.;
Demuth, D.; Curtis, P. J.; Ballantine, M.; Croce, C. M.; Showe, L.
C.: Chromosomal localization of a human band 3-like gene to region
7q35-7q36. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 39: 307-316, 1986.

7. Showe, M. K.; Williams, D.; Showe, L. C.: An MboI RFLP in the
human erythrocyte surface protein band 3-like 1 gene (EPB3L1) on chromosome
7q35-7q36. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 337 only, 1993.

8. Tanner, M. J. A.: Molecular and cellular biology of the erythrocyte
anion exchanger (AE1). Seminars Hemat. 30: 34-57, 1993.

9. White, R. A.; Geissler, E. N.; Adkison, L. R.; Dowler, L. L.; Alper,
S. L.; Lux, S. E.: Chromosomal location of the murine anion exchanger
genes encoding AE2 and AE3. Mammalian Genome 5: 827-829, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2004
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 2/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1987

EDITED terry: 07/06/2012
mgross: 7/13/2004
terry: 7/6/2004
carol: 3/8/2002
terry: 3/8/2002
alopez: 2/9/1998
joanna: 1/22/1998
carol: 2/17/1995
carol: 6/28/1993
carol: 4/26/1993
carol: 2/19/1993
carol: 2/18/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

609959	TITLE *609959 MYELOID-ASSOCIATED DIFFERENTIATION MARKER; MYADM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display analysis, Pettersson et al. (2000) identified
mouse myeloid-associated differentiation marker (Myadm) based upon its
varied expression during differentiation of an Il3 (147740)-dependent
myeloid progenitor cell line established from mouse bone marrow. The
deduced protein contains 8 potential transmembrane domains and several
potential phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis on hematopoietic
cell lines revealed restricted expression of Myadm to cells belonging to
the myeloid lineage. Expression was also seen in mature granulocytes and
macrophages. Tissue analysis showed high expression of Myadm in lung and
more moderate expression in bone marrow and brain. RT-PCR experiments
demonstrated expression of Myadm in multipotent cells
(c-kit+Sca-1+Lin-), erythroid progenitors, and early lymphoid
progenitors.

By database searching with mouse Myadm as query, Cui et al. (2002)
identified human MYADM and cloned a full-length MYADM sequence from a
human bone marrow cDNA library. The deduced 298-amino acid protein has a
predicted molecular mass of 32 kD. It contains 7 predicted transmembrane
domains and shows sequence homology with the T-cell differentiation
protein MAL (188860) and plasmolipin (PLMP; 600340). MYADM shares 75.8%
overall sequence identity with mouse Myadm, with highest levels of
conservation seen in the predicted transmembrane regions. Northern blot
analysis detected 3.3- and 2.2-kb MYADM transcripts. Expression of the
longer transcript was seen in all tissues tested except thymus;
expression of the shorter transcript was seen in heart, placenta, lung,
pancreas, testis, and peripheral blood leukocytes and was undetectable
in all other tissues. Semiquantitative PCR assays showed that expression
of MYADM was not only significantly higher in peripheral blood
leukocytes than in bone marrow cells, but was also upregulated in NB4
cells (derived from a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia) that
were treated with the differentiation inducer all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA).

GENE FUNCTION

Using antisense Myadm oligonucleotides, Pettersson et al. (2000) showed
that downregulation of mouse Myadm expression in pluripotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells inhibited colony formation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cui et al. (2002) determined that the MYADM gene contains 3 exons and
spans 7.1 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Cui et al. (2002) mapped the MYADM gene to
chromosome 19q13.33-q13.4.

REFERENCE 1. Cui, W.; Yu, L.; He, H.; Chu, Y.; Gao, J.; Wan, B.; Tang, L.; Zhao,
S.: Cloning of human myeloid-associated differentiation marker (MYADM)
gene whose expression was up-regulated in NB4 cells induced by all-trans
retinoic acid. Molec. Biol. Rep. 28: 123-138, 2002.

2. Pettersson, M.; Dannaeus, K.; Nilsson, K.; Jonsson, J.-I.: Isolation
of MYADM, a novel hematopoietic-associated marker gene expressed in
multipotent progenitor cells and up-regulated during myeloid differentiation. J.
Leuko. Biol. 67: 423-431, 2000.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 3/15/2006

EDITED carol: 03/15/2006

604661	TITLE *604661 POTASSIUM CHANNEL-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; KCNIP2
;;KCHIP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the brain and heart, rapidly inactivating (A-type) voltage-gated
potassium (Kv) currents operate at subthreshold membrane potentials to
control the excitability of neurons and cardiac myocytes. An et al.
(2000) described 3 Kv channel-interacting proteins called KCHIPs that
bind to the cytoplasmic amino termini of Kv4-alpha subunits. See KCHIP1
(604660). The KCHIP2 cDNA encodes a 252-amino acid protein that has a
distinct amino terminus but shares approximately 70% amino acid identity
with KCHIP1 and KCHIP3 throughout a carboxy-terminal 185-amino acid core
domain containing 4 EF-hand-like motifs. Expression of KCHIP2 and Kv4
together reconstituted several features of native A-type currents by
modulating the density, inactivation kinetics, and rate of recovery from
inactivation of Kv4 channels in heterologous cells. The KCHIPs
colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated with brain Kv4-alpha subunits and
are thus integral components of native Kv4 channel complexes.

GENE FUNCTION

Jeyaraj et al. (2012) provided molecular evidence that links circadian
rhythms to vulnerability in ventricular arrhythmias in mice.
Specifically, they showed that cardiac ion channel expression and QT
interval duration (an index of myocardial repolarization) exhibit
endogenous circadian rhythmicity under the control of a clock-dependent
oscillator, Kruppel-like factor-15 (KLF15; 606465). Klf15
transcriptionally controls rhythmic expression of KChIP2, a critical
subunit required for generating the transient outward potassium current.
Deficiency or excess of Klf15 causes loss of rhythmic QT variation,
abnormal repolarization, and enhanced susceptibility to ventricular
arrhythmias. Jeyaraj et al. (2012) concluded that their findings
identified circadian transcription of ion channels as a mechanism for
cardiac arrhythmogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2001) found that knockout mice deficient for Kchip2
exhibited normal cardiac structure and function but displayed a
prolonged elevation in the ST segment on the electrocardiogram. The
Kchip2 -/- mice were highly susceptible to the induction of cardiac
arrhythmias. Single-cell analysis revealed a substrate for
arrhythmogenesis, including a complete absence of transient outward
potassium current (I-to) and a marked increase in action potential
duration. These studies demonstrated that a defect in KCHIP2 is
sufficient to confer a marked genetic susceptibility to arrhythmias,
establishing a novel genetic pathway for ventricular tachycardia via a
loss of the transmural gradient of I-to.

REFERENCE 1. An, W. F.; Bowlby, M. R.; Betty, M.; Cao, J.; Ling, H.-P.; Mendoza,
G.; Hinson, J. W.; Mattsson, K. I.; Strassle, B. W.; Trimmer, J. S.;
Rhodes, K. J.: Modulation of A-type potassium channels by a family
of calcium sensors. Nature 403: 553-556, 2000.

2. Jeyaraj, D.; Haldar, S. M.; Wan, X.; McCauley, M. D.; Ripperger,
J. A.; Hu, K.; Lu, Y.; Eapen, B. L.; Sharma, N.; Ficker, E.; Cutler,
M. J.; Gulick, J.; and 9 others: Circadian rhythms govern cardiac
repolarization and arrhythmogenesis. Nature 483: 96-99, 2012.

3. Kuo, H.-C.; Cheng, C.-F.; Clark, R. B.; Lin, J. J.-C.; Lin, J.
L.-C.; Hoshijima, M.; Nguyen-Tran, V. T. B.; Gu, Y.; Ikeda, Y.; Chu,
P.-H.; Ross, J., Jr.; Giles, W. R.; Chien, K. R.: A defect in the
Kv channel-interacting protein 2 (KChIP2) gene leads to a complete
loss of I-to, and confers susceptibility to ventricular tachycardia. Cell 107:
801-813, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/7/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/05/2012
alopez: 9/5/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
mgross: 10/20/2003
mgross: 1/7/2002
alopez: 6/30/2000
alopez: 3/8/2000
alopez: 3/7/2000

614984	TITLE *614984 DEHYDROGENASE E1 AND TRANSKETOLASE DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; DHTKD1
;;KIAA1630
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned DHTKD1, which they designated
KIAA1630. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in its
3-prime end. The deduced 901-amino acid DHTKD1 protein shares
significant similarity with Arabidopsis thaliana 2-oxoglutarate
dehydrogenase E1 subunit-like protein. RT-PCR ELISA detected variable
DHTKD1 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with highest
expression in adult kidney, ovary, and brain and all specific adult
brain regions examined. Lowest expression was in adult skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human-rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the
DHTKD1 gene to chromosome 10.

Hartz (2012) mapped the DHTKD1 gene to chromosome 10p14 based on an
alignment of the DHTK1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA009773) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- 2-Aminoadipic 2-Oxoadipic Aciduria

Danhauser et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygous mutations in
the DHTKD1 gene in patients with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria
(204750). Whole-exome sequencing in 1 individual detected compound
heterozygosity for an A-to-G transition altering the methionine at codon
1, which the authors suggested might cause out-of-frame usage of an AUG
triple 160 nucleotides downstream (614984.0001). The second mutation was
a missense mutation, gly729 to arg (G729R; 614984.0002), which affected
an amino acid residue evolutionarily conserved from Homo sapiens to C.
elegans and D. melanogaster. This mutation was found with a minor allele
frequency of 0.17%, corresponding to 19 heterozygous but no homozygous
carriers among 5,379 individuals. The methionine mutation was present in
the mother, but the missense mutation occurred as a de novo event.
Sanger sequencing in the second patient detected the same G729R mutation
as in the first patient, and a nonsense mutation, arg410 to ter (R410X;
614984.0003), on the other allele. Functional assays showed that reduced
DHTKD1 activity was responsible for the 2-aminoadipic and 2-oxoadipic
aciduria in the affected individuals. Because of the much milder
phenotype in patients with this disorder than in the disorder glutaric
acidemia I (231670), caused by mutation in the next enzyme in the
pathway, glutaryl CoA-dehydrogenase (608801), the authors suggested that
pharmacologic inhibition of DHTKD1 might be an interesting drug target
for glutaric aciduria type I.

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2Q

Xu et al. (2012) identified a nonsense mutation in the DHTKD1 gene that
segregated with a Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 phenotype (615025)
in a large 5-generation Chinese family from Shandong. Affected
individuals ranged in age from 13 to 71 years of age at the time of
examination. The age of onset of symptomatology ranged from 13 to 25
years of age; all displayed pes cavus. Upper and lower extremity
symptoms appeared to be similar. The proband had distal upper and lower
limb muscle atrophy and some angulated muscle fibers with increased
connective tissue and fat around the muscle bundle and hematoxylin and
eosin staining. Mitochondrial vacuolization was evident on electron
microscopy analysis of muscle cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
2-@AMINOADIPIC 2-OXOADIPIC ACIDURIA
DHTKD1, 1A-G

In a patient with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (204750), Danhauser
et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for mutation in the
DHTKD1 gene, an A-to-G transition affecting the initiating methionine
codon and a nonsense mutation (614984.0002). The 1A-G mutation was
predicted to cause out-of-frame usage of the next AUG triplet 160
nucleotides downstream and thus result in a nonfunctional protein. This
mutation was also identified in the patient's mother.

.0002
2-@AMINOADIPIC 2-OXOADIPIC ACIDURIA
DHTKD1, GLY729ARG (dbSNP rs117225135)

In 2 patients with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (204750),
Danhauser et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 2185 of the DHTHD1 gene resulting in a gly-to-arg
substitution at codon 729 (G729R). In 1 patient the G729R mutation was
found in compound heterozygosity with a mutation involving the initiator
methionine (614984.0001), and in the other patient a premature
termination mutation was found (R410X; 614984.0003). In the first
patient the G729R mutation occurred de novo and in the second it was
maternally transmitted. Gly729 is evolutionarily conserved from Homo
sapiens to C. elegans and D. melanogaster. This mutation (dbSNP
rs117225135) was found in the NHLBI Exome Variant Server with a minor
allele frequency of 0.17%, corresponding to 19 heterozygous but no
homozygous carriers among 5,379 individuals.

.0003
2-@AMINOADIPIC 2-OXOADIPIC ACIDURIA
DHTKD1, ARG410TER

In a patient with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (204750), Danhauser
et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for a missense mutation
in the DHTKD1 gene (G729R; 614984.0002) and a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 1228, resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution at codon 410
(R410X). The patient had mild psychomotor developmental delay but more
significant speech delay, IQ of 87, and muscular hypotonia. The father
was a carrier of the mutation.

.0004
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2Q
DHTKD1, TYR485TER

Xu et al. (2012) reported a 5-generation Chinese family with 8 affected
individuals segregating CMT disease type 2 (CMT2Q; 615025). All 8
affected individuals but no unaffected individuals carried a
heterozygous T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1455 in exon 8 of the
DHTKD1 gene, resulting in a tyr-to-ter substitution at codon 485
(Y485X). This mutation was not detected in 250 unrelated normal
individuals. The patients were found to have half-normal expression of
DHTKD1 mRNA, and Xu et al. (2012) found that DHTKD1 silencing led to
impaired energy production evidenced by decreased ATP, total NAD(+) and
NADH, and NADH levels in vitro.

REFERENCE 1. Danhauser, K.; Sauer, S. W.; Haack, T. B.; Wieland, T.; Staufner,
C.; Graf, E.; Zschocke, J.; Strom, T. M.; Traub, T.; Okun, J. G.;
Meitinger, T.; Hoffmann, G. F.; Prokisch, H.; Kolker, S.: DHTKD1
mutations cause 2-aminoadipic and 2-oxoadipic aciduria. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 91: 1082-1087, 2012.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/6/2012.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

4. Xu, W.; Gu, M.; Sun, L.; Guo, W.; Zhu, H.; Ma, J.; Yuan, W.; Kuang,
Y.; Ji, B.; Wu, X.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, H.; Sun, F.; Huang, W.; Huang,
L.; Chen, S.; Wang, Z.: A nonsense mutation in DHTKD1 causes Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 2 in a large Chinese pedigree. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91:
1088-1094, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/17/2012

EDITED carol: 10/25/2013
alopez: 1/17/2013
terry: 1/8/2013
mgross: 12/17/2012

614848	TITLE *614848 CENTROSOMAL PROTEIN, 164-KD; CEP164
;;KIAA1052
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CEP164 is a basal body protein required for assembly of the primary
cilium (Graser et al., 2007). CEP164 also has a critical role in DNA
damage response (Sivasubramaniam et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned CEP164, which they designated
KIAA1052. The deduced protein contains 1,455 amino acids. RT-PCR
detected low to moderate CEP164 expression in all adult and fetal
tissues and specific adult brain regions examined, except skeletal
muscle.

Andersen et al. (2003) identified CEP164 as a potential centrosomal
protein in human lymphoblastic KE37 cells. The deduced protein contains
7 coiled-coil domains and a WW motif. Epitope-tagged CEP164 localized to
centrosomes.

Graser et al. (2007) stated that the full-length 1,460-amino acid CEP164
protein contains an N-terminal WW domain followed by 3 coiled-coil
domains. It has a calculated molecular mass of 164 kD. Database analysis
suggested the presence of splice variants. Western blot analysis of
several human cell lines detected CEP164 at an apparent molecular mass
of about 200 kD. Immunofluorescence and immunogold electron microscopy
localized CEP164 to the very distally located appendage structure of a
single mature centriole at the base of the primary cilium. Quantitative
RT-PCR and Western blot analyses detected 2-fold elevated CEP164 mRNA
and protein during mitosis, consistent with duplication of centrioles.

Sivasubramaniam et al. (2008) stated that the 1,455- and 1,460-amino
acid isoforms of CEP164 result from differential splicing of exons 9 and
26, respectively. CEP164 contains an N-terminal WW domain, followed by a
long coiled-coil region, part of which shares homology with RAD26
(ERCC6; 609413). CEP164 also has 16 SQ/TQ motifs, which are potential
ATM (607585) and ATR (601215) phosphorylation sites, spread throughout
the molecule. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed localization of
CEP164 at nuclei and centrioles.

GENE FUNCTION

Using small interfering RNA, Graser et al. (2007) found that depletion
of pericentrin (PCNT; 605925), CEP290 (610142), or CEP164 in human
retinal pigment epithelial cells prevented serum starvation-induced
formation of a primary cilium. Knockdown of CEP164 had no effect on
expression of the centriole subappendage proteins ninein (NIN; 608684)
and CEP170 (613023), suggesting that CEP164 does not interact with these
proteins.

Sivasubramaniam et al. (2008) studied the 1,465-amino acid form of
CEP164 and found that it had a critical role in mediating genomic
stability. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that endogenous HeLa
cell CEP164 interacted with the DNA damage response proteins ATR, ATRIP
(606605), ATM, and MDC1 (607593). CEP164 was phosphorylated by ATR and
ATM and accumulated in nuclear foci during ionizing or ultraviolet (UV)
irradiation-induced replication stress in HeLa cells. Ser186 was the
preferred ATM/ATR phosphorylation site. Inactivation of ATM and ATR
reduced CEP164 foci formation upon radiation stress. Knockdown of CEP164
altered phosphorylation of H2AX (H2AFX; 601772), RPA (see 179835), CHK2
(CHEK2; 604373), and CHK1 (CHEK1; 603078) in the DNA damage-induced
checkpoint signaling cascade and abrogated the G2/M checkpoint.

XPA (611153) is an essential factor in the nucleotide excision repair
pathway for removing UV-induced aberrant DNA structures, including
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis, Pan and Lee (2009) found that CEP164 localized to sites of UV
radiation-induced DNA damage in HeLa cells in an XPA-regulated manner.
CEP164 interacted directly with XPA and was recruited to sites of DNA
damage early in the DNA damage response. Interaction of CEP164 with XPA
was required for UV damage-induced CHK1 phosphorylation. Knockdown of
CEP164 sensitized cells to UV irradiation and hampered the removal of
UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Pan and Lee (2009)
hypothesized that, following UV-induced DNA damage, ATR phosphorylates
XPA and CEP164, which serve as critical signals for efficient DNA damage
repair.

Using confocal microscopy, Chaki et al. (2012) found that CEP164
colocalized with the mother centriole, mitotic spindle poles, and the
abscission structure in a cell cycle-dependent manner in immortalized
human retinal pigment epithelial (TERT-RPE) cells. Knockdown of Cep164
in mouse kidney IMCD3 cells permitted normal growth of spheroids in
3-dimensional culture. Cells showed overall normal architecture and
size, but they had markedly reduced frequency of cilia. CEP164
colocalized with the DNA damage response proteins TIP60 (KAT5; 601409)
and SC35 (SRSF2; 600813) and with ZNF423 (604557) and NPHP10 (SDCCAG8;
613524) at nuclear foci in TERT-RPE cells. Following UV
radiation-induced DNA damage in HeLa cells, CEP164 colocalized with
TIP60 and CHK1 in nuclear foci. Knockdown of Cep164 in IMCD3 cells
caused defects in DNA damage response, increased gamma-H2ax intensity,
and increased cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Yeast 2-hybrid,
pull-down, and coimmunoprecipitation analyses also showed that CEP164
interacted directly with CCDC92, TTBK2 (611695), NPHP3 (608002), NPHP2
(INVS; 243305), and DVL3 (601368).

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the CEP164
gene to chromosome 11. Graser et al. (2007) mapped the CEP164 gene to
chromosome 11q23.3 by genomic sequence analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Saudi child, born of consanguineous parents, with a variant of
nephronophthisis-15 (NPHP15; 614845) characterized by Leber congenital
amaurosis and retinal degeneration resulting in blindness by age 2
years, Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous mutation in the
CEP164 gene (614848.0001). Sequencing of this gene in 856 patients with
different NPHP-related ciliopathies identified homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations in the CEP164 gene in 3 additional families
(614848.0002-614848.0005). Most patients had NPHP and some form of
retinal degeneration, sometimes resulting in blindness. Although the
number of affected families was small, the findings supported a gradient
of genotype/phenotype correlations in which null mutations cause the
severe dysplastic phenotypes of Meckel syndrome and Joubert syndrome,
whereas hypomorphic alleles cause the milder degenerative phenotypes of
NPHP and Senior-Loken syndrome. Cellular studies showed that CEP164 is
involved in the DNA repair response, suggesting that defects in the DNA
repair response signaling pathway may contribute to the pathogenesis of
NPHP and related ciliopathies. Chaki et al. (2012) suggested that loss
of function of proteins that have a dual role in centrosome and DNA
repair signaling could cause a disturbance of cell-cycle checkpoint
controls, which is detrimental to progenitor cell survival both during
embryogenesis and later during tissue maintenance.

ANIMAL MODEL

Chaki et al. (2012) found that knockdown of Cep164 in zebrafish resulted
in a ciliopathy with ventral body axis curvature, cell death, abnormal
heart looping, pronephric tubule cysts, hydrocephalus, and retinal
dysplasia.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, TER1460TRP

In a Saudi child, born of consanguineous parents, with a variant of
nephronophthisis-15 (NPHP15; 614845) characterized by Leber congenital
amaurosis and retinal degeneration resulting in blindness by age 2
years, Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 4383A-G transition in
exon 33 of the CEP164 gene, resulting in extension of the protein beyond
the normal termination signal with an addition of 57 residues
(X1460WextX57). The mutation was found by homozygosity mapping and
whole-exome sequencing, and was not found in more than 270 controls or
in the exome variant server database.

.0002
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, GLN11PRO

In 2 patients, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with NPHP15
(614845), Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 32A-C transversion
in exon 3 of the CEP164 gene, resulting in a gln11-to-pro (Q11P)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found
in more than 270 controls or in the exome variant server database. Both
patients had NPHP at age 8 years, and 1 had retinal degeneration at age
11. Both were obese, and at least 1 had liver failure.

.0003
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, ARG93TRP

In 3 affected members of a family with NPHP15 (614845), Chaki et al.
(2012) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the CEP164
gene: a 277C-T transition in exon 5 resulting in an arg93-to-trp (R93W)
substitution at a highly conserved residue, and a 1573C-T transition in
exon 13 resulting in a gln525-to-ter (Q525X; 614848.0004) substitution.
Two patients had NPHP at ages 8 and 9 years, respectively, and all had
some degree of retinal degeneration, with 1 child being legally blind at
age 5 months. One of the children also had seizures and developmental
delay. Neither mutation was found in more than 270 controls or in the
exome variant server database.

.0004
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, GLN525TER

See 614848.0003 and Chaki et al. (2012).

.0005
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, ARG576TER

In a patient, born of consanguineous parents, with NPHP15 (614845),
Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 1726C-T transition in exon
15 of the CEP164 gene, resulting in an arg576-to-ter (R576X)
substitution. The patient had NPHP by age 8 years, retinal degeneration,
flat electroretinogram, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, facial
dysmorphism, polydactyly, abnormal liver function tests, bronchiectasis,
and obesity. The mutation was found in 1 of 7,019 European American
controls.

REFERENCE 1. Andersen, J. S.; Wilkinson, C. J.; Mayor, T.; Mortensen, P.; Nigg,
E. A.; Mann, M.: Proteomic characterization of the human centrosome
by protein correlation profiling. Nature 426: 570-574, 2003.

2. Chaki, M.; Airik, R.; Ghosh, A. K.; Giles, R. H.; Chen, R.; Slaats,
G. G.; Wang, H.; Hurd, T. W.; Zhou, W.; Cluckey, A.; Gee, H. Y.; Ramaswami,
G.; and 61 others: Exome capture reveals ZNF423 and CEP164 mutations,
linking renal ciliopathies to DNA damage response signaling. Cell 150:
533-548, 2012.

3. Graser, S.; Stierhof, Y.-D.; Lavoie, S. B.; Gassner, O. S.; Lamla,
S.; Le Clech, M.; Nigg, E. A.: Cep164, a novel centriole appendage
protein required for primary cilium formation. J. Cell Biol. 179:
321-330, 2007.

4. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

5. Pan, Y.-R.; Lee, E. Y.-H. P.: UV-dependent interaction between
Cep164 and XPA mediates localization of Cep164 at sites of DNA damage
and UV sensitivity. Cell Cycle 8: 655-664, 2009.

6. Sivasubramaniam, S.; Sun, X.; Pan, Y.-R.; Wang, S.; Lee, E. Y.-H.
P.: Cep164 is a mediator protein required for the maintenance of
genomic stability through modulation of MDC1, RPA, and CHK1. Genes
Dev. 22: 587-600, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/4/2012

EDITED joanna: 08/05/2013
terry: 10/8/2012
carol: 10/8/2012
terry: 10/5/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
ckniffin: 10/4/2012
mgross: 10/4/2012

607576	TITLE *607576 CAT EYE SYNDROME CHROMOSOME REGION, CANDIDATE 2; CECR2
;;KIAA1740
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult hippocampus
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned CECR2, which they designated
KIAA1740. The deduced protein contains 1,119 amino acids. RT-PCR
followed by ELISA detected moderate expression in all tissues tested
except spleen. In brain, KIAA1740 expression was high in cerebellum,
elevated in hippocampus, and moderate in all other regions tested.

Footz et al. (2001) cloned CECR2 by genomic sequencing of the cat eye
syndrome (115470) critical region of chromosome 22, followed by 5-prime
and 3-prime RACE. The deduced 1,464-amino acid protein contains a
bromodomain.

Using the SEC1 homology domain of LRPPRC (607544) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen, Liu and McKeehan (2002) cloned CECR2 from a liver cDNA
library. Northern blot analysis of 12 tissues detected distinct CECR2
banding only in placenta, with transcripts of about 2, 4, 6.5, and 9 kb.
Other tissues showed a smear beginning at about 10 kb, with variable
intensities between tissues. Liu and McKeehan (2002) concluded that the
smearing may indicate particular lability of CECR2 mRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Footz et al. (2001) determined that the CECR2 gene contains 19 exons and
spans about 186 kb. Intron 1 extends about 106 kb. The mouse Cecr2 gene
has a similar structure.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Footz et al. (2001) mapped the CECR2 gene
within the cat eye syndrome critical region on chromosome 22q11.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Banting et al. (2005) generated a mutant mouse line containing a gene
trap insertion within Cecr2. Cecr2 expression was predominantly neural
in the embryo, and mice homozygous for the Cecr2 gene trap insertion
showed a high penetrance of exencephaly, which is the human equivalent
of anencephaly, in a strain-dependent fashion. In HEK293 cells, they
isolated CECR2 and SMARCA1 (300012) as components of a complex, which
they termed CECR2-containing remodeling factor (CERF). CERF was capable
of remodeling chromatin in vitro and displayed an ATP-hydrolyzing
activity that was stimulated by nucleosomes. Banting et al. (2005)
suggested that CERF plays a critical role in neurulation.

REFERENCE 1. Banting, G. S.; Barak, O.; Ames, T. M.; Burnham, A. C.; Kardel,
M. D.; Cooch, N. S.; Davidson, C. E.; Godbout, R.; McDermid, H. E.;
Shiekhattar, R.: CECR2, a protein involved in neurulation, forms
a novel chromatin remodeling complex with SNF2L. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
513-524, 2005.

2. Footz, T. K.; Brinkman-Mills, P.; Banting, G. S.; Maier, S. A.;
Riazi, M. A.; Bridgland, L.; Hu, S.; Birren, B.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu,
N.; Pan, H.; Nguyen, T.; and 15 others: Analysis of the cat eye
syndrome critical region in humans and the region of conserved synteny
in mice: a search for candidate genes at or near the human chromosome
22 pericentromere. Genome Res. 11: 1053-1070, 2001.

3. Liu, L.; McKeehan, W. L.: Sequence analysis of LRPPRC and its
SEC1 domain interaction partners suggest roles in cytoskeletal organization,
vesicular trafficking, nucleocytosolic shuttling, and chromosome activity. Genomics 79:
124-136, 2002.

4. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/24/2003

EDITED terry: 01/20/2010
wwang: 1/11/2008
terry: 1/3/2008
mgross: 2/24/2003

600470	TITLE *600470 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN OF CEREBELLUM 1; ZIC1
;;ZIC FAMILY MEMBER 1;;
ZIC
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the mouse, Aruga et al. (1994) cloned a gene, which they named zic
(for zinc finger protein of the cerebellum), after screening a lambda
gt11 mouse cerebellar cDNA library. The putative open reading frame is
1,344 nucleotides encoding 447 amino acids and is preceded by 530
nucleotides of a 5-prime untranslated region. Northern blot
hybridization studies failed to demonstrate zic expression in any
tissues other than nervous tissue. Within the central nervous system,
the highest level of expression was in the cerebellum, whereas the
olfactory bulb, diencephalon, and brainstem showed only low levels of
zic expression. The zic gene has significant homology to the zinc finger
domain of the Caenorhabditis elegans tra1 gene, the Drosophila cubitus
interruptus dominant gene, and the human GLI oncogene (165220). In situ
hybridization demonstrated restricted expression of zic in granule cells
and their putative precursors. It is also expressed in the dorsal half
of the neural tube at early embryonic stages. Aruga et al. (1994)
speculated that zic encodes a nuclear factor involved in differentiation
in early development, as well as in the maintenance of the phenotypic
properties of the cerebellar granule cells.

The ZIC is a zinc finger protein that displays a highly restricted
expression pattern in the adult and developing mouse cerebellum and is
highly homologous to the Drosophila pair-rule gene Opa. To clarify the
mechanism for the development of the human cerebellum and the possible
involvement of ZIC in human nervous system diseases, Yokota et al.
(1996) isolated human ZIC cDNA and examined its expression by using
monoclonal antibody against recombinant ZIC protein. The nucleotide
sequence of human ZIC cDNA is 85% homologous to that the mouse zic gene.
Its putative amino acid sequence is highly conserved (more than 99%)
except for substitution of only 2 amino acid residues. The human ZIC
protein was immunohistochemically detected in the nuclei of the
cerebellar granule cell lineage from the progenitor cells of the
external germinal layer to the postmigrated cells of the internal
granular layer. Furthermore, ZIC protein was detected in medulloblastoma
(26 of 29 cases), whereas none of 70 other tumors examined, including
primitive neuroectodermal tumors, expressed this protein. These findings
suggested that ZIC is a potential biomarker for medulloblastoma as well
as the human cerebellar granule cell lineage.

Using a yeast 1-hybrid screen with the proximal region of the APOE
(107741) promoter as bait, Salero et al. (2001) isolated cDNAs encoding
the ZIC1 and ZIC2 (603073) transcription factors. Electrophoretic
mobility shift and mutational analyses identified binding sites in the
-136 to -125, -65 to -54, and -185 to -174 regions of the APOE promoter.
Luciferase reporter analysis showed that the ZIC proteins stimulate
potent transcriptional activation of APOE through these binding sites.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yokota et al. (1996) mapped the
human ZIC gene to 3q24.

Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM; 220200) is a common but poorly
understood congenital cerebellar malformation in humans. Through mapping
of 3q2 interstitial deletions in several individuals with DWM, Grinberg
et al. (2004) defined the critical region associated with DWM,
encompassing 2 ZIC genes, ZIC1 and ZIC4 (608948). Mice with a
heterozygous deletion of these 2 linked genes were found to have a
phenotype that closely resembles DWM, providing a mouse model for this
malformation.

REFERENCE 1. Aruga, J.; Yokota, N.; Hashimoto, M.; Furuichi, T.; Fukuda, M.;
Mikoshiba, K.: A novel zinc finger protein, Zic, is involved in neurogenesis,
especially in the cell lineage of cerebellar granule cells. J. Neurochem. 63:
1880-1890, 1994.

2. Grinberg, I.; Northrup, H.; Ardinger, H.; Prasad, C.; Dobyns, W.
B.; Millen, K. J.: Heterozygous deletion of the linked genes ZIC1
and ZIC4 is involved in Dandy-Walker malformation. Nature Genet. 36:
1053-1055, 2004.

3. Salero, E.; Perez-Sen, R.; Aruga, J.; Gimenez, C.; Zafra, F.:
Transcription factors Zic1 and Zic2 bind and transactivate the apolipoprotein
E gene promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 1881-1888, 2001.

4. Yokota, N.; Aruga, J.; Takai, S.; Yamada, K.; Hamazaki, M.; Iwase,
T.; Sugimura, H.; Mikoshiba, K.: Predominant expression of human
Zic in cerebellar granule cell lineage and medulloblastoma. Cancer
Res. 56: 377-383, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/20/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/12/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/28/1995

EDITED terry: 09/09/2010
alopez: 7/7/2010
terry: 3/3/2005
alopez: 10/21/2004
terry: 10/20/2004
mgross: 4/5/2001
alopez: 9/18/2000
terry: 6/3/1998
jenny: 11/13/1997
terry: 11/12/1997
jamie: 5/29/1997
mark: 4/15/1995
mark: 4/13/1995
mark: 4/11/1995
mark: 3/28/1995

608216	TITLE *608216 COMM DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; COMMD5
;;COPPER METABOLISM MURR1 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5;;
HYPERTENSION-RELATED CALCIUM-REGULATED GENE; HCARG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Solban et al. (2000) cloned rat Hcarg from a cDNA library constructed
from the spontaneously hypertensive rat parathyroid gland. The deduced
224-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 22.5 kD.
Hcarg has a 67% alpha helix content, a calcium-binding EF-hand motif, 4
putative leucine zipper motifs, a nuclear receptor-binding domain, and
no transmembrane domain. It also contains several putative
phosphorylation sites and an N-glycosylation site. Using rat Hcarg as
probe, Solban et al. (2000) cloned human HCARG from a vascular smooth
muscle cell cDNA library. The deduced 224-amino acid protein shares 80%
homology with rat Hcarg. Multiple-tissue expression array analysis
detected high expression in heart, stomach, jejunum, kidney, liver, and
adrenal gland. Expression was generally higher in adult organs than in
fetal tissues, particularly in heart, kidney, and liver. In situ
hybridization of rat tissues detected expression in the medulla and zona
fasciculata of the adrenal cortex and in the tubules of the kidney, but
showed no expression in renal glomeruli. Immunofluorescence microscopy
of transfected COS-7 cells and immunohistochemical staining of rat
pituitary detected Hcarg predominantly localized to the nucleus, with
some staining at sites of protein synthesis.

GENE FUNCTION

Solban et al. (2000) found that expression of Hcarg was higher in the
adrenal cortex and kidney tubules of hypertensive rats compared with
their normotensive controls. Rat Hcarg inhibited cell proliferation in
human embryonic kidney cells following transfection.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Solban et al. (2002) mapped the COMMD5
gene to chromosome 8q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Solban, N.; Dumas, P.; Gossard, F.; Sun, Y.; Pravenec, M.; Kren,
V.; Lewanczuk, R.; Hamet, P.; Tremblay, J.: Chromosomal mapping of
HCaRG, a novel hypertension-related, calcium-regulated gene. Folia
Biologica 48: 9-14, 2002.

2. Solban, N.; Jia, H.-P.; Richard, S.; Tremblay, S.; Devlin, A. M.;
Peng, J.; Gossard, F.; Guo, D.-F.; Morel, G.; Hamet, P.; Lewanczuk,
R.; Tremblay, J.: HCaRG, a novel calcium-regulated gene coding for
a nuclear protein, is potentially involved in the regulation of cell
proliferation. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 32234-32243, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/30/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2009
alopez: 5/12/2008
terry: 5/10/2006
mgross: 10/30/2003

607292	TITLE *607292 SEMAPHORIN 4A; SEMA4A
;;SEMAPHORIN B; SEMAB; SEMB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SEMA4A is a member of the semaphorin family of soluble and transmembrane
proteins. Semaphorins are involved in guidance of axonal migration
during neuronal development and in immune responses.

CLONING

Using degenerate PCR primers based on motifs conserved in members of the
semaphorin family, Kumanogoh et al. (2002) identified mouse Sema4a,
which was originally identified as SemB (Puschel et al., 1995). RT-PCR
analysis detected prominent expression in adult mouse brain, spleen,
lung, kidney, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis showed expression in
B cells and dendritic cells (DCs) but not in resting T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kumanogoh et al. (2002) showed that activation upregulated expression of
mouse Sema4a in both B and T cells, and proliferation and interleukin-2
(IL2; 147680) production by T cells were enhanced in the presence of
Sema4a. However, Sema4a, unlike CD100 (SEMA4D; 601866), did not enhance
the activation of B cells or DCs. Mice treated with Sema4a had enhanced
priming of antigen-specific T cells secreting both IL4 (147780) and
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). Treatment of mice with anti-Sema4a
early after immunization with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
suppressed the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
In these mice, infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells was
ablated by inhibition of the generation of antigen-specific T cells by
anti-Sema4a. Expression cloning determined that the high-affinity
receptor for Sema4a is Tim2. Sema4a stimulation of cells expressing Tim2
induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Tim2 but not of Tim3 (606652).
Kumanogoh et al. (2002) concluded that Sema4a and CD100 have crucial
roles in the reciprocal stimulation between T cell and
antigen-presenting cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Abid et al. (2006) screened 135 Pakistani patients with retinitis
pigmentosa (RP35; 610282), 25 with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD10; 610283),
and 30 with congenital blindness for mutations in the SEMA4A gene. They
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 substitutions
(607292.0001-607292.0002) in 2 RP and 2 CORD patients and heterozygosity
for another substitution (607292.0003) in 3 patients with RP and 1
patient with congenital blindness. No mutations in SEMA4A were found in
affected members of a Pakistani family with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8;
605549) previously mapped to chromosome 1q12-q24 (Ismail et al., 2006).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, ASP345HIS

In 2 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 2 with
cone-rod dystrophy-10 (610282), Abid et al. (2006) identified compound
heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in codon 345 and a T-to-G
transversion in codon 350 in exon 10 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an
asp345-to-his (D345H) and a phe350-to-cys (F350C; 607292.0002)
substitution in the conserved semaphorin domain, respectively. Sequence
analysis of the unaffected parents of 1 of the CORD patients revealed
that his father was heterozygous for the D345H mutation and his mother
was heterozygous for the F350C mutation. Neither mutation was found in
100 ethnically matched controls.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, PHE350CYS

See 607292.0001 and Abid et al. (2006).

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
SEMA4A, ARG713GLN

In 3 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 1 with
congenital blindness of uncertain phenotype, Abid et al. (2006)
identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition in codon 713 of exon
15 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an arg713-to-gln (R713Q)
substitution in the cytoplasmic tail. Sequence analysis of family
members of 1 of the RP patients confirmed that the R713Q mutation
segregated with the disease phenotype in an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, and the mutation was not found in 100 ethnically matched
controls.

REFERENCE 1. Abid, A.; Ismail, M.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Identification
of novel mutations in the SEMA4A gene associated with retinal degenerative
diseases. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43: 378-381, 2006.

2. Ismail, M.; Abid, A.; Anwar, K.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Refinement
of the locus for autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8) linked
to chromosome 1q23-q24 in a Pakistani family and exclusion of candidate
genes. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 827-831, 2006.

3. Kumanogoh, A.; Marukawa, S.; Suzuki, K.; Takegahara, N.; Watanabe,
C.; Ch'ng, E.; Ishida, I.; Fujimura, H.; Sakoda, S.; Yoshida, K.;
Kikutani, H.: Class IV semaphorin Sema4A enhances T-cell activation
and interacts with Tim-2. Nature 419: 629-633, 2002.

4. Puschel, A. W.; Adams, R. H.; Betz, H.: Murine semaphorin D/collapsin
is a member of a diverse gene family and creates domains inhibitory
for axonal extension. Neuron 14: 941-948, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/27/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/10/2002

EDITED carol: 07/26/2007
wwang: 12/18/2006
carol: 7/28/2006
carol: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/27/2006
mgross: 10/10/2002

613110	TITLE *613110 BLADDER CANCER-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; BLCAP
;;BLADDER CANCER-ASSOCIATED, 10-KD; BC10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The BLCAP gene is a tumor suppressor that limits cell proliferation and
stimulates apoptosis. BLCAP protein or message is downregulated or
absent in a variety of human cancers (Schulz et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using differential display to identify genes upregulated in tumor
biopsies obtained from a noninvasive compared with invasive bladder
transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs), Gromova et al. (1999) identified
BLCAP, which they designated BC10. Gromova et al. (2002) cloned
full-length BC10 from a cDNA library developed from a noninvasive TCC.
The deduced 87-amino acid peptide has a calculated molecular mass of 9.8
kD. It has an N-terminal cytoplasmic region, followed by a proline-rich
region with characteristics of the SRC (190090) homology-3
domain-binding site, 2 highly hydrophobic regions, and a C terminus with
a putative casein kinase II (see CSNK2A1, 115440) phosphorylation site.
Human and mouse BC10 share 100% amino acid identity, and the
corresponding transcripts share 95% nucleotide identity in the coding
region. Close orthologs were also detected in nematode and fly,
suggesting a high degree of conservation. Northern blot analysis
detected a transcript of about 2 kb in noninvasive TCC. Two-dimensional
separation of proteins in BC10-expressing COS cells, followed by Western
blot analysis, revealed a major acidic form of BC10, and a minor basic
form of BC10, both at an apparent molecular mass of 10 kD. The acidic
form is likely phosphorylated.

Schulz et al. (2009) identified at least 4 distinct human BLCAP
transcripts and 2 distinct mouse transcripts. They referred to BLCAP
transcripts with translation start sites downstream of NNAT (603106),
which is within intron 1 of BLCAP, as BLCAP-V1A, -V1B, and -V1C, and
they referred to the BLCAP transcript with translation start site
upstream of NNAT as BLCAP-V2A.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Northern blot analysis and RT-PCR, Gromova et al. (2002) confirmed
that the expression of BLCAP was downregulated in invasive bladder TCCs.

Yao et al. (2007) stated that expression of BLCAP is downregulated in
several types of carcinomas and overexpression of BLCAP in HeLa cells
induces apoptosis. They found that BLCAP overexpression in a human
tongue carcinoma cell line induced S phase arrest and apoptosis,
accompanied by upregulation of p21 (CDKN1A; 116899) and downregulation
of BCL2 (151430) and BCLXL (BCL2L1; 600039).

GENE STRUCTURE

Schulz et al. (2009) noted that the BLCAP gene consists of 2 exons
traversing approximately 13 kb, with evidence for 2 alternative exons
resulting in minor splice variants. In mouse and human, the first intron
of the BLCAP gene contains the distinct neuronatin (NNAT; 603106) gene,
which is an imprinted gene exclusively expressed from the paternally
inherited allele.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gromova et al. (2002) mapped the BLCAP
gene to chromosome 20q11.2-q12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schulz et al. (2009) found that mouse Blcap-v1 transcripts were
preferentially expressed from maternally-inherited alleles in adult and
fetal brain but not in other murine tissues, and likewise human BLCAP-V1
transcripts showed similar preferential expression from
maternally-inherited alleles in adult and fetal brain. Mouse and human
BLCAP-V2A transcripts were found predominantly expressed from
paternally-inherited alleles in brain. They proposed that the
tissue-specific imprinting of BLCAP may be due to the particularly high
transcriptional activity of NNAT in brain. Schulz et al. (2009)
hypothesized that the imprinted expression of BLCAP and its interplay
with NNAT at the transcriptional level may be relevant to human
carcinogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Gromova, I.; Gromov, P.; Celis, J. E.: bc10: a novel human bladder
cancer-associated protein with a conserved genomic structure downregulated
in invasive cancer. Int. J. Cancer 98: 539-546, 2002.

2. Gromova, I.; Gromov, P.; Celis, J. E.: Identification of true
differentially expressed mRNAs in a pair of human bladder transitional
cell carcinomas using an improved differential display procedure. Electrophoresis 20:
241-248, 1999.

3. Schulz, R.; McCole, R. B.; Woodfine, K.; Wood, A. J.; Chahal, M.;
Monk, D.; Moore, G. E.; Oakey, R. J.: Transcript- and tissue-specific
imprinting of a tumour suppressor gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 118-127,
2009.

4. Yao, J. Duan, L.; Fan, M.; Yuan, J.; Wu, X.: Overexpression of
BLCAP induces S phase arrest and apoptosis independent of p53 and
NF-kappa-B in human tongue carcinoma: BLCAP overexpression induces
S phase arrest and apoptosis. Molec. Cell. Biochem. 297: 81-92,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/13/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/13/2009

EDITED wwang: 11/13/2009

605475	TITLE *605475 BAI1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; BAIAP2
;;INSULIN RECEPTOR SUBSTRATE p53; IRSP53
DESCRIPTION Brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor-1 (BAI1; 602682) is a secretin
receptor family member whose expression is induced by p53 (191170). Yeh
et al. (1996) cloned a hamster cDNA encoding a 53-kD BAI-associated
protein which, when expressed in mammalian cells, is tyrosine
phosphorylated by the insulin receptor. They termed the protein IRSp53
for insulin receptor substrate p53. The protein contains 521 amino acids
with a calculated molecular mass of 57 kD and is highly expressed in the
brain. The protein appears to be localized primarily in the particulate
fraction of cell lysates. The IRSp53 cDNA was found to encode an
additional protein product of 58 kD (p58) in vivo.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with cytoplasmic BAI1 as bait, followed by
screening of a human fetal brain cDNA library, Oda et al. (1999)
isolated a cDNA encoding BAIAP2 and a splice variant. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 520- and 521-amino acid proteins are homologous to
hamster IRSp53 with identity conserved in the C-terminal SH3 domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 3.2-kb transcript
primarily in brain with very low levels in placenta, prostate, and
testis as well as ubiquitous expression of a 2.2-kb transcript that is
relatively abundant in liver, prostate, testis, and placenta. The
expression of the 3.2-kb transcript overlaps that of BAI1 in brain
subregions, is similar to that of neuron- and neuroendocrine-restricted
NSE (ENO2; 131360), but different from that of astrocyte-specific GFAP
(137780). Yeast 2-hybrid and GST pull-down analyses with mutated
proteins confirmed that the SH3 domain of BAIAP2 interacts with the
proline-rich cytoplasmic portion of BAI1. Double immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated colocalization of BAI1 and BAIAP2 in the
cytoplasmic membrane, whereas cells expressing BAIAP2 alone showed
diffuse staining of the cytosol and nucleus.

Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA; 125370) is an autosomal
dominant, progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by
selective neuron death in the dentatorubral and pallidoluysian pathways
and is associated with CAG repeats in the DRPLA gene (607462). Using a
yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human fetal brain cDNA library with
N-terminus-deleted DRPLA as bait, Okamura-Oho et al. (1999) identified
cDNAs encoding human IRSP53. Sequence analysis identified deduced
proteins of 552 and 521 amino acids. The latter sequence is 94%
identical to hamster IRSp53. Northern blot analysis revealed expression
of a 3.0-kb transcript in most tissues examined and a 3.8-kb transcript
mainly in brain, suggesting alternative splicing. After stimulation of
cells with insulin, immunoblot analysis detected a phosphorylated 58-kD
IRSP53 protein which did not enhance binding to DRPLA.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis and reporter gene assays indicated that
DRPLA and IRSP53 do interact. Confocal microscopy demonstrated
colocalization in perinuclear dots. GST pull-down analysis determined
that the SH3 domain in the C terminus of IRSP53 binds to a proline-rich
region of DRPLA, which may be interfered with by extended polyglutamine
tracts in the form of CAG repeats.

Miki et al. (2000) demonstrated that IRSP53 is the critical linker
between RAC (see 602048) and WAVE2 (605875). Activated RAC binds to the
N terminus of IRSP53, and the C-terminal SH3 domain of IRSP53 binds to
WAVE2 to form a trimolecular complex. From studies of ectopic
expression, Miki et al. (2000) found that IRSP53 is essential for RAC to
induce membrane ruffling, probably because it recruits WAVE2, which
stimulates actin polymerization mediated by the ARP2/3 complex.

By FISH, Oda et al. (1999) mapped the BAIAP2 gene to chromosome 17q25.

REFERENCE 1. Miki, H.; Yamaguchi, H.; Suetsugu, S.; Takenawa, T.: IRSp53 is
an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of
membrane ruffling. Nature 408: 732-735, 2000.

2. Oda, K.; Shiratsuchi, T.; Nishimori, H.; Inazawa, J.; Yoshikawa,
H.; Taketani, Y.; Nakamura, Y.; Tokino, T.: Identification of BAIAP2
(BAI-associated protein 2), a novel human homologue of hamster IRSp53,
whose SH3 domain interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of BAI1. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 84: 75-82, 1999.

3. Okamura-Oho, Y.; Miyashita, T.; Ohmi, K.; Yamada, M.: Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy protein interacts through a proline-rich region near polyglutamine
with the SH3 domain of an insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 947-957, 1999.

4. Yeh, T. C.; Ogawa, W.; Danielsen, A. G.; Roth, R. A.: Characterization
and cloning of a 58/53-kDa substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 2921-2928, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 12/14/2000

EDITED carol: 01/24/2003
joanna: 4/24/2001
carol: 2/20/2001
mcapotos: 2/15/2001
carol: 2/13/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
carol: 12/14/2000

606594	TITLE *606594 SET DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 7; SETD7
;;SET7;;
SET9;;
HISTONE H3-LYSINE 4-SPECIFIC METHYLTRANSFERASE;;
H3-K4-HMTase;;
KIAA1717
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Methylation of histone H3 (see 602810) at lysine-9 (K9) by SUV39H1
(300254) and the subsequent recruitment of heterochromatin protein-1
(HP1; see 604478) is linked to gene silencing. In addition to K9, H3
methylation also occurs at K4, K27, and K36. Wang et al. (2001) reported
the purification, molecular identification, and functional
characterization of an H3-K4-specific methyltransferase (H3-K4-HMTase)
that they named SET7 due to the presence of a SET domain in its C
terminus. The authors determined that the SET7 cDNA, which is identical
to the KIAA1717 cDNA reported by Nagase et al. (2000), encodes a
366-amino acid protein that is 96% identical to its mouse homolog.

Nishioka et al. (2002) isolated SET7, which they termed SET9, from HeLa
cells. The predicted protein contains a SET domain, but it lacks the
pre- and post-SET domains.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) showed that SET7 methylates H3-K4 in vitro and in
vivo and that methylation of H3-K4 and methylation of H3-K9 inhibit each
other. Furthermore, H3-K4 methylation and H3-K9 methylation by SET7 and
SUV39H1, respectively, were found to have differential effects on
subsequent histone acetylation by p300 (602700). This study provided a
molecular explanation to the differential effects of H3-K4 and H3-K9
methylation on transcription.

Chuikov et al. (2004) reported a novel mechanism of p53 (191170)
regulation through lysine methylation by Set9 methyltransferase. Set9
specifically methylates p53 at lys372 within the C-terminal regulatory
region. Methylated p53 is restricted to the nucleus and the modification
positively affects its stability. Set9 regulates the expression of p53
target genes in a manner dependent on the p53 methylation site. The
crystal structure of a ternary complex of Set9 with a p53 peptide and
the cofactor product S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine provided the molecular
basis for recognition of p53 by this lysine methyltransferase.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

The evolutionarily conserved SET domain occurs in most proteins known to
possess histone lysine methyltransferase activity. Wilson et al. (2002)
described the crystal structure of a large fragment of human SET7 that
contains an N-terminal beta-sheet domain as well as the conserved SET
domain. Mutagenesis identified 2 residues in the C terminus of the
protein that appeared essential for catalytic activity toward lys4 of
histone H3. Furthermore, the cofactor S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet)
bound to this domain. Wilson et al. (2002) presented biochemical data
supporting the role of invariant residues in catalysis, binding of
AdoMet, and interactions with the peptide substrate.

Xiao et al. (2003) identified the high-resolution crystal structure of a
ternary complex of human SET7/9 with a histone peptide and cofactor,
which revealed that the peptide substrate and cofactor bind on opposite
surfaces of the enzyme. The target lysine accesses the active site of
the enzyme and the S-adenosyl-L-methionine cofactor by inserting its
side chain into a narrow channel that runs through the enzyme,
connecting the 2 surfaces. Xiao et al. (2003) showed from the structure
and from solution studies that SET7/9, unlike most other SET proteins,
is exclusively a mono-methylase. The structure indicates the molecular
basis of the specificity of the enzyme for the histone target, and Xiao
et al. (2003) proposed a model for the methylation reaction that
accounts for the role of many of the residues that are invariant across
the SET family.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SETD7
gene to chromosome 4 (TMAP D4S3221).

REFERENCE 1. Chuikov, S.; Kurash, J. K.; Wilson, J. R.; Xiao, B.; Justin, N.;
Ivanov, G. S.; McKinney, K.; Tempst, P.; Prives, C.; Gamblin, S. J.;
Barlev, N. A.; Reinberg, D.: Regulation of p53 activity through lysine
methylation. Nature 432: 353-360, 2004.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

3. Nishioka, K.; Chuikov, S.; Sarma, K.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Allis,
C. D.; Tempst, P.; Reinberg, D.: Set9, a novel histone H3 methyltransferase
that facilitates transcription by precluding histone tail modifications
required for heterochromatin formation. Genes Dev. 16: 479-489,
2002.

4. Wang, H.; Cao, R.; Xia, L.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Borchers, C.;
Tempst, P.; Zhang, Y.: Purification and functional characterization
of a histone H3-lysine 4-specific methyltransferase. Molec. Cell 8:
1207-1217, 2001.

5. Wilson, J. R.; Jing, C.; Walker, P. A.; Martin, S. R.; Howell,
S. A.; Blackburn, G. M.; Gamblin, S. J.; Xiao, B.: Crystal structure
and functional analysis of the histone methyltransferase SET7/9. Cell 111:
105-115, 2002.

6. Xiao, B.; Jing, C.; Wilson, J. R.; Walker, P. A.; Vasisht, N.;
Kelly, G.; Howell, S.; Taylor, I. A.; Blackburn, G. M.; Gamblin, S.
J.: Structure and catalytic mechanism of the human histone methyltransferase
SET7/9. Nature 421: 652-656, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/10/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/13/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/29/2003

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/4/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
alopez: 10/18/2006
alopez: 12/14/2004
terry: 12/10/2004
mgross: 4/13/2004
mgross: 7/7/2003
alopez: 2/28/2003
alopez: 2/4/2003
terry: 2/3/2003
mgross: 1/29/2003
mgross: 1/4/2002

176873	TITLE *176873 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 11B; CDK11B
;;CELL DIVISION CYCLE 2-LIKE 1; CDC2L1;;
PROTEIN KINASE p58; PK58; p58;;
CDC-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE p58;;
PITSLRE B;;
CDK11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bunnell et al. (1990) identified a human cell division control
(CDC)-related protein kinase, p58, that is structurally and functionally
related to p34(cdc2) (CDC2; 116940). Abnormal expression of the p58
protein kinase in eukaryotic cells had effects suggesting that it is a
negative regulator of normal cell cycle progression. The gene is well
conserved evolutionarily. Its expression is regulated during murine
embryogenesis, and its activity is coordinately regulated with that of
p34(cdc2) during the cell cycle.

Lahti et al. (1994) characterized the genomic region surrounding CDC2L1
and found that a related gene, CDC2L2 (116951), was located within 100
kb. They referred to CDC2L1 as PITSLRE B, based on the amino acid
sequence of the region corresponding to the conserved CDC2 PSTAIRE box.

Xiang et al. (1994) isolated multiple, alternatively spliced CDC2L1 and
CDC2L2 mRNAs. The CDC2L1 transcripts encode protein isoforms ranging in
size from 58 to 110 kD. The isoforms vary in the length and sequence of
their N-terminal regions; the protein kinase catalytic and C-terminal
domains are identical. All contain a 30-residue acid blob domain
comprised primarily of glutamic acid. The larger protein species
contained a putative bipartite nuclear localization signal. Western blot
analysis revealed that the 58-kD isoform was present only in cells
undergoing apoptosis. Xiang et al. (1994) analyzed the expression
pattern of the CDC2L1 mRNAs.

The CDC2L1 and CDC2L2 genes encode almost identical protein kinases of
110 kD that contain at their C termini the open reading frame of a
smaller isoform of 58 kD. Cornelis et al. (2000) found that 2 PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms, p110 and p58, are translated from a single
transcript by initiation at alternative in-frame AUG codons. p110 is
produced by classic cap-dependent translation, whereas p58 results from
internal initiation of translation controlled by an internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) with unique properties. The IRES element is localized
to the mRNA coding region, and its activity is cell cycle regulated,
permitting translation of p58 in G2/M.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that both CDC2L2 and CDC2L1 can produce a
third isoform, p46, by caspase-dependent proteolysis of either the p110
or p58 isoforms. By immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell
lines, they detected p110 in both nucleoplasm and nuclear speckles.
Western blot analysis showed robust expression of p110 in several human
cell lines and in activated human peripheral blood cells. Only activated
blood cells expressed p58 and p46. Size exclusion chromatography of HeLa
cells revealed that p110 fractionated with protein complexes of about
170 kD to over 1 MDa.

GENE FUNCTION

Lahti et al. (1994) demonstrated that 1 allele of the entire gene CDC2L
complex was either deleted or translocated in 18 of 20 neuroblastoma
(256700) cell lines investigated. They suggested that the CDC2L gene
complex may harbor 1 or more tumor suppressor genes affected by
chromosome 1p36 modifications in neuroblastoma.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that p110 CDK11 associated with
the alpha and beta isoforms of cyclin L1 (CCNL1; 613384) and L2 (CCNL2;
613482) in a high molecular mass complex that showed splicing activity.
The p58 and p46 CDK11 isoforms interacted more weakly with the cyclin L
alpha isoforms. In vivo splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin
L1-alpha, L1-beta, L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased
intron-splicing activity and altered alternative splice-site selection
in a cyclin L1 and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner. In
contrast with p110 CDK11, p58 and p46 CDK11 reduced splicing activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Eipers et al. (1992) detailed the complete structure of the CDC2L1 gene
including its putative promoter region, transcriptional start sites,
exonic sequences, and intron/exon boundary sequences. The gene is 10 kb
and contains 12 exons and 11 introns.

Gururajan et al. (1998) determined the structure of the 140-kb CDC2L
genomic region. This region consists of 2 identical genomic segments
arranged in a tail-to-tail configuration. Each segment contains a CDC2L
gene linked to an MMP gene. See MMP21 (603320). In each case, the most
widely expressed products of the CDC2L gene are derived from a genomic
region that is composed of 20 exons and spans approximately 20 kb. The
authors reported that only 15 amino acids of the 773-786 residues that
encode the multiple CDC2L isoforms are unique to either CDC2L1 or
CDC2L2.

MAPPING

Eipers et al. (1991) assigned the expressed p58 gene to 1p36 by somatic
cell hybrid analysis, in situ hybridization, and nested PCR
amplification of microdissected chromosomes. The authors stated that
this gene, tentatively symbolized PK58, may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of tumors that have deletion in the region of 1p36.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lahti et al. (1994) mapped the
CDC2L1 gene to 1p36.3.

White et al. (1995) showed that CDC2L1 is located outside the consensus
region of allelic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) associated with
neuroblastomas, namely, 1p36.3-p36.2, and is therefore not the
neuroblastoma suppressor gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bunnell, B.; Heath, L. S.; Adams, D. E.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V.
J.: Elevated expression of a p58 protein kinase leads to changes
in the CHO cell cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 7467-7471, 1990.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 2612 only, 1991.

2. Cornelis, S.; Bruynooghe, Y.; Denecker, G.; Van Huffel, S.; Tinton,
S.; Beyaert, R.: Identification and characterization of a novel cell
cycle-regulated internal ribosome entry site. Molec. Cell 5: 597-605,
2000.

3. Eipers, P. G.; Barnoski, B. L.; Han, J.; Carroll, A. J.; Kidd,
V. J.: Localization of the expressed human p58 protein kinase chromosomal
gene to chromosome 1p36 and a highly related sequence to chromosome
15. Genomics 11: 621-629, 1991.

4. Eipers, P. G.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V. J.: Structure and expression
of the human p58(clk-1) protein kinase chromosomal gene. Genomics 13:
613-621, 1992.

5. Gururajan, R.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Gruber, I.;
Ambros, P. F.; Kidd, V. J.: Duplication of a genomic region containing
the Cdc2L1-2 and MMP21-22 genes on human chromosome 1p36.3 and their
linkage to D1Z2. Genome Res. 8: 929-939, 1998.

6. Lahti, J. M.; Valentine, M.; Xiang, J.; Jones, B.; Amann, J.; Grenet,
J.; Richmond, G.; Look, A. T.; Kidd, V. J.: Alterations in the PITSLRE
protein kinase gene complex on chromosome 1p36 in childhood neuroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 7: 370-375, 1994.

7. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

8. White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Beltinger, C.; Sulman, E.; Marshall,
H. N.; Fujimori, M.; Kaufman, B. A.; Biegel, J. A.; Allen, C.; Hilliard,
C.; Valentine, M. B.; Look, A. T.; Enomoto, H.; Sakiyama, S.; Brodeur,
G. M.: A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within
human chromosome 1p36.2-36.3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5520-5524,
1995.

9. Xiang, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Kidd, V. J.:
Molecular cloning and expression of alternatively spliced PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15786-15794, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/24/1991

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
alopez: 11/19/2010
terry: 11/15/2010
alopez: 5/7/2007
mgross: 6/20/2000
alopez: 1/27/1999
alopez: 11/30/1998
alopez: 7/30/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mimadm: 2/25/1995
carol: 7/20/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992
carol: 11/11/1991

606494	TITLE *606494 ST3 BETA-GALACTOSIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE 3; ST3GAL3
;;SIALYLTRANSFERASE 6; SIAT6;;
N-ACETYLLACTOSAMINIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE;;
ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE II; ST3GALII;;
ST3N
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ST3GAL3 gene encodes
beta-galactoside-alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase-III, a Golgi resident
membrane protein that forms the sialyl Lewis a (sLe-a) epitope on
glyocoproteins. These glycoproteins form the glycocalyx, composed of
sialic acids that act as key determinants of a variety of cellular
recognition and communication processes (summary by Hu et al., 2011).

CLONING

By screening a human placenta cDNA library with a probe based on the
sialyl motif (a highly conserved region in the catalytic domain of
sialyltransferases), Kitagawa and Paulson (1993) isolated a cDNA
encoding SIAT6, which they termed ST3N (EC 2.4.99.6). The deduced
375-amino acid protein is 97% identical to the rat protein. SDS-PAGE
analysis showed expression of an 80-kD protein having sialyltransferase
activity. Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript with abundant expression in skeletal muscle and high
expression in fetal tissue but low expression in placenta.

Using Northern blot analysis, Kitagawa and Paulson (1994) evaluated the
differential expression of 5 human sialyltransferase genes in adult and
fetal tissues. A 2.7-kb ST3N transcript was expressed highly in skeletal
muscle and moderately in most other tissues examined. A 3.8-kb
transcript was also expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Taniguchi et al. (2003) determined that the 5-prime UTR of the ST3GAL3
gene consists of 2 exons. The 5-prime flanking region of the promoter
lacks canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes, but it contains several putative
transcriptional factor binding sites.

Hu et al. (2011) stated that the ST3GAL3 gene contains 15 exons, 12 of
which are coding exons.

MAPPING

The International RH Mapping Consortium mapped the SIAT6 gene to
chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG22084).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Recessive Mental Retardation 12

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families with
autosomal recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090),
Hu et al. (2011) used linkage analysis, chromosome sorting, and
next-generation sequencing to identify 2 different homozygous mutations
in the ST3GAL3 gene (A13D, 606494.0001 and D370Y, 606494.0002,
respectively.) Neither mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl
motifs, but rather affected the N-terminal transmembrane domain and
catalytic domain, respectively. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant proteins were mislocalized to the endoplasmic
reticulum and that one (D370Y) had loss of catalytic activity. The
findings demonstrated a link between the glycoprotein complex,
sialyltransferase activity, and higher cognitive functioning.

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 15

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous mutation in the ST3GAL3 gene (A320P;
606494.0003). The mutation was identified by linkage analysis combined
with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. The mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl motif S,
which is crucially involved in binding of both donor and acceptor
substrate. In vitro functional expression studies showed that secretion
of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of control levels and it had no
detectable enzymatic activity. The phenotype was severe: patients showed
delayed psychomotor development and had onset of refractory infantile
spasms between ages 3 and 7 months associated with hypsarrhythmia on
EEG. Other features included hypotonia, poor eye contact, and inability
to speak or walk, even later in childhood. All were profoundly mentally
retarded. Edvardson et al. (2013) noted that the phenotype was more
severe than that observed by Hu et al. (2011), who had identified
ST3GAL3 mutations outside of the highly conserved and functionally
important sialyl motifs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ALA13ASP

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), previously reported by
Najmabadi et al. (2007), Hu et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 38C-A
transversion in exon 2 of the ST3GAL3 gene, resulting in an ala13-to-asp
(A13D) substitution in the transmembrane domain. The mutation was not
found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls or
in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that most of the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. Catalytic activity of the A13D mutant enzyme was similar to
wildtype.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ASP370TYR

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), Hu et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1108G-T transversion in exon 14 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an asp370-to-tyr (D370Y) substitution in the
catalytic domain at the C-terminal end of the protein. The mutation was
not found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls
or in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. The D370Y mutant protein also showed a complete lack of enzyme
activity. Studies of recombinant proteins in CHO cells indicated that
secretion of the D370Y mutant protein was dramatically reduced compared
to wildtype. Hu et al. (2011) concluded that the mutant protein was
cleared by the endoplasmic reticulum-mediated system, suggesting that
the C terminus is important for the proper folding of functional
ST3GAL3.

.0003
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 15
ST3GAL3, ALA320PRO

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 958G-C transversion in exon 12 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an ala320-to-pro (A320P) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in the sialyl motif S. The mutation was identified by
linkage analysis combined with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. It segregated with the disorder in
the family and was not found in 123 controls of the same ethnic origin
or in 5,379 control exomes. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that secretion of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of
control levels and that the protein had no detectable enzymatic
activity.

REFERENCE 1. Edvardson, S.; Baumann, A.-M.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Stephan, O.; Kuss,
A. W.; Shaag, A.; He, L.; Zenvirt, S.; Tanzi, R.; Gerardy-Schahn,
R.; Elpeleg, O.: West syndrome caused by ST3Gal-III deficiency. Epilepsia 54:
e24-e27, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Hu, H.; Eggers, K.; Chen, W.; Garshasbi, M.; Motazacker, M. M.;
Wrogemann, K.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach, A.; Hosseini, M.; Bahman, I.;
Hucho, T.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Najmabadi, H.; Ropers,
H. H.; Kuss, A. W.: ST3GAL3 mutations impair the development of higher
cognitive functions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 407-414, 2011.

3. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Cloning and expression of human
Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 194: 375-382, 1993.

4. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Differential expression of five
sialyltransferase genes in human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 17872-17878,
1994.

5. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity mapping
in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of non-syndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies 8 novel gene
loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

6. Taniguchi, A.; Saito, K.; Kubota, T.; Matsumoto, K.: Characterization
of the promoter region of the human Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase
III (hST3Gal III) gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1626: 92-96, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/17/2006
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/1/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/26/2001

EDITED carol: 07/08/2013
carol: 1/8/2013
ckniffin: 1/8/2013
carol: 10/3/2011
ckniffin: 9/27/2011
mgross: 5/23/2006
terry: 5/17/2006
mgross: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/28/2006
alopez: 12/4/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
mgross: 8/22/2002
alopez: 11/26/2001

615417	TITLE *615417 BET1-LIKE PROTEIN; BET1L
;;GOLGI SNARE, 15-KD; GS15
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BET1L is part of a SNARE (SNAP receptor) complex that recruits soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF; 601633) attachment proteins
(SNAPs) to membranes. BET1L is a vesicle-associated SNARE (v-SNARE) that
pairs with a target membrane SNARE (t-SNARE), such as GOS28 (GOSR1;
604026) and syntaxin-5 (STX5; 603189) (Xu et al., 1997; Volchuk et al.,
2004).

CLONING

By searching databases using rat Bet1 (605456) as probe, followed by
screening a rat brain cDNA library, Xu et al. (1997) cloned rat Bet1l,
which they called Gs15. The deduced 111-amino acid protein has a
C-terminal hydrophobic region that may function as a membrane anchor.
Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression in rat tissues.
Immunoblot analysis and immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated
expression of a 15-kD protein on Golgi membranes.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (1997) showed that rat Gs15 bound to recombinant SNAP. They
concluded that GS15 is a C-terminal tail-anchored integral membrane
v-SNARE associated with the Golgi apparatus.

Using immunoelectron microscopy with mammalian cell lines and tissues,
Xu et al. (2002) showed that Gs15 was primarily found in the medial
cisternae of the Golgi apparatus and adjacent tubulovesicular elements.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis identified rat Gs15 as part of a distinct
SNARE complex containing 3 other SNAREs, Stx5, Gs28, and Ykt6 (606209),
implicated in both ER-to-Golgi and intra-Golgi transport. Inhibition of
GS15 expression by small interfering RNA in HeLa cells resulted in
redistribution of Golgi markers into small dotty and diffuse labeling.
Xu et al. (2002) proposed that GS15 has an essential role in the Golgi
apparatus.

Using quantitative immunogold labeling in mammalian cells, Volchuk et
al. (2004) showed that the distribution of t-SNAREs was nearly even
across the Golgi stack from the cis to the trans side, whereas Gs15 was
present in a gradient of increasing concentration toward the trans face
of the stack. In contrast, the v- and t-SNARE subunits of a second
distinct SNARE complex required for intra-Golgi transport decreased in
concentration toward the trans face. Volchuk et al. (2004) proposed that
transport within the stack uses countercurrent gradients of 2 Golgi
SNAREpins (i.e., complexes of cognate v- and t-SNAREs bridging 2
membranes) and may involve a homotypic fusion mechanism.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the BET1L gene to chromosome 11p15.5 based on an
alignment of the BET1L sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF234160) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/17/2013.

2. Volchuk, A.; Ravazzola, M.; Perrelet, A.; Eng, W. S.; Di Liberto,
M.; Varlamov, O.; Fukasawa, M.; Engel, T.; Sollner, T. H.; Rothman,
J. E.; Orci, L.: Countercurrent distribution of two distinct SNARE
complexes mediating transport with the Golgi stack. Molec. Biol.
Cell 15: 1506-1518, 2004.

3. Xu, Y.; Martin, S.; James, D. E.; Hong, W.: GS15 forms a SNARE
complex with syntaxin 5, GS28, and Ykt6 and is implicated in traffic
in the early cisternae of the Gogli apparatus. Molec. Biol. Cell 13:
3493-3507, 2002.

4. Xu, Y.; Wong, S. H.; Zhang, T.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Hong, W.:
GS15, a 15-kilodalton Golgi soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor
attachment protein receptor (SNARE) homologous to rbet1. J. Biol.
Chem. 272: 20162-20166, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/17/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/17/2013

EDITED mgross: 09/17/2013
mgross: 9/17/2013

603023	TITLE *603023 IKAROS FAMILY ZINC FINGER 1; IKZF1
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN, SUBFAMILY 1A, MEMBER 1; ZNFN1A1;;
IKAROS; IK1;;
LYF1
IKAROS/BCL6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ikaros proteins are lymphoid-restricted zinc finger transcription
factors that are considered master regulators of lymphocyte
differentiation. Klug et al. (1998) noted that there are at least 8
alternatively spliced transcripts of the Ikaros gene that encode
isoforms with common N-terminal and C-terminal domains. By screening a
Jurkat T-cell cDNA library with a mouse Ikaros cDNA, Molnar et al.
(1996) isolated human Ikaros cDNAs. The deduced human and mouse Ikaros
proteins are 95% identical. RT-PCR of human thymus and peripheral blood
leukocyte mRNAs detected 6 Ikaros splicing variants which were expressed
at similar levels and ratios as the corresponding mouse leukocyte Ikaros
transcripts. The authors found that Ikaros proteins are conserved in
sequence composition and relative expression between human T cells and
mouse thymocytes. Northern blot analysis demonstrated the expression of
7.5- and 4.5-kb Ikaros transcripts in human thymus, spleen, and
peripheral blood leukocytes.

By PCR using primers based on a conserved nucleotide sequence of various
zinc finger proteins, Nietfeld and Meyerhans (1996) cloned human bone
marrow cDNAs encoding Ikaros, which they designated IK1. The deduced
519-amino acid protein is 93% identical to the mouse Ikaros isoform
1/LyF1 isoform VI and contains 4 N-terminal and 2 C-terminal zinc finger
domains. The authors detected 3 human mRNA species by Northern blot
analysis: a 4.4-kb transcript, which was prominent in peripheral blood
leukocytes; a 6.0-kb transcript, which was strongly expressed in spleen,
thymus, lymph node, and bone marrow; and a 7.0-kb transcript. They
stated that the human and mouse Ikaros genes have similar overall
transcription patterns.

Dijon et al. (2008) stated that the N-terminal Kruppel-like zinc finger
domain of Ikaros proteins is involved in DNA binding, while the
C-terminal zinc finger domain mediates homo- or heterodimerization with
other Ikaros proteins. Alternative splicing of exons 3 to 6 produces
Ikaros isoforms with 0 to 4 N-terminal zinc fingers, and those with at
least 3 efficiently bind DNA. The DNA-binding Ikaros isoforms include
IK1, IK2, IK3, and IKX, and IK4 can bind DNA on palindromic sequences.
IK5, IK6, IK7, and IK8 are considered dominant-negative isoforms due to
their capacity to bind other isoforms and their inefficiency in binding
DNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Harker et al. (2002) showed that Ikaros may play an important role in
CD4 (186940) versus CD8 (see CD8A; 186910) lineage commitment decisions
by demonstrating: (1) that it binds to regulatory elements in the
endogenous CD8A locus in vivo using thymocyte chromatin
immunoprecipitations; (2) that Ikaros suppresses position effect
variegation of transgenes driven by CD8 regulatory elements; and (3)
that mice with reduced levels of Ikaros and Aiolos (606221) show an
apparent increase in CD4 populations with immature phenotype, i.e.,
cells that fail to activate the CD8A gene. The authors proposed that
Ikaros family members function as activators of the CD8A gene and that
their associated activities are critical for appropriate chromatin
remodeling transitions during thymocyte differentiation and lineage
commitment.

Ezzat et al. (2005) demonstrated that Ikaros is expressed in the
hormone-producing pituitary corticomelanotroph cells of mice, where it
binds the proopiomelanocortin promoter and regulates endogenous gene
expression. Ikaros-null mice had contraction of the pituitary
corticomelanotroph population, reduced circulating adrenocorticotrophic
hormone levels, and adrenal glucocorticoid insufficiency. Hematopoietic
reconstitution failed to correct this hormonal deficit, but the
phenotype of reduced body weight and diminished survival was rescued by
systemic glucocorticoid-hormone administration. Ezzat et al. (2005)
concluded that Ikaros plays a role in orchestrating immune-endocrine
development and function.

Yap et al. (2005) identified Ikaros-binding elements in the 5-prime
flanking regions of pufferfish, mouse, and human STAT4 (600558).
Transactivation, electrophoretic mobility shift, and RNA interference
analyses showed that Ikaros bound to the STAT4 promoter and was involved
in regulation of STAT4 in human T cells.

Dijon et al. (2008) found that purified CD34 (142230)-positive human
cord blood cells and adult peripheral blood cells that were cultured
under erythroid conditions expressed the DNA-binding Ikaros isoforms IK1
through IK4, but not the dominant-negative isoform IK6.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that expression of IK6 in these
cells resulted in complex formation between IK6 and IK1, and IK6
decreased cell number and increased cell death. IK6 overexpression
disturbed erythroid differentiation and expression of erythroid-specific
genes, although it had no effect on Ikaros expression, and favored
myelopoiesis by promoting expression of myeloid-specific genes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dijon et al. (2008) stated that the IKZF1 gene contains 7 translated
exons.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid DNAs, Molnar et al. (1996) mapped the human
Ikaros gene to 7p13-p11.1, near the EGFR gene (131550). They mapped the
mouse Ikaros gene to chromosome 11 by interspecific backcross analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ikaros is required for normal lymphocyte development. Germline mutant
mice that express only non-DNA-binding dominant-negative 'leukemogenic'
Ikaros isoforms lacking critical N-terminal zinc fingers develop an
aggressive form of lymphoblastic leukemia 3 to 6 months after birth (see
'Animal Model' below). These facts prompted Sun et al. (1999) to seek
molecular abnormalities involving the Ikaros gene in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL2; 613067) in infants. In leukemic cells from 12 ALL
infants less than 1 year of age, Sun et al. (1999) found high-level
expression of dominant-negative isoforms of Ikaros with abnormal
subcellular compartmentalization patterns. PCR cloning and nucleotide
sequencing were used to identify the specific Ikaros isoforms and detect
Ikaros gene mutations in these cells. Leukemic cells from 7 of 7 infants
with ALL, including 5 of 5 MLL-AF4-positive (159557) infants, expressed
dominant-negative Ikaros isoforms IK4, IK7, and IK8 that lack critical
N-terminal zinc fingers. In 6 of 7 patients, Sun et al. (1999) detected
an in-frame deletion of 10 amino acids (KSSMPQKFLG) upstream of the
transcription-activation domain adjacent to the C-terminal zinc fingers
of IK2, IK4, IK7, and IK8. In contrast, only wildtype IK1 and IK2
isoforms with normal nuclear localization were found in normal infant
bone marrow cells and infant thymocytes. These results implicated the
expression of dominant-negative Ikaros isoforms and the disruption of
normal Ikaros function in the leukemogenesis of ALL in infants.

Nakase et al. (2000) found overexpression of the dominant-negative IK6
isoform in 14 of 41 B-cell patients with adult B-cell ALL. None of the
other dominant-negative isoforms of the Ikaros gene were detected by
RT-PCR analysis. Southern blot analysis with PstI digestion revealed
that those patients with the dominant-negative IK6 isoform might have
small mutations in the Ikaros locus. The results suggested that Ikaros
plays a key role in human B-cell malignancies through the
dominant-negative isoform IK6.

Using RT-PCR to detect Ikaros isoforms with the 30-base deletion in exon
6, Payne et al. (2001) showed that transcripts for IK1 and IK1 with the
deletion were present in normal cord blood and bone marrow, as well as
in 3 ALL cell lines. In addition, they identified an isoform, IKX, that
was identical to IK3 except that it included exon 6; IKX was generated
from a novel exon combination with and without the 30-base deletion.
Payne et al. (2001) detected multiple DNA-binding and nonbinding
isoforms with a 60-base insertion linked to leukemia expressed at the
RNA level in normal hemopoietic cells. Immunoblot analysis indicated
that the predominant isoform in normal cells is IKX, while the
predominant form in leukemic cells is IK1.

In a genomewide analysis of leukemic cells from 242 pediatric ALL
patients using high resolution, single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
arrays and genomic DNA sequencing, Mullighan et al. (2007) identified
mutations in genes encoding principal regulators of B-lymphocyte
development and differentiation in 40% of B-progenitor ALL cases.
Deletions were detected in IKZF1, IKZF3 (606221),TCF3 (147141), EBF1
(164343), and LEF1 (153245). The PAX5 (167414) gene was the most
frequent target of somatic mutation, being altered in 31.7% of cases.

The Philadelphia chromosome, a chromosomal abnormality that encodes
BCR-ABL1 (see 151410, 189980), is the defining lesion of chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) and a subset of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL). To define oncogenic lesions that cooperate with BCR-ABL1 to
induce ALL, Mullighan et al. (2008) performed a genomewide analysis of
diagnostic leukemia samples from 304 individuals with ALL, including 43
BCR-ABL1 B-progenitor ALLs and 23 CML cases. IKZF1, encoding the
transcription factor Ikaros, was deleted in 83.7% of BCR-ABL1 ALL, but
not in chronic phase CML. Deletion of IKZF1 was also identified as an
acquired lesion at the time of transformation of CML to ALL (lymphoid
blast crisis). The IKZF1 deletions resulted in haploinsufficiency,
expression of a dominant-negative Ikaros isoform, or the complete loss
of Ikaros expression. Sequencing of IKZF1 deletion breakpoints suggested
that aberrant RAG-mediated recombination (see 179615) is responsible for
the deletions. Mullighan et al. (2008) concluded that genetic lesions
resulting in the loss of Ikaros function are an important event in the
development of BCR-ABL1 ALL.

Mullighan et al. (2009) identified deletions involving the IKZF1 gene in
leukemic cells of 63 (28.6%) of 221 children with B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Cells from 20 patients had a deletion of coding
exons 3 through 6, resulting in the expression of a dominant-negative
form of IKZF1. IKZF1 deletions were associated with an increased risk of
relapse and adverse effects in the original cohort and in an independent
cohort of 258 patients (p values ranging from less than 0.001 to 0.004).

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
IKZF1 gene and acute lymphoblastic leukemia, see ALL2 (613067).

CYTOGENETICS

The BCL6 gene (109565), isolated from the breakpoints of 3q27-associated
chromosomal translocations, is implicated in diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBL). Hosokawa et al. (2000) described the molecular
characterization of novel t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocations in 2 patients
with DLBL. Molecular genetic analysis of the breakpoint area involving
BCL6 revealed the presence of the Ikaros gene. As a molecular
consequence of the translocation, the 5-prime regulatory region of BCL6
was replaced by the putative 5-prime regulatory region of the Ikaros
gene, probably leading to deregulated expression of the BCL6 gene
throughout B-cell differentiation. RT-PCR and FISH analyses of a patient
sample established that the translocation resulted in fusion of the
Ikaros and BCL6 genes. The clinical features of the 2 patients with DLBL
and t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocations were reported by Ichinohasama et al.
(1998).

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice homozygous for a germline mutation in the Ikaros DNA-binding domain
lack not only T and B lymphocytes and natural killer cells, but also
their earliest defined progenitors (Georgopoulos et al., 1994). In
contrast, the erythroid and myeloid lineages are intact in these mutant
mice. Klug et al. (1998) showed that the DNA-binding isoforms of mouse
Ikaros are localized in the nucleus of the most primitive hematopoietic
stem cell subset. They found that Ikaros localizes to heterochromatin in
Abelson-transformed pre-B lymphocytes. Changes in the RNA splicing
pattern of Ikaros occurred at 2 stages of lymphoid differentiation.

O'Neill et al. (1999, 2000) described the structure of a chromatin
remodeling complex associated with Ikaros that is present only in adult
hematopoietic cells. This complex binds to Ikaros-like DNA-binding
sites, including a long polypyrimidine-rich sequence upstream of the
human delta-globin gene (142000), and was thus called PYR complex.
Deletion of this sequence in a human beta locus-containing cosmid
(carrying sequences from the human gamma-A gene, 142200, through the
adult beta-globin gene, 141900) in transgenic mice resulted in delayed
switching from gamma-globin to beta-globin. Lopez et al. (2002) showed
that homozygous Ikaros-null mice lacked the PYR complex, demonstrating a
requirement for Ikaros in the formation of the complex on DNA.
Heterozygous Ikaros-null mice had about half as much PYR complex,
indicating a dosage effect for both Ikaros and PYR complex. They also
showed that Ikaros-null mice had multiple hematopoietic cell defects,
including anemia and megakaryocytic abnormalities, in addition to
lymphoid and stem cell defects. The null mice also had a delay in murine
embryonic-to-adult beta-globin switching and a delay in human
gamma-to-beta switching, consistent with the suggested role for PYR
complex in this process. Lastly, cDNA array analyses indicated that
several hematopoietic cell-specific genes in all blood lineages were
either up- or downregulated in 14-day embryos from Ikaros-null mice
compared with wildtype mice. These results indicated that Ikaros and PYR
complex function together in vivo at many adult hematopoietic
cell-specific genes and at intergenic sites, affecting their expression
and leading to pleiotropic hematopoietic defects.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are specialized dendritic cells that
produce high levels of type I interferon (see IFNA1; 147660) upon viral
infection. Allman et al. (2006) showed that mice expressing low levels
of Ikaros lacked peripheral plasmacytoid dendritic cells but not other
dendritic cell subsets. Loss of plasmacytoid dendritic cells was
associated with inability to produce type I interferon after challenge
with Tlr7 (300365) or Tlr9 (605474) ligands or murine cytomegalovirus.
Conventional dendritic cells were present in normal numbers and
exhibited normal responses to in vivo challenge with murine
cytomegalovirus or inactivated toxoplasma antigen.

REFERENCE 1. Allman, D.; Dalod, M.; Asselin-Paturel, C.; Delale, T.; Robbins,
S. H.; Trinchieri, G.; Biron, C. A.; Kastner, P.; Chan, S.: Ikaros
is required for plasmacytoid dendritic cell differentiation. Blood 108:
4025-4034, 2006.

2. Dijon, M.; Bardin, F.; Murati, A.; Batoz, M.; Chabannon, C.; Tonnelle,
C.: The role of Ikaros in human erythroid differentiation. Blood 111:
1138-1146, 2008.

3. Ezzat, S.; Mader, R.; Yu, S.; Ning, T.; Poussier, P.; Asa, S. L.
: Ikaros integrates endocrine and immune system development. J. Clin.
Invest. 115: 1021-1029, 2005.

4. Georgopoulos, K.; Bigby, M.; Wang, J. H.; Molnar, A.; Wu, P.; Winandy,
S.; Sharpe, A.: The Ikaros gene is required for the development of
all lymphoid lineages. Cell 79: 143-156, 1994.

5. Harker, N.; Naito, T.; Cortes, M.; Hostert, A.; Hirschberg, S.;
Tolaini, M.; Roderick, K.; Georgopoulos, K.; Kioussis, D.: The CD8-alpha
gene locus is regulated by the Ikaros family of proteins. Molec.
Cell 10: 1403-1415, 2002.

6. Hosokawa, Y.; Maeda, Y.; Ichinohasama, R.; Miura, I.; Taniwaki,
M.; Seto, M.: The Ikaros gene, a central regulator of lymphoid differentiation,
fuses to the BCL6 gene as a result of t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocation
in a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 95: 2719-2721,
2000.

7. Ichinohasama, R.; Miura, I.; Funato, T.; Sato, I.; Suzuki, C.;
Saito, Y.; Decoteau, J. F.; Myers, J. B.; Kadin, M. E.; Sawai, T.;
Ooya, K.: A recurrent nonrandom translocation (3;7)(q27;p12) associated
with BCL-6 gene rearrangement in B-cell diffuse large cell lymphoma. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 104: 19-27, 1998.

8. Klug, C. A.; Morrison, S. J.; Masek, M.; Hahm, K.; Smale, S. T.;
Weissman, I. L.: Hematopoietic stem cells and lymphoid progenitors
express different Ikaros isoforms, and Ikaros is localized to heterochromatin
in immature lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 657-662, 1998.

9. Lopez, R. A.; Schoetz, S.; DeAngelis, K.; O'Neill, D.; Bank, A.
: Multiple hematopoietic defects and delayed globin switching in Ikaros
null mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 602-607, 2002.

10. Molnar, A.; Wu, P.; Largespada, D. A.; Vortkamp, A.; Scherer,
S.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Bruns, G.; Georgopoulos, K.:
The Ikaros gene encodes a family of lymphocyte-restricted zinc finger
DNA binding proteins, highly conserved in human and mouse. J. Immun. 156:
585-592, 1996.

11. Mullighan, C. G.; Goorha, S.; Radtke, I.; Miller, C. B.; Coustan-Smith,
E.; Dalton, J. D.; Girtman, K.; Mathew, S.; Ma, J.; Pounds, S. B.;
Su, X.; Pui, C.-H.; Relling, M. V.; Evans, W. E.; Shurtleff, S. A.;
Downing, J. R.: Genome-wide analysis of genetic alterations in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Nature 446: 758-764, 2007.

12. Mullighan, C. G.; Miller, C. B.; Radtke, I.; Phillips, L. A.;
Dalton, J.; Ma, J.; White, D.; Hughes, T. P.; Le Beau, M. M.; Pui,
C.-H.; Relling, M. V.; Shurtleff, S. A.; Downing, J. R.: BCR-ABL1
lymphoblastic leukaemia is characterized by the deletion of Ikaros. Nature 453:
110-114, 2008.

13. Mullighan, C. G.; Su, X.; Zhang, J.; Radtke, I.; Phillips, L.
A. A.; Miller, C. B.; Ma, J.; Liu, W.; Cheng, C.; Schulman, B. A.;
Harvey, R. C.; Chen, I.-M.; and 17 others: Deletion of IKZF1 and
prognosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. New Eng. J. Med. 360:
470-480, 2009.

14. Nakase, K.; Ishimaru, F.; Avitahl, N.; Dansako, H.; Matsuo, K.;
Fujii, K.; Sezaki, N.; Nakayama, H.; Yano, T.; Fukuda, S.; Imajoh,
K.; Takeuchi, M.; and 13 others: Dominant negative isoform of the
Ikaros gene in patients with adult B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer
Res. 60: 4062-4065, 2000.

15. Nietfeld, W.; Meyerhans, A.: Cloning and sequencing of hIK-1,
a cDNA encoding a human homologue of mouse Ikaros/LyF-1. Immun. Lett. 49:
139-141, 1996.

16. O'Neill, D.; Yang, J.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Bornschlegel, K.;
Tempst, P.; Bank, A.: Tissue-specific and developmental stage-specific
DNA binding by a mammalian SWI/SNF complex associated with human fetal-to-adult
globin gene switching. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 349-354, 1999.

17. O'Neill, D. W.; Schoetz, S. S.; Lopez, R. A.; Castle, M.; Rabinowitz,
L.; Shor, E.; Krawchuk, D.; Goll, M. G.; Renz, M.; Sellig, H.-P.;
Han, S.; Seong, R. H.; Park, S. D.; Agalioti, T.; Munshi, N.; Thanos,
D.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Bank, A.: An Ikaros-containing
chromatin-remodeling complex in adult-type erythroid cells. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 7572-7582, 2000.

18. Payne, K. J.; Nicolas, J.-H.; Zhu, J. Y.; Barsky, L. W.; Crooks,
G. M.: Cutting edge: predominant expression of a novel Ikaros isoform
in normal human hemopoiesis. J. Immun. 167: 1867-1870, 2001.

19. Sun, L.; Heerema, N.; Crotty, L.; Wu, X.; Navara, C.; Vassilev,
A.; Sensel, M.; Reaman, G. H.; Uckun, F. M.: Expression of dominant-negative
and mutant isoforms of the antileukemic transcription factor Ikaros
in infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
680-685, 1999.

20. Yap, W.-H.; Yeoh, E.; Tay, A.; Brenner, S.; Venkatesh, B.: STAT4
is a target of the hematopoietic zinc-finger transcription factor
Ikaros in T cells. FEBS Lett. 579: 4470-4478, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/25/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/28/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/1999

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 9/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 10/08/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
wwang: 10/13/2009
ckniffin: 10/5/2009
wwang: 2/9/2009
ckniffin: 2/4/2009
mgross: 10/7/2008
terry: 10/3/2008
alopez: 6/18/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 10/29/2007
alopez: 6/18/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
wwang: 4/25/2007
terry: 7/8/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 4/16/2004
mgross: 4/28/2003
terry: 3/8/2002
mgross: 2/11/2002
terry: 2/6/2002
mgross: 12/3/2001
terry: 11/28/2001
mgross: 8/23/2001
mcapotos: 10/9/2000
mcapotos: 10/6/2000
terry: 9/29/2000
mcapotos: 9/1/2000
mcapotos: 6/2/2000
mcapotos: 5/25/2000
terry: 5/19/2000
carol: 9/23/1999
mgross: 3/5/1999
mgross: 2/25/1999
terry: 2/18/1999
terry: 11/19/1998
psherman: 9/17/1998
psherman: 9/16/1998

612605	TITLE *612605 LATE CORNIFIED ENVELOPE 1C; LCE1C
;;LATE ENVELOPE PROTEIN 3; LEP3
DESCRIPTION For background information on the LCE gene cluster, see 612603.

CLONING

By database analysis to identify human orthologs of mouse genes encoding
late envelope proteins (LEPs), Marshall et al. (2001) identified LCE1C,
which they called LEP3.

Using real-time PCR, Jackson et al. (2005) detected high LCE1C
expression in human fetal, arm, penal, and abdominal skin. Expression
was much lower in vulva and was not detected in tongue and esophagus.

GENE FUNCTION

Jackson et al. (2005) showed that expression of LCE1 genes, including
LCE1C, was upregulated in cultured normal human keratinocytes by
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, but not by calcium. Induction of LCE1C
could be detected 24 hours after UV irradiation and was very high 36
hours after UV irradiation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jackson et al. (2005) determined that the LCE1C gene contains 2 exons.
Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marshall et al. (2001) mapped the LCE1C
gene within the LCE gene cluster on chromosome 1q21. Jackson et al.
(2005) stated that the mouse Lce1c gene maps to a syntenic LCE gene
cluster on chromosome 3F1.

REFERENCE 1. Jackson, B.; Tilli, C. M. L. J.; Hardman, M. J.; Avilion, A. A.;
MacLeod, M. C.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Byrne, C.: Late cornified envelope
family in differentiating epithelia--response to calcium and ultraviolet
irradiation. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1062-1070, 2005.

2. Marshall, D.; Hardman, M. J.; Nield, K. M.; Byrne, C.: Differentially
expressed late constituents of the epidermal cornified envelope. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13031-13036, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 02/11/2009

180390	TITLE *180390 RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE, M2 SUBUNIT; RRM2
;;RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE, SMALL SUBUNIT;;
RIBONUCLEOTIDE REDUCTASE, R2 SUBUNIT; R2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RRM2 gene encodes the small subunit (R2) of ribonucleotide
reductase, the heterodimeric enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting
step in deoxyribonucleotide synthesis.

CLONING

Pavloff et al. (1992) cloned human RRM1 (180410) and RRM2 cDNAs from a
breast carcinoma cDNA library. The deduced 389-amino acid RRM2 protein
has a molecular mass of 45 kD and is 1 amino acid shorter than the
equivalent mouse protein. The human and mouse RRM2 proteins share 96%
homology in the C terminus, but only 69% in the first 68 residues in the
N terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

In dividing cells, ribonucleotide reductase is essential for the
production of deoxyribonucleotides before DNA synthesis in S phase.
Neither of its 2 subunits, R1 or R2, are detectable in quiescent cells.
In cycling cells, RRM2 mRNA and protein are present throughout the cell
cycle (summary by Parker et al., 1994).

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was RRM2. These 37 genes included several
splicing factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects.
In addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

MAPPING

Yang-Feng et al. (1986, 1987) carried out chromosomal mapping of RRM2 by
means of a full-length mouse cDNA. By Southern blot analysis of
interspecies somatic cell hybrid lines and by in situ hybridization,
Yang-Feng et al. (1987) found that the 4 chromosomal sites carrying
M2-related sequences are 1p33-p31, 1q21-q23, 2p25-p24, and Xp21-p11. In
the mouse, M2 sequences were found on chromosomes 4, 7, 12, and 13 by
somatic cell hybrid studies. By Southern analysis of human and mouse
hydroxyurea-resistant cells that overproduce M2 due to gene
amplification, Yang-Feng et al. (1987) identified the amplified
restriction fragments as those that map to human chromosome 2 and to
mouse chromosome 12. The sites other than 2p probably represent
pseudogenes, particularly the ones on the X chromosome since active
genes on mammalian X chromosomes are conserved and no RRM2 sequence was
found on the mouse X chromosome. Ornithine decarboxylase (ODC; 165640)
is coamplified with RRM2 in human and rodent hydroxyurea-resistant cell
lines. Using cDNA clones, Yang-Feng et al. (1987) mapped ODC to the same
region of human chromosome 2. In an RRM2 overproducing mouse cell line,
they found amplification of the chromosome 12-specific restriction
fragments. Thus, the functional loci of both RRM2 and ODC are on murine
chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

2. Parker, N. J.; Begley, C. G.; Fox, R. M.: Human R1 subunit of
ribonucleotide reductase (RRM1): 5-prime flanking region of the gene. Genomics 19:
91-96, 1994.

3. Pavloff, N.; Rivard, D.; Masson, S.; Shen, S.-H.; Mes-Masson, A.-M.
: Sequence analysis of the large and small subunits of human ribonucleotide
reductase. DNA Seq. 2: 227-234, 1992.

4. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Barton, D. E.; Thelander, L.; Lewis, W. H.; Srinivasan,
P. R.; Francke, U.: Ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit sequences
mapped to four different chromosomal sites in humans and mice: functional
locus identified by its amplification in hydroxyurea-resistant cell
lines. Genomics 1: 77-86, 1987.

5. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Thelander, L.; Lewis, W. H.; Srinivasan, P. R.;
Francke, U.: Gene localization of the ribonucleotide reductase M2
subunit and of related and co-amplified sequences on human and mouse
chromosomes. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 39: A174 only, 1986.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/16/1986

EDITED carol: 03/16/2012
carol: 7/8/2008
carol: 6/9/2008
alopez: 3/8/2005
terry: 12/7/2001
alopez: 3/22/2000
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
root: 10/14/1987
root: 6/15/1987

606110	TITLE *606110 LY6/NEUROTOXIN 1; LYNX1
;;SECRETED LY6/PLAUR DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; SLURP2;;
SECRETED LY6/UPAR-RELATED PROTEIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The LYNX1 gene encodes a protein that shares characteristics with toxins
that bind and inhibit nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR; see,
e.g., CHRNA1, 100690) (Miwa et al., 1999). Components of snake venoms
often have structural and functional mammalian homologs. For example,
hemolytic snake venom toxins are related to cellular phospholipases
(e.g., PLA2G1B; 172410), and snake sarafotoxins may be related to
vertebrate endothelins (e.g., EDN1; 131240). The elapid venom
alpha-bungarotoxin also binds to and inhibits nAChR.

CLONING

By screening for central nervous system-specific, developmentally
regulated cDNAs in mouse, Miwa et al. (1999) identified a cDNA encoding
GC26, which was expressed in mouse cerebellum. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 116-amino acid protein contains a signal sequence at
its N terminus, a cysteine-rich consensus motif characteristic of LY6
family proteins (e.g., CD59; 107271) and snake alpha-neurotoxins, and an
asparagine/GPI anchor motif at its C terminus. The overall structure of
GC26 is similar to that of LY6 family proteins and snake
alpha-neurotoxins, and Miwa et al. (1999) redesignated the protein
'Ly6/neurotoxin-1,' or Lynx1. A partial sequence encoding a human Lynx1
homolog has been identified (GenBank GENBANK AF321824). Northern blot
analysis revealed predominant expression of Lynx1 in mouse brain. In
situ hybridization analysis showed Lynx1 expression in neurons in
multiple brain structures. Immunocytochemistry demonstrated expression
of Lynx1 in neuronal soma and proximal dendrites.

Using microarray analysis to identify ESTs expressed predominantly in
the skin of patients with psoriasis vulgaris (see 177900), followed by
PCR and RACE of cultured keratinocyte cDNA libraries, Tsuji et al.
(2003) cloned LYNX1, which they called SLURP2. The deduced 97-amino acid
protein contains a signal peptide and 10 conserved cysteine residues
with a spacing pattern characteristic of the LY6 superfamily, but it
does not have the GPI anchor or transmembrane domains found in
membrane-bound LY6 proteins. Northern blot analysis detected a 0.6-kb
transcript in esophagus and a 1.6-kb transcript in stomach and duodenum.
No expression was detected in other tissues examined, including skin.
RT-PCR detected abundant LYNX1 expression in cervix and esophagus, with
lower expression in adult and fetal skin and keratinocytes. Weak
expression was detected in brain, lung, stomach, small intestine, colon,
rectum, uterus, and thymus. No expression was detected in spleen and
bone marrow. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR analysis detected a 3.8- to
2.8-fold increase in LYNX1 expression in lesional skin from 5 psoriasis
patients compared with nonlesional skin or normal skin.

GENE FUNCTION

Functional analysis by Miwa et al. (1999) indicated that Lynx1 is not a
ligand or neurotransmitter but has the capacity to enhance nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor function in the presence of acetylcholine.

Morishita et al. (2010) identified an increase in expression of Lynx1
protein in mice that prevented plasticity in the primary visual cortex
late in life. Removal of this molecular brake enhanced nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor signaling. Lynx1 expression thus maintains
stability of mature cortical networks in the presence of cholinergic
innervation. Morishita et al. (2010) concluded that modulating the
balance between excitatory and inhibitory circuits reactivates visual
plasticity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tsuji et al. (2003) determined that the LYNX1 gene contains 3 exons and
spans about 5.6 kb. The promoter region contains 3 Sp1 (189906)- and 2
AP1 (165160)-binding sites, as well as single sites for E2F (189971) and
GATA3 (131320). It lacks TATA and CAAT consensus sequences. There are 2
major transcriptional initiation sites.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Tsuji et al. (2003) mapped the LYNX1 gene
to chromosome 8q24.3. Southern blot analysis indicated that LYNX1 is a
single-copy gene.

EVOLUTION

Human evolution is characterized by a dramatic increase in brain size
and complexity. To probe its genetic basis, Dorus et al. (2004) examined
the evolution of genes involved in diverse aspects of nervous system
biology. These genes, including LYNX1, displayed significantly higher
rates of protein evolution in primates than in rodents. This trend was
most pronounced for the subset of genes implicated in nervous system
development. Moreover, within primates, the acceleration of protein
evolution was most prominent in the lineage leading from ancestral
primates to humans. Dorus et al. (2004) concluded that the phenotypic
evolution of the human nervous system has a salient molecular correlate,
i.e., accelerated evolution of the underlying genes, particularly those
linked to nervous system development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Miwa et al. (2006) found that Lynx1 -/- mice showed no gross
abnormalities in size, viability, CNS morphology, or longevity compared
to wildtype mice. However, Lynx1-null mice showed increased learning and
memory in a fear-conditioned paradigm and displayed increased
sensitivity to nicotine in motor tasks compared to wildtype. Neurons
from Lynx1-null mice showed heightened sensitivity and increased
intracellular calcium levels in response to nicotine. Loss of Lynx1
decreased receptor desensitization and enhanced synaptic efficacy.
Mutant neurons were also more sensitive to excitotoxic insult, and Lynx1
mutant mice exhibited age-dependent degeneration that was exacerbated by
nicotine and rescued by null mutations in nAChR subunits. These data
supported the hypotheses that Lynx1 normally decreases activity of
nAChRs and that deletion of Lynx1 shifts the balance in favor of
increased neuronal activity and synaptic plasticity. But the short-term
benefits of the loss of Lynx1 were counterbalanced by an increased
vulnerability of Lynx1 mutant neurons to glutamate toxicity and by loss
of nicotine's neuroprotective effect on these cells. Miwa et al. (2006)
concluded that Lynx1 modulates nAChR function to maintain low
sensitivity and plays a critical role in maintaining a balance between
the beneficial effects of short-term nAChR activation and the
degenerative effects of chronic receptor activation.

REFERENCE 1. Dorus, S.; Vallender, E. J.; Evans, P. D.; Anderson, J. R.; Gilbert,
S. L.; Mahowald, M.; Wyckoff, G. J.; Malcom, C. M.; Lahn, B. T.:
Accelerated evolution of nervous system genes in the origin of Homo
sapiens. Cell 119: 1027-1040, 2004.

2. Miwa, J. M.; Ibanez-Tallon, I.; Crabtree, G. W.; Sanchez, R.; Sali,
A.; Role, L. W.; Heintz, N.: Lynx1, an endogenous toxin-like modulator
of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the mammalian CNS. Neuron 23:
105-114, 1999.

3. Miwa, J. M.; Stevens, T. R.; King, S. L.; Caldarone, B. J.; Ibanez-Tallon,
I.; Xiao, C.; Fitzsimonds, R. M.; Pavlides, C.; Lester, H. A.; Picciotto,
M. R.; Heintz, N.: The prototoxin lynx1 acts on nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors to balance neuronal activity and survival in vivo. Neuron 51:
587-600, 2006.

4. Morishita, H.; Miwa, J. M.; Heintz, N.; Hensch, T. K.: Lynx1,
a cholinergic brake, limits plasticity in adult visual cortex. Science 330:
1238-1240, 2010.

5. Tsuji, H.; Okamoto, K.; Matsuzaka, Y.; Iizuka, H.; Tamiya, G.;
Inoko, H.: SLURP-2, a novel member of the human Ly-6 superfamily
that is upregulated in psoriasis vulgaris. Genomics 26-33, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/31/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/14/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/10/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/13/2001

EDITED alopez: 02/04/2011
terry: 1/31/2011
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 9/27/2006
mgross: 2/14/2005
mgross: 1/10/2005
mgross: 7/13/2001

603069	TITLE *603069 DUAL-SPECIFICITY PHOSPHATASE 5; DUSP5
;;VH1-LIKE PHOSPHATASE 3; HVH3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dual-specificity phosphatases (DUSPs) constitute a large heterogeneous
subgroup of the type I cysteine-based protein-tyrosine phosphatase
superfamily. DUSPs are characterized by their ability to dephosphorylate
both tyrosine and serine/threonine residues. DUSP1 belongs to a class of
DUSPs, designated MKPs, that dephosphorylate MAPK (mitogen-activated
protein kinase) proteins ERK (see 601795), JNK (see 601158), and p38
(see 600289) with specificity distinct from that of individual MKP
proteins. MKPs contain a highly conserved C-terminal catalytic domain
and an N-terminal Cdc25 (see 116947)-like (CH2) domain. MAPK activation
cascades mediate various physiologic processes, including cellular
proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and stress responses (summary
by Patterson et al., 2009).

CLONING

To identify human dual-specificity PTPases, Martell et al. (1994)
screened a genomic library with a partial DUSP1 (600714) cDNA. They
isolated several novel PTPase genes, including DUSP5, which they
designated HVH3 for human VH1-like PTPase-3.

Kwak and Dixon (1995) cloned human placenta DUSP5 cDNAs and reported
that the predicted protein has 384 amino acids. Using
immunofluorescence, they determined that epitope-tagged DUSP5 is
localized primarily in the nucleus of mammalian cells.

Ishibashi et al. (1994) isolated DUSP5 cDNAs from a human mammary
epithelial cell cDNA library and found that the predicted protein has
397 amino acids. Northern blot analysis revealed that DUSP5 is expressed
as a 2.5-kb mRNA in a variety of tissues, with the highest levels in
pancreas and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Ishibashi et al. (1994) found that, in vitro, recombinant protein
containing the catalytic domain of DUSP5 displayed phosphatase activity
toward several substrates. The highest relative activity was toward ERK1
(601795), suggesting that it may be a target for DUSP5 activity in vivo.
Ishibashi et al. (1994) showed that DUSP5 expression was induced by
serum stimulation of fibroblasts and by heat shock, with similar
kinetics to those observed with DUSP1. As has been proposed for other
dual-specificity PTPases like DUSP1 and DUSP2 (603068), Ishibashi et al.
(1994) suggested that the induction of DUSP5 may lead to the
deactivation of mitogen- or stress-activated protein kinases, thereby
restoring these signaling pathways to their mitogen- or stress-sensitive
state.

Using morpholino-mediated gene knockdown in zebrafish, Pramanik et al.
(2009) showed that Dusp5 and Snrk1 (SNRK; 612760) targeted a common
signaling pathway and coordinately functioned in controlling angioblast
numbers at the lateral plate mesoderm. Dusp5 was expressed in
angioblasts in embryonic zebrafish and was essential for vascular
development. Loss of Dusp5 resulted in endothelial cell apoptosis.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Martell et al. (1994) mapped the
DUSP5 gene to 10q25.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations

Pramanik et al. (2009) identified an apparently somatic ser147-to-pro
(S147P) mutation in the DUSP5 gene in 1 of 3 infantile hemangioma
(602089) samples and in 12 of 17 lymphatic, arteriovenous, and venous
malformation samples. The mutation was not found in normal human
placenta, control human umbilical vein endothelial cells, or tonsillar
tissue from unrelated individuals. In addition, a somatic arg248-to-gln
(R248Q) mutation in the SNRK gene was found in 8 of the vascular anomaly
samples, including venous and lymphatic malformations, but not in
infantile hemangiomas. Six of the 8 samples with the SNRK mutation also
carried the DUSP5 S147P mutation. Since studies in zebrafish implicated
a role for the Dusp5/Snrk signaling pathway in vascular development, the
findings suggested that variation in these genes may provide
susceptibility to the development of vascular anomalies in humans.

REFERENCE 1. Ishibashi, T.; Bottaro, D. P.; Michieli, P.; Kelley, C. A.; Aaronson,
S. A.: A novel dual specificity phosphatase induced by serum stimulation
and heat shock. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 29897-29902, 1994.

2. Kwak, S. P.; Dixon, J. E.: Multiple dual specificity protein tyrosine
phosphatases are expressed and regulated differentially in liver cell
lines. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 1156-1160, 1995.

3. Martell, K. J.; Kwak, S.; Hakes, D. J.; Dixon, J. E.; Trent, J.
M.: Chromosomal localization of four human VH1-like protein-tyrosine
phosphatases. Genomics 22: 462-464, 1994.

4. Patterson, K. I.; Brummer, T.; O'Brien, P. M.; Daly, R. J.: Dual-specificity
phosphatases: critical regulators with diverse cellular targets. Biochem.
J. 418: 475-489, 2009.

5. Pramanik, K.; Chun, C. Z.; Garnaas, M. K.; Samant, G. V.; Li, K.;
Horswill, M. A.; North, P. E.; Ramchandran, R.: Dusp-5 and Snrk-1
coordinately function during vascular development and disease. Blood 113:
1184-1191, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/17/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2010
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/4/2009

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 9/28/1998

EDITED mgross: 03/17/2010
mgross: 3/17/2010
ckniffin: 3/17/2010
mgross: 3/16/2010
terry: 3/12/2010
carol: 12/4/2009
psherman: 9/29/1998

136131	TITLE *136131 FLAVIN-CONTAINING MONOOXYGENASE 4; FMO4
;;FLAVIN-CONTAINING MONOOXYGENASE 2, FORMERLY; FMO2, FORMERLY;;
FMO, ADULT LIVER FORM;;
TRIMETHYLAMINE OXYGENASE;;
TMA OXYGENASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The flavin-containing monooxygenases (EC 1.14.13.8) are microsomal
enzymes that catalyze the NADPH-dependent oxygenation of a large number
of structurally diverse foreign compounds including many therapeutic
drugs and pesticides. FMO3 is the largest of the FMO proteins (Phillips
et al., 1995).

CLONING

Dolphin et al. (1992) cloned the human FMO4 gene, which they called
FMO2, by screening an adult human liver library with the porcine coding
sequence. The cDNA encodes a deduced 558-amino acid protein with a
molecular mass of 63,338 Da. FMO2 shows 51 to 53% primary sequence
identity with FMO1 (136130). The corresponding mRNA was present in low
abundance in adult human liver. Southern blot hybridization with single
exon probes demonstrated that human FMO4 and FMO1 are, in each case, the
product of a single gene.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis, Dolphin et al. (1992) mapped the FMO4 gene to
chromosome 1.

NOMENCLATURE

Lawton et al. (1994) proposed a reclassification of mammalian FMOs.
Under this system, FMO2 described by Dolphin et al. (1992) is now
designated FMO4.

REFERENCE 1. Dolphin, C. T.; Shephard, E. A.; Povey, S.; Smith, R. L.; Phillips,
I. R.: Cloning, primary sequence and chromosomal localization of
human FMO2, a new member of the flavin-containing mono-oxygenase family. Biochem.
J. 287: 261-267, 1992.

2. Lawton, M. P.; Cashman, J. R.; Cresteil, T.; Dolphin, C. T.; Elfarra,
A. A.; Hines, R. N.; Hodgson, E.; Kimura, T.; Ozols, J.; Phillips,
I. R.; Philpot, R. M.; Poulsen, L. L.; Rettie, A. E.; Shephard, E.
A.; Williams, D. E.; Ziegler, D. M.: A nomenclature for the mammalian
flavin-containing monooxygenase gene family based on amino acid sequence
identities. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 308: 254-257, 1994.

3. Phillips, I. R.; Dolphin, C. T.; Clair, P.; Hadley, M. R.; Hutt,
A. J.; McCombie, R. R.; Smith, R. L.; Shephard, E. A.: The molecular
biology of the flavin-containing monooxygenases of man. Chem. Biol.
Interact. 96: 17-32, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 6/4/2008
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - edited: 10/25/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/8/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1991

EDITED carol: 06/05/2008
carol: 6/4/2008
joanna: 6/4/2008
mgross: 6/30/1999
mark: 10/25/1997
mark: 5/23/1997
mark: 5/20/1997
mark: 3/1/1996
terry: 2/21/1996
mimadm: 9/24/1994
pfoster: 2/16/1994
carol: 11/16/1993
carol: 11/4/1993
carol: 10/28/1993
carol: 10/26/1993

600250	TITLE *600250 CHEMOKINE, C MOTIF, LIGAND 1; XCL1
;;SMALL INDUCIBLE CYTOKINE SUBFAMILY C, MEMBER 1; SCYC1;;
SINGLE CYSTEINE MOTIF 1; SCM1;;
SINGLE CYSTEINE MOTIF 1A; SCM1A;;
LYMPHOTACTIN; LTN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a CD8+ T-lymphocyte cDNA library with a mouse lymphotactin
probe, Kennedy et al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding the lymphotactin
XCL1, later designated SCYC1. The sequence of the deduced 114-amino acid
protein is most homologous to the CC chemokines CCL8 (602283) and CCL3
(182283), but differs in that it lacks the first and third cysteines
characteristic of CC and CXC chemokines. By Northern blot analysis,
Kennedy et al. (1995) and Yoshida et al. (1995) revealed expression of
an 0.8-kb SCYC1 transcript in activated thymic and peripheral blood CD8+
but not CD4+ T cells. In normal tissues, SCYC1 is expressed at high
levels in spleen, thymus, small intestine, and peripheral blood
leukocytes, as well as at low levels in lung, prostate, and ovary; it
shows little or no expression in colon and testis. Lymphotactin is
chemotactic for CD4+ and CD8+ T cells but not for monocytes, and induces
a rise in intracellular calcium in peripheral blood lymphocytes. Yoshida
et al. (1995) and Muller et al. (1995) had identified the same sequence,
termed SCM1 and ATAC, respectively, homologous to mouse lymphotactin,
but were unable to demonstrate chemotaxis or calcium mobilization.

Kennedy et al. (1995) also identified a variant of SCYC1 which differed
from SCYC1 by only 2 amino acid residues. This variant was later found
to be a separate gene; see SCYC2 604828.

GENE FAMILY

Chemokines are a group of small (approximately 8 to 14 kD), mostly
basic, structurally related molecules that regulate cell trafficking of
various types of leukocytes through interactions with a subset of
7-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors (Kennedy et al., 1995).
Chemokines also play fundamental roles in the development, homeostasis,
and function of the immune system, and they have effects on cells of the
central nervous system as well as on endothelial cells involved in
angiogenesis or angiostasis. Chemokines are divided into 2 major
subfamilies, CXC and CC, based on the arrangement of the first 2 of the
4 conserved cysteine residues; the 2 cysteines are separated by a single
amino acid in CXC chemokines and are adjacent in CC chemokines.

GENE FUNCTION

Yoshida et al. (1998) observed that XCL1 induces the migration of cells
expressing XCR1 (600552).

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Yoshida et al. (1995) and Kennedy et
al. (1995) mapped the SCYC1 gene to chromosome 1. Kennedy et al. (1995)
noted that the region to which mouse lymphotactin was located on
chromosome 1 by Kelner et al. (1994) is syntenic to human 1q23-q25.
Yoshida et al. (1996) and Muller et al. (1995) mapped the gene to
chromosome 1q23 by FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Kelner, G. S.; Kennedy, J.; Bacon, K. B.; Kleyensteuber, S.; Largaespada,
D. A.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Bazan, J. F.; Moore, K. W.;
Schall, T. J.; Zlotnik, A.: Lymphotactin: a cytokine that represents
a new class of chemokine. Science 266: 1395-1399, 1994.

2. Kennedy, J.; Kelner, G. S.; Kleyensteuber, S.; Schall, T. J.; Weiss,
M.  C.; Yssel, H.; Schneider, P. V.; Cocks, B. G.; Bacon, K. B.; Zlotnik,
A.: Molecular cloning and functional characterization of human lymphotactin. J.
Immun. 155: 203-209, 1995.

3. Muller, S.; Dorner, B.; Korthauer, U.; Mages, H. W.; D'Apuzzo,
M.; Senger, G.; Kroczek, R. A.: Cloning of ATAC, an activation-induced,
chemokine-related molecule exclusively expressed in CD8+ T lymphocytes. Europ.
J. Immun. 25: 1744-1748, 1995.

4. Yoshida, T.; Imai, T.; Kakizaki, M.; Nishimura, M.; Takagi, S.;
Yoshie, O.: Identification of single C motif-1/lymphotactin receptor
XCR1. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 16551-16554, 1998.

5. Yoshida, T.; Imai, T.; Kakizaki, M.; Nishimura, M.; Yoshie, O.
: Molecular cloning of a novel C or gamma type chemokine, SCM-1. FEBS
Lett. 360: 155-159, 1995.

6. Yoshida, T.; Imai, T.; Takagi, S.; Nishimura, M.; Ishikawa, I.;
Yaoi, T.; Yoshie, O.: Structure and expression of two highly related
genes encoding SCM-1/human lymphotactin. FEBS Lett. 395: 82-88,
1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/12/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 8/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/20/1994

EDITED alopez: 04/08/2009
mgross: 7/20/2005
mgross: 9/26/2002
carol: 4/12/2000
carol: 4/6/2000
alopez: 8/13/1999
carol: 12/21/1994
carol: 12/20/1994

193001	TITLE *193001 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 18 (VESICULAR MONOAMINE), MEMBER 2; SLC18A2
;;VESICULAR AMINE TRANSPORTER 2; VAT2;;
VESICULAR MONOAMINE TRANSPORTER 2; VMAT2;;
SYNAPTIC VESICLE MONOAMINE TRANSPORTER, BRAIN; SVMT;;
SYNAPTIC VESICLE AMINE TRANSPORTER, BRAIN; SVAT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The vesicular monoamine transporter acts to accumulate cytosolic
monoamines into synaptic vesicles, using the proton gradient maintained
across the synaptic vesicular membrane. Its proper function is essential
to the correct activity of the monoaminergic systems that have been
implicated in several human neuropsychiatric disorders. The transporter
is a site of action of important drugs, including reserpine and
tetrabenazine (summary by Peter et al., 1993).

See also SLC18A1 (193002).

CLONING

Liu et al. (1992) and Erickson et al. (1992) investigated cDNAs encoding
the synaptic vesicular monoamine transporter in rat brain. Using
sequences from rat brain SVMT, Surratt et al. (1993) identified the
human homolog. Human SVMT shares 92% amino acid identity with the rat
sequence but displays one less consensus site for asparagine N-linked
glycosylation and one more consensus site for phosphorylation by protein
kinase C.

GENE FUNCTION

Tritsch et al. (2012) demonstrated that activation of dopamine neurons
in striatal slices rapidly inhibits action potential firing in both
direct- and indirect-pathway striatal projection neurons through
vesicular release of the inhibitory transmitter GABA. GABA is released
directly from dopaminergic axons but in a manner that is independent of
the vesicular GABA transporter VGAT (SLC32A1). Instead, GABA release
requires activity of the vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT2, which is
the vesicular transporter for dopamine. Furthermore, VMAT2 expression in
GABAergic neurons lacking VGAT is sufficient to sustain GABA release.
Tritsch et al. (2012) concluded that their findings expand the
repertoire of synaptic mechanisms used by dopamine neurons to influence
basal ganglia circuits, show a new substrate whose transport is
dependent on VMAT2, and demonstrate that GABA can function as a bona
fide cotransmitter in monoaminergic neurons.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of human/rodent hybrid cell lines and
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Surratt et al. (1993) mapped the
human SLC18A2 gene to chromosome 10q25. They also demonstrated a TaqI
polymorphism that may prove useful in assessing the gene's involvement
in neuropsychiatric disorders involving monoaminergic brain systems.
Peter et al. (1993) likewise assigned the SLC18A2 gene to chromosome
10q25 using a panel of mouse/human hybrids and in situ hybridization.

Roghani et al. (1996) showed that the mouse Slc18a2 gene maps to mouse
chromosome 19 by linkage analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Lin et al. (2005) sequenced the 17.4-kb SLC18A2 promoter region in 23
Caucasian individuals and identified 47 polymorphisms that conferred 13
haplotypes. In vitro analysis showed a 20% difference in promoter
activity between 2 frequent haplotypes and identified some of the SNPs
that influenced promoter activity. In 144 alcoholic patients and 189
controls, they found that haplotypes with -14234G (dbSNP rs363371) and
-2504C of the SLC18A2 promoter region represented a protective factor
against alcoholism (p = 0.0038).

ANIMAL MODEL

For a discussion of a Drosophila vesicular monoamine transporter model,
see SLC18A1 (193002).

REFERENCE 1. Erickson, J. D.; Eiden, L. E.; Hoffman, B. J.: Expression cloning
of a reserpine-sensitive vesicular monoamine transporter. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 89: 10993-10997, 1992.

2. Lin, Z.; Walther, D.; Yu, X.-Y.; Li, S.; Drgon, T.; Uhl, G. R.
: SLC18A2 promoter haplotypes and identification of a novel protective
factor against alcoholism. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1393-1404, 2005.

3. Liu, Y.; Peter, D.; Roghani, A.; Schuldiner, S.; Prive, G. G.;
Eisenberg, D.; Brecha, N.; Edwards, R. H.: A cDNA that suppresses
MPP+ toxicity encodes a vesicular amine transporter. Cell 70: 539-551,
1992.

4. Peter, D.; Finn, J. P.; Klisak, I.; Liu, Y.; Kojis, T.; Heinzmann,
C.; Roghani, A.; Sparkes, R. S.; Edwards, R. H.: Chromosomal localization
of the human vesicular amine transporter genes. Genomics 18: 720-723,
1993.

5. Roghani, A.; Welch, C.; Xia, Y.-R.; Liu, Y.; Peter, D.; Finn, J.
P.; Edwards, R. H.; Lusis, A. J.: Assignment of the mouse vesicular
monoamine transporter genes, Slc18a1 and Slc18a2, to chromosomes 8
and 19 by linkage analysis. Mammalian Genome 7: 393-394, 1996.

6. Surratt, C. K.; Persico, A. M.; Yang, X.-D.; Edgar, S. R.; Bird,
G. S.; Hawkins, A. L.; Griffin, C. A.; Li, X.; Jabs, E. W.; Uhl, G.
R.: A human synaptic vesicle monoamine transporter cDNA predicts
posttranslational modifications, reveals chromosome 10 gene localization
and identifies TaqI RFLPs. FEBS Lett. 318: 325-330, 1993.

7. Tritsch, N. X.; Ding, J. B.; Sabatini, B. L.: Dopaminergic neurons
inhibit striatal output through non-canonical release of GABA. Nature 490:
262-266, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/30/2008
John Logan Black, III - updated: 6/2/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/24/1993

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2012
terry: 10/25/2012
carol: 1/20/2011
wwang: 6/5/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
wwang: 6/7/2006
terry: 6/2/2006
cwells: 11/12/2003
jenny: 3/31/1997
terry: 6/14/1996
terry: 6/11/1996
carol: 2/1/1994
carol: 9/24/1993

602432	TITLE *602432 OPTINEURIN; OPTN
;;14.7K-INTERACTING PROTEIN; FIP2;;
HYPL;;
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR IIIA-INTERACTING PROTEIN;;
TFIIIA-INTP;;
NEMO-RELATED PROTEIN; NRP;;
GLC1E GENE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1998) used the adenovirus E3-14.7K protein to screen a HeLa
cell cDNA library to search for interacting proteins in the yeast
2-hybrid system. They identified a protein, which they named FIP2
(14.7K-interacting protein) with multiple leucine zipper domains. Li et
al. (1998) identified 3 major mRNA forms of FIP2 in multiple human
tissues and found that expression of the transcripts was induced by
TNF-alpha (191160) treatment in a time-dependent manner in 2 different
cell lines. They concluded that FIP2 is one of the cellular targets for
adenovirus E3-14.7K and that its mechanism of affecting cell death
involves the TNF receptor (191190), RIP (603453), or a downstream
molecule affected by either of these 2 molecules.

Moreland et al. (2000) cloned the same gene, which they called
transcription factor IIIA-interacting protein. The rat TF3A-intP has 85%
identity with the human sequence, including 100% identity over a
leucine-rich, 36-amino acid stretch. The full-length 617-amino acid
protein has a molecular mass of 70.6 kD, numerous leucine zippers and
other leucine-rich regions, and contains a potential cys2-his-cys zinc
finger at residues 553-582.

Schwamborn et al. (2000) also cloned the optineurin gene, which they
called NRP (NEMO-related protein), by searching databases for cDNAs with
strong homology to NEMO (300248). They determined that NRP is a 67-kD
protein with 53% amino acid identity to NEMO and that it is present in a
novel high molecular weight complex that contains none of the known
members of the IKK complex. They demonstrated that de novo expression of
NRP can be induced by interferon and TNF-alpha and that these 2 stimuli
have a synergistic effect on NRP expression. They further demonstrated
that NRP is associated with the Golgi apparatus.

Li et al. (1998) found gene expression of FIP2 in heart, brain,
placenta, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas. By RT-PCR,
Rezaie et al. (2002) found further expression in human trabecular
meshwork, nonpigmented ciliary epithelium, retina, brain, adrenal
cortex, liver, fetus, lymphocyte, and fibroblast. Northern blot analysis
revealed a major 2.0-kb transcript in human trabecular meshwork and
nonpigmented ciliary epithelium and a minor 3.6-kb message that was 3 to
4 times less abundant. Optineurin expression was also detected in
aqueous humor samples of human, macaque, cow, pig, goat, sheep, cat, and
rabbit, suggesting that it is a secreted protein. Rezaie et al. (2002)
showed by immunocytochemistry that optineurin is localized to the Golgi
apparatus.

Wild et al. (2011) reported that the 577-amino acid human OPTN protein
contains an N-terminal coiled-coil domain, followed by an LC3 (MAP1LC3A;
601242)-interacting motif (LIR), 2 more coiled-coil domains, a
ubiquitin-binding motif (UBAN), and a C-terminal zinc finger domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Optineurin has been shown to interact with huntingtin (HTT; 613004)
(Faber et al., 1998), transcription factor IIIA (Moreland et al., 2000),
and RAB8 (165040) (Hattula and Peranen, 2000).

Rezaie et al. (2002) found that the optineurin gene is mutated in
adult-onset primary open angle glaucoma (POAG; 137760). Linkage analysis
had shown that a locus for POAG resided on chromosome 10p15-p14
(Sarfarazi et al., 1998). Optineurin was a logical candidate gene on the
basis of its physical location on chromosome 10 and its expression in
retina.

Vittitow and Borras (2002) studied the effect of glaucomatous insults on
the expression of OPTN in human eyes maintained in organ culture.
Sustained elevated intraocular pressure, TNF-alpha exposure, and
prolonged dexamethasone treatment all significantly upregulated OPTN
expression. Vittitow and Borras (2002) concluded that these results
support the protective role of OPTN in the trabecular meshwork.

Chalasani et al. (2007) explored functional features of optineurin and
its mutants. The E50K mutation (602432.0001) acquired the ability to
induce cell death selectively in retinal ganglion cells. This cell death
was mediated by oxidative stress.

Park et al. (2007) studied the relationship between 2 glaucoma-related
genes, OPTN and MYOC (601652). MYOC overexpression had no effect on OPTN
expression, but OPTN overexpression upregulated endogenous MYOC in human
trabecular meshwork cells. This induction was also observed in other
ocular and nonocular cell types, including rat PC12 pheochromocytoma
cells. Endogenous levels of both Optn and Myoc were increased in PC12
cells following NGF (see 162030)-induced neuronal differentiation.
Overexpressed OPTN, which localized to the cytoplasm, prolonged the
turnover rate of MYOC mRNA, but it had little effect on MYOC promoter
activity. Park et al. (2007) concluded that OPTN has a role in
stabilizing MYOC mRNA.

Li et al. (2008) showed that TNF-alpha, which is found in cystic fluid
of humans with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD; see
173900), disrupted the localization of polycystin-2 (PKD2; 173910) to
the plasma membrane and primary cilia through the TNF-alpha-induced
scaffold protein FIP2. Treatment of mouse embryonic kidney organ
cultures with TNF-alpha resulted in cyst formation, and this effect was
exacerbated in Pkd2 +/- kidneys. TNF-alpha also stimulated cyst
formation in vivo in Pkd2 +/- mice, and treatment of Pkd2 +/- mice with
a TNF-alpha inhibitor prevented cyst formation.

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, Morton et al. (2008) identified TANK
(603893)-binding kinase-1 (TBK1; 604834) as a binding partner for
optineurin; the interaction was confirmed by
overexpression/immunoprecipitation experiments in HEK293 cells and by
coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous OPTN and TBK1 from cell extracts. A
TBK1-binding site was detected between residues 1 and 127 of optineurin;
residues 78 through 121 were found to display striking homology to the
TBK1-binding domain of TANK. The OPTN-binding domain was localized to
residues 601 to 729 of TBK1; residues 1 to 688 of TBK1, which do not
bind to TANK, did not interact with OPTN. The E50K OPTN mutant
(602432.0001), known to cause open angle glaucoma (GLC1E; 137760),
displayed markedly enhanced binding to TBK1, suggesting that this
interaction may contribute to familial glaucoma caused by this mutation.

Wild et al. (2011) reported that phosphorylation of human OPTN promoted
selective autophagy of ubiquitin-coated cytosolic Salmonella enterica.
Phosphorylation on ser177 by TBK1 (604834) enhanced LC3 binding affinity
and autophagic clearance of cytosolic Salmonella. On the other hand,
ubiquitin- or LC3-binding mutants of OPTN or silencing of OPTN or TBK1
impaired Salmonella autophagy, leading to increased intracellular
bacterial proliferation. Wild et al. (2011) proposed that
phosphorylation of autophagy receptors, such as OPTN, may be a general
mechanism for regulation of cargo-selective autophagy.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rezaie et al. (2002) reported that the optineurin gene contains 3
noncoding exons in the 5-prime untranslated region and 13 exons that
code for a 577-amino acid protein. Alternative splicing at the 5-prime
UTR generates at least 3 different isoforms, but all have the same
reading frame. The mouse Optn gene codes for a 584-amino acid protein
(67 kD) that has 78% identity with human optineurin.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the OPTN
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP stSG3281).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Primary Open Angle Glaucoma

In patients with adult-onset primary open angle glaucoma (GLC1E;
137760), Rezaie et al. (2002) identified heterozygous mutations in the
OPTN gene (602432.0001-602432.0004). One of the mutations (602432.0004)
was also found to be associated with normal tension glaucoma
(602432.0004).

Because normal tension glaucoma (NTG) is the most frequent form of
glaucoma in Japan, Tang et al. (2003) sought mutations in the OPTN gene
in 148 unrelated Japanese patients with NTG as well as 165 patients with
POAG and 196 unrelated controls without glaucoma. No disease-causing
mutations were identified in these individuals.

Funayama et al. (2004) demonstrated that the OPTN gene was associated
with POAG rather than NTG in Japanese. Their statistical analyses showed
a possible interaction between polymorphisms in the OPTN and the tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF; 191160) genes that would increase the risk
for the development and probably the progression of glaucoma in Japanese
patients with POAG.

- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Maruyama et al. (2010) identified 2 different homozygous null mutations
in the OPTN gene, one a deletion of exon 5 (602432.0005) and the other a
nonsense mutation (602432.0006) in 4 Japanese individuals with autosomal
recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS12; 613435). These mutations
were not identified in over 6,800 individuals with glaucoma. In
addition, Maruyama et al. (2010) identified a missense mutation, E478G
(602432.0007), segregating as an apparently autosomal dominant mutation
with incomplete penetrance in 2 families. This mutation was not seen in
a total of 5,000 Japanese chromosomes. In cell transfection assays,
Maruyama et al. (2010) observed that nonsense and missense mutations of
OPTN abolished the inhibition of activation of nuclear factor kappa-B
(NFKB; see 164011) and that E478G mutant OPTN had a cytoplasmic
distribution different from that of wildtype OPTN or OPTN carrying a
mutation causing in POAG. A case with the E478G mutation showed
OPTN-immunoreactive cytoplasmic inclusions. Furthermore, TDP43 (605078)-
or SOD1 (147450)-positive inclusions in sporadic and familial cases of
ALS were also noticeably immunolabeled by anti-OPTN antibodies.

Deng et al. (2011) observed OPTN-immunoreactive skeinlike inclusions in
anterior horn neurons and neurites in spinal cord sections from all 32
patients with sporadic ALS and in all 8 patients with familial ALS who
did not have mutations in the SOD1 gene. OPTN immunoreactivity was
absent in all 6 cases of familial ALS due to SOD1 mutations and in
tissue from 2 mouse models of ALS due to Sod1 mutations. The findings
suggested that OPTN may play a role in the pathogenesis of non-SOD1 ALS,
and that SOD1-linked ALS has a distinct disease pathogenesis.

- Paget Disease of Bone

For discussion of a possible association of variation in the OPTN gene
with susceptibility to Paget disease of bone, see 602080.

ANIMAL MODEL

Chi et al. (2010) described the phenotypic characteristics of transgenic
mice overexpressing wildtype or mutated optineurin. Mutations E50K
(602432.0001), H486R, and Optn with a deletion of the first or second
leucine zipper were used for overexpression. After 16 months, histologic
abnormalities were exclusively observed in the retina of E50K mutant
mice, with loss of retinal ganglion cells and connecting synapses in the
peripheral retina, thinning of the nerve fiber layer at the optic nerve
head at normal intraocular pressure, and massive apoptosis and
degeneration of the entire retina. Introduction of the E50K mutation
disrupted the interaction between Optn and Rab8 GTPase (RAB8A; 165040),
a protein involved in the regulation of vesicle transport from Golgi to
plasma membrane. Wiltype Optn and an active GTP-bound form of Rab8
colocalized to the Golgi. Chi et al. (2010) concluded that alteration of
the Optn sequence can initiate significant retinal degeneration in mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLAUCOMA 1, OPEN ANGLE, E
OPTN, GLU50LYS

In affected members of a family segregating adult-onset open angle
glaucoma (137760), Rezaie et al. (2002) identified a 458G-A transition
in the OPTN gene, resulting in a glu50-to-lys substitution. This
mutation was observed in 7 of 52 families, accounting for 13.5% of the
disease-causing alterations, and was not identified in any of 540 normal
chromosomes tested.

Rezaie et al. (2002) noted that 31 (81.6%) of the 38 glaucoma patients
carrying the recurrent E50K mutation had normal intraocular pressure
(IOP), ranging from 11 to 21 mm Hg, whereas the remaining 7 patients had
elevated IOP (23 to 26 mm Hg).

.0002
GLAUCOMA 1, OPEN ANGLE, E
OPTN, 2-BP INS, 691AG

In 1 of 46 families segregating adult-onset primary open angle glaucoma
(137760), Rezaie et al. (2002) identified a frameshift mutation in exon
6 of the OPTN gene, an insertion of AG between nucleotides 691 and 692.
This mutation was observed in 2.2% of the families studied and was not
seen in any of 200 normal chromosomes tested.

.0003
GLAUCOMA 1, OPEN ANGLE, E
OPTN, ARG545GLN

In 1 of 46 families segregating adult-onset primary open angle glaucoma
(137760), Rezaie et al. (2002) identified a 1944G-A transition in exon
16 of the OPTN gene, resulting in an arg545-to-glu substitution. This
mutation was not identified in any of 100 normal chromosomes tested.

.0004
GLAUCOMA, NORMAL TENSION, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
GLAUCOMA 1, OPEN ANGLE, E, INCLUDED
OPTN, MET98LYS

Within a group of 169 subjects with adult-onset open angle glaucoma
(137760), Rezaie et al. (2002) identified a 603T-A transversion in exon
5 of the OPTN gene, resulting in a met98-to-lys substitution in 8 of 45
familial (17.8%) and 15 of 124 (12.1%) sporadic individuals with
glaucoma. Most of these individuals had normal intraocular pressure
(606657) and were screened for sequence changes in exon 5 only. This
mutation was also identified in 9 of 422 normal chromosomes, giving the
overall identification in an at-risk population of 13.6% versus 2.1% in
the general population, and making this a risk-associated alteration.

.0005
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 12
OPTN, DEL EXON 5

In 2 sibs with autosomal recessive ALS (ALS12; 613435) from a
consanguineous Japanese family, Maruyama et al. (2010) identified
homozygosity for deletion of exon 5 of the OPTN gene. The deletion
resulted from an Alu-mediated recombination.

.0006
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 12
OPTN, GLN398TER

In a Japanese woman with ALS (ALS12; 613435) who was the child of a
consanguineous union, Maruyama et al. (2010) identified a homozygosity
for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1502 of the OPTN gene, resulting
in a glutamine-to-nonsense substitution at codon 398 (Q398X). In a
separate analysis, Maruyama et al. (2010) found this mutation in
homozygosity in an apparently sporadic case. The probands of the 2
families were not related according to their family history but were
found to share haplotypes for a 0.9-Mb region around the OPTN gene,
suggesting that inheritance of the mutation from a common ancestor was
likely. This mutation was not detected in 781 healthy Japanese
volunteers as well as in over 6,800 individuals enrolled in glaucoma
studies, where the entire coding region of the gene was sequenced.

.0007
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 12
OPTN, GLU478GLY

In 4 individuals with ALS (ALS12; 613435) from 2 families, Maruyama et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the OPTN gene,
an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 1743 in exon 14 resulting in a
glutamic acid-to-glycine substitution at codon 478 (E478G). Two of the
subjects were sisters, and the pedigree suggested that the mutation
resulted in an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. In
the second family, the sibs were brothers. Although the 2 families were
not known to be related, all affected individuals shared their haplotype
for 2.3 megabases on chromosome 10 around the OPTN gene.

REFERENCE 1. Chalasani, M. L.; Radha, V.; Gupta, V.; Agarwal, N.; Balasubramanian,
D.; Swarup, G.: A glaucoma-associated mutant of optineurin selectively
induces death of retinal ganglion cells which is inhibited by antioxidants. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1607-1614, 2007.

2. Chi, Z.-L.; Akahori, M.; Obazawa, M.; Minami, M.; Noda, T.; Nakaya,
N.; Tomarev, S.; Kawase, K.; Yamamoto, T.; Noda, S.; Sasaoka, M.;
Shimazaki, A.; Takada, Y.; Iwata, T.: Overexpression of optineurin
E50K disrupts Rab8 interaction and leads to a progressive retinal
degeneration in mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 2606-2615, 2010.

3. Deng, H.-X.; Bigio, E. H.; Zhai, H.; Fecto, F.; Ajroud, K.; Shi,
Y.; Yan, J.; Mishra, M.; Ajroud-Driss, S.; Heller, S.; Sufit, R.;
Siddique, N.; Mugnaini, E.; Siddique, T.: Differential involvement
of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without SOD1
mutations. Arch. Neurol. 68: 1057-1061, 2011.

4. Faber, P. W.; Barnes, G. T.; Srinidhi, J.; Chen, J.; Gusella, J.
F.; MacDonald, M. E.: Huntingtin interacts with a family of WW domain
proteins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1463-1474, 1998.

5. Funayama, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohtake, Y.; Tanino, T.; Kurasaka, D.;
Kimura, I.; Suzuki, K.; Ideta, H.; Nakamoto, K.; Yasuda, N.; Fujimaki,
T.; Murakami, A.; and 12 others: Variants in optineurin gene and
their association with tumor necrosis factor-alpha polymorphisms in
Japanese patients with glaucoma. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 45:
4359-4367, 2004.

6. Hattula, K.; Peranen, J.: FIP-2, a coiled-coil protein, links
huntingtin to Rab8 and modulates cellular morphogenesis. Curr. Biol. 10:
1603-1606, 2000.

7. Li, X.; Magenheimer, B. S.; Xia, S.; Johnson, T.; Wallace, D. P.;
Calvet, J. P.; Li, R.: A tumor necrosis factor-alpha-mediated pathway
promoting autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Nature Med. 14:
863-868, 2008.

8. Li, Y.; Kang, J.; Horwitz, M. S.: Interaction of an adenovirus
E3 14.7-kilodalton protein with a novel tumor necrosis factor alpha-inducible
cellular protein containing leucine zipper domains. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 18: 1601-1610, 1998.

9. Maruyama, H.; Morino, H.; Ito, H.; Izumi, Y.; Kato, H.; Watanabe,
Y.; Kinoshita, Y.; Kamada, M.; Nodera, H.; Suzuki, H.; Komure, O.;
Matsuura, S.; and 15 others: Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Nature 465: 223-226, 2010.

10. Moreland, R. J.; Dresser, M. E.; Rodgers, J. S.; Roe, B. A.; Conaway,
J. W.; Conaway, R. C.; Hanas, J. S.: Identification of a transcription
factor IIIA-interacting protein. Nucleic Acids Res. 28: 1986-1993,
2000.

11. Morton, S.; Hesson, L.; Peggie, M.; Cohen, P.: Enhanced binding
of TBK1 by an optineurin mutant that causes a familial form of primary
open angle glaucoma. FEBS Lett. 582: 997-1002, 2008.

12. Park, B.-C.; Tibudan, M.; Samaraweera, M.; Shen, X.; Yue, B. Y.
J. T.: Interaction between two glaucoma genes, optineurin and myocilin. Genes
Cells 12: 969-979, 2007.

13. Rezaie, T.; Child, A.; Hitchings, R.; Brice, G.; Miller, L.; Coca-Prados,
M.; Heon, E.; Krupin, T.; Ritch, R.; Kreutzer, D.; Crick, R. P.; Sarfarazi,
M.: Adult-onset primary open-angle glaucoma caused by mutations in
optineurin. Science 295: 1077-1079, 2002.

14. Sarfarazi, M.; Child, A.; Stoilova, D.; Brice, G.; Desai, T.;
Trifan, O. C.; Poinoosawmy, D.; Crick, R. P.: Localization of the
fourth locus (GLC1E) for adult-onset primary open-angle glaucoma to
the 10p15-p14 region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 641-652, 1998.

15. Schwamborn, K.; Weil, R.; Courtois, G.; Whiteside, S. T.; Israel,
A.: Phorbol esters and cytokines regulate the expression of the NEMO-related
protein, a molecule involved in a NF-kappa-B-independent pathway. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 22780-22789, 2000.

16. Tang, S.; Toda, Y.; Kashiwagi, K.; Mabuchi, F.; Iijima, H.; Tsukahara,
S.; Yamagata, Z.: The association between Japanese primary open-angle
glaucoma and normal tension glaucoma patients and the optineurin gene. Hum.
Genet. 113: 276-279, 2003.

17. Vittitow, J. L.; Borras, T.: Expression of optineurin, a glaucoma-linked
gene, is influenced by elevated intraocular pressure. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 298: 67-74, 2002.

18. Wild, P.; Farhan, H.; McEwan, D. G.; Wagner, S.; Rogov, V. V.;
Brady, N. R.; Richter, B.; Korac, J.; Waidmann, O.; Choudhary, C.;
Dotsch, V.; Bumann, D.; Dikic, I.: Phosphorylation of the autophagy
receptor optineurin restricts Salmonella growth. Science 333: 228-233,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 8/20/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/27/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/14/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/19/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/19/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/2/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/15/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/3/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 9/25/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 6/23/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2002
Ada Hamosh - reorganized: 2/13/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/10/1998

EDITED carol: 08/21/2013
tpirozzi: 8/21/2013
carol: 8/20/2013
tpirozzi: 8/20/2013
carol: 3/27/2013
terry: 3/27/2013
carol: 3/18/2013
ckniffin: 3/14/2013
mgross: 8/19/2011
terry: 8/19/2011
alopez: 7/13/2010
alopez: 6/8/2010
terry: 6/2/2010
wwang: 9/15/2009
mgross: 8/19/2008
terry: 8/15/2008
mgross: 6/12/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
carol: 9/25/2007
carol: 10/25/2006
alopez: 6/23/2005
tkritzer: 8/19/2003
terry: 8/13/2003
carol: 5/13/2003
mgross: 12/18/2002
terry: 12/16/2002
cwells: 9/11/2002
ckniffin: 3/12/2002
carol: 2/14/2002
carol: 2/13/2002
terry: 2/13/2002
carol: 2/12/2002
terry: 1/25/2002
dholmes: 3/30/1998
alopez: 3/10/1998

614215	TITLE *614215 ACTIVATING SIGNAL COINTEGRATOR 1 COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 1; ASCC1
;;ASC1 COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT;;
p50
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing peptides that copurified with the 650-kD ASC1 (TRIP4;
604501) complex from HeLa cells, followed by database analysis and PCR
of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Jung et al. (2002) cloned ASCC1, which they
designated p50. The deduced 357-amino acid protein contains a KH-type
RNA-binding motif near its N terminus. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of an approximately 2.1-kb transcript in all tissues
examined. P50 localized to both nuclei and cytoplasm of HeLa cells.
Database analysis revealed orthologs of p50 in mouse, fly, frog, and
nematode.

GENE FUNCTION

Jung et al. (2002) identified a 650-kD protein complex containing ASC1,
p50, p100 (ASCC2; 614216), and p200 (ASCC3; 614217). Immunodepletion of
p50 from HeLa cell nuclear extracts almost completely eliminated phorbol
ester-induced AP1 (see 165160) transactivation of a reporter gene. Yeast
2-hybrid analysis, coimmunoprecipitation of in vitro-translated
proteins, and protein pull-down experiments confirmed direct interaction
between p50 and p200. Domain analysis revealed that the KH motif of p50
was required its interaction with p200.

Gastrin (GAS; 137250) regulates the expression of a variety of genes
involved in the control of acid secretion. It also triggers tissue
response to damage, infection, and inflammation in cells expressing
gastrin receptor (CCKBR; 118445) and, indirectly, in nearby cells via a
paracrine mechanism. Almeida-Vega et al. (2009) found that gastrin
directly induced upregulation of the antiapoptotic regulator PAI2
(SERPINB2; 173390) in CCKBR-positive cells. CCKBR-positive cells also
released IL8 (146930) and prostaglandin E2 into the culture medium in
response to gastrin, which resulted in elevated PAI2 expression in
cocultured CCKBR-negative cells. IL8 signaling in CCKBR-negative cells
upregulated PAI2 via binding of the ASC1 complex to the PAI2 promoter.
Prostaglandin E2 independently upregulated PAI2 via RHOA
(165390)-dependent signaling that induced binding of MAZ (600999) to the
PAI2 promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that MAZ and the p50 subunit of
the ASC1 complex bound directly to sites in the PAI2 promoter. Mutation
of the putative MAZ site in the PAI2 promoter reduced responses to RHOA.
Knockdown of the p50 or p65 (TRIP4) subunits of the ASC1 complex via
small interfering RNA significantly reduced PAI2 upregulation in
response to gastrin.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the ASCC1 gene to chromosome 10q22.1 based on an
alignment of the ASCC1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF132952) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Orloff et al. (2011) identified a germline asn290-to-ser (N290S;
614215.0001) mutation in the ASCC1 gene in 2 (2.1%) of 116 patients of
European descent with Barrett esophagus and/or esophageal adenocarcinoma
(614266). The mutation was not found in 125 controls. This genomic
region was studied after being identified by genomewide linkage analysis
of 21 concordant and 11 discordant sib pairs with the disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARRETT ESOPHAGUS/ESOPHAGEAL ADENOCARCINOMA
ASCC1, ASN290SER

Orloff et al. (2011) identified a germline 869G-A transition in exon 8
of the ASCC1 gene, resulting in an asn290-to-ser (N290S) substitution,
in 2 (2.1%) of 116 patients of European descent with Barrett esophagus
and/or esophageal adenocarcinoma (614266). The mutation was not found in
125 controls. This genomic region was studied after being identified by
genomewide linkage analysis of 21 concordant and 11 discordant sib pairs
with the disorders.

REFERENCE 1. Almeida-Vega, S.; Catlow, K.; Kenny, S.; Dimaline, R.; Varro, A.
: Gastrin activates paracrine networks leading to induction of PAI-2
via MAZ and ASC-1. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 296:
G414-G423, 2009.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/6/2011.

3. Jung, D.-J.; Sung, H.-S.; Goo, Y.-W.; Lee, H. M.; Park, O. K.;
Jung, S.-Y.; Lim, J.; Kim, H.-J.; Lee, S.-K.; Kim, T. S.; Lee, J.
W.; Lee, Y. C.: Novel transcription coactivator complex containing
activating signal cointegrator 1. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 5203-5211,
2002.

4. Orloff, M.; Peterson, C.; He, X.; Ganapathi, S.; Heald, B.; Yang,
Y.; Bebek, G.; Romigh, T.; Song, J. H.; Wu, W.; David, S.; Cheng,
Y.; Meltzer, S. J.; Eng, C.: Germline mutations in MSR1, ASCC1, and
CTHRC1 in patients with Barrett esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. JAMA 306:
410-419, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/21/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/7/2011

EDITED terry: 10/13/2011
mgross: 10/7/2011
carol: 10/4/2011
ckniffin: 10/4/2011
carol: 10/4/2011
ckniffin: 10/4/2011
ckniffin: 9/21/2011
mgross: 9/7/2011

147138	TITLE *147138 MEMBRANE-SPANNING 4 DOMAINS, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 2; MS4A2
;;Fc FRAGMENT OF IgE, HIGH AFFINITY I, RECEPTOR FOR, BETA SUBUNIT; FCER1B;;
IMMUNOGLOBULIN E RECEPTOR, HIGH AFFINITY, BETA POLYPEPTIDE;;
Fc IgE RECEPTOR, BETA CHAIN;;
IMMUNOGLOBULIN E REGULATOR; IGHER; IGER
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The high affinity IgE receptor is responsible for initiating the
allergic response. Binding of allergen to receptor-bound IgE leads to
cell activation and the release of mediators (such as histamine)
responsible for the manifestations of allergy. The receptor is a
tetrameric complex composed of an alpha chain (147140), a beta chain,
and 2 disulfide-linked gamma chains (147139). It is found on the surface
of mast cells and basophils. The alpha and beta subunits have not been
detected in other hematopoietic cells, although the gamma chains are
found in macrophages, natural killer (NK) cells, and T cells where they
associate with the low affinity receptor for IgG or with the T-cell
antigen receptor. The molecular cloning of subunits permitted the
reconstitution of surface-expressed receptor complexes by transfection.
Cotransfection of all 3 chains--alpha, beta, and gamma--was required for
efficient surface expression of the rat or mouse receptor. By contrast,
surface expression of the human alpha-gamma complex was achieved by
cotransfecting alpha and gamma alone, suggesting that beta is not
necessary. To study the expression of the beta gene, Kuster et al.
(1992) isolated and characterized the gene and its cDNA. Analysis of the
surface expression of transfected receptors indicated that human
alpha-gamma and alpha-beta-gamma complexes are expressed with comparable
efficiency.

Donnadieu et al. (2003) noted that the FCER1 tetrameric complex is
expressed on mast cells and basophils, whereas the FCER1 trimeric
complex lacking the beta subunit is expressed on Langerhan cells,
dendritic cells, and monocytes. Thus, beta chain expression correlates
with allergy mediator release, while the trimeric FCER1 form is
associated with antigen presentation. The presence of the beta chain
amplifies FCER1 surface expression and signaling capacity, and the beta
chain acts as a chaperone for transporting the FCER1 complex to the cell
surface. By RT-PCR of basophil RNA, Donnadieu et al. (2003) cloned an
FCER1B splice variant that retains intron 5 and encodes a truncated
protein, designated beta(T). The fourth transmembrane domain and the
C-terminal tail of the full-length beta form are deleted and replaced
with 16 novel amino acids in beta(T). The beta(T) variant was also
present in cord blood mast cells, but not in a monocyte cell line.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses showed that beta(T) was
expressed as a 21-kD protein, whereas the full-length form was 28 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transfection experiments, Donnadieu et al. (2003) showed that the
beta(T) isoform competed with the full-length beta isoform and
diminished FCER1 expression by preventing alpha chain maturation.
Immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that beta(T) associated with
immature alpha chains, but not with mature alpha chains or gamma chains.
Donnadieu et al. (2003) proposed that the relative abundance of the beta
and beta(T) isoforms may control the level of surface FCER1 expression
and influence susceptibility to allergic disease.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kuster et al. (1992) determined that the gene encoding the human high
affinity IgE receptor beta chain spans about 10 kb and contains 7 exons.
There is a single transcription initiation site preceded by a TATA box.
The human beta gene appears to be present in single copy.

MAPPING

By linkage studies using a CA microsatellite repeat in the fifth intron
of the FCER1B gene, Sandford et al. (1993) demonstrated that the gene is
located on 11q13. Using in situ hybridization and pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis, Szepetowski and Gaudray (1994) likewise mapped the
FCER1B gene to chromosome 11q at a site centromeric from CD20 (112210)
at 11q13 and in the same 550 kb fragment as TCN1 (189905), thought to be
on 11q11-q12, and OSBP (167040), thought to be on 11q12-q13.

The gene for the mouse beta subunit was localized to chromosome 19 by
genetic linkage studies (Hupp et al., 1989) and was thought to be a
single gene. The genes for the alpha and gamma subunits are both located
on human and mouse chromosome 1 (Kuster et al., 1992).

- Linkage to Atopy

Sandford et al. (1993) demonstrated that the FCER1B gene is linked to
clinical atopy (147050). In their linkage study of atopy, Sandford et
al. (1993) used only maternally derived alleles; paternally derived
alleles failed to show linkage. The known roles of the high affinity IgE
receptor in antigen-induced mast cell degranulation and in the release
of cytokines that enhance IgE production, taken with the location in the
same region, 11q13, made the FCER1B gene a candidate for the chromosome
11 atopy locus.

Folster-Holst et al. (1998) presented evidence from linkage studies in
12 families with atopic dermatitis for linkage in close proximity to the
marker D11S903. The method of analysis suggested an oligogenic mode of
inheritance as well as heterogeneity in the genetic susceptibility to
atopy and atopic dermatitis; only 2 of 12 families showed evidence for
linkage using the oligogenic model.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Shirakawa et al. (1994) reported a significant association between atopy
and substitution of a leucine for an isoleucine at position 181 of the
FCER1B gene product. Hizawa et al. (1995) failed to find this
leu181-to-ile substitution.

Hill and Cookson (1996) identified a novel coding polymorphism in exon 7
of the beta subunit of the high affinity receptor for IgE. An A-to-G
transition changes glutamic acid-237 to glycine (147138.0001). The
substitution occurs adjacent to the immunoreceptor tyrosine activation
motif (ITAM). This E237G mutation was detected in 53 subjects from a
general Australian population of 1004 (5.3%). E237G subjects had a
significantly elevated skin test response to grass (p = 0.0004) and
house dust mite (p = 0.04), RAST to grass (p = 0.0020), and bronchial
reactivity to methacholine (p = 0.0009). Hill and Cookson (1996)
reported that the relative risk of individuals with E237G having asthma
compared to subjects without the variant was 2.3.

Traherne et al. (2003) performed association studies between FCER1B SNPs
and atopy in 2 Caucasian cohorts. Independent clusters of SNPs within an
18-kb region affected prick skin tests and specific IgE responses.
Interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF2; 147576) sites were altered by
significantly associated SNPs in 2 regions. Strong association to
maternally derived alleles was seen in 1 panel of subjects and not in
the other. Two regions of increased CpG concentration were identified in
FCER1B, providing a potential substrate for epigenetic effects.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ATOPIC ASTHMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MS4A2, GLU237GLY

Hill and Cookson (1996) found this exon 7 E237G polymorphism in 53 of
1004 Australian subjects studied (5.3%). E237G subjects had elevated
reactions to a number of common measures of atopy and bronchial
hyperresponsiveness. The investigators also found that the relative risk
for E237G individuals having asthma compared to those without the allele
was 2.3.

Shirakawa et al. (1996) reported that the gly237 form of the IgE Fc
receptor was associated with atopic asthma (odds ratio = 3.00,
chi-square = 5.10, p less than 0.03) and with elevated serum IgE levels
(odds ratio = 8.56) in the Japanese population. This association was
particularly noted in childhood asthma (odds ratio = 3.92, chi-square =
8.66, p less than 0.005).

Among 333 Japanese subjects, including 233 with nasal allergy and 100
controls, Nagata et al. (2001) observed a significant relationship
between gly237 and elevated levels of serum total IgE and very high IgE.
The findings suggested that the glu237-to-gly variant of the FCER1B gene
is involved in the development of nasal allergy through the process for
the production of both specific and nonspecific IgE antibodies.

REFERENCE 1. Donnadieu, E.; Jouvin, M.-H.; Rana, S.; Moffatt, M. F.; Mockford,
E. H.; Cookson, W. O.; Kinet, J.-P.: Competing functions encoded
in the allergy-associated Fc-epsilon-RI-beta gene. Immunity 18:
665-674, 2003.

2. Folster-Holst, R.; Moises, H. W.; Yang, L.; Fritsch, W.; Weissenbach,
J.; Christophers, E.: Linkage between atopy and the IgE high-affinity
receptor gene at 11q13 in atopic dermatitis families. Hum. Genet. 102:
236-239, 1998.

3. Hill, M. R.; Cookson, W. O. C. M.: A new variant of the beta subunit
of the high-affinity receptor for immunoglobulin E (Fc-epsilon-RI-beta
E237G): associations with measures of atopy and bronchial hyper-responsiveness. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 959-962, 1996.

4. Hizawa, N.; Yamaguchi, E.; Furuya, K.; Ohnuma, N.; Kodama, N.;
Kojima, J.; Ohe, M.; Kawakami, Y.: Association between high serum
total IgE levels and D11S97 on chromosome 11q13 in Japanese subjects. J.
Med. Genet. 32: 363-369, 1995.

5. Hupp, K.; Siwarski, D.; Mock, B. A.; Kinet, J.-P.: Gene mapping
of the three subunits of the high affinity FcR for IgE to mouse chromosomes
1 and 19. J. Immun. 143: 3787-3791, 1989.

6. Kuster, H.; Zhang, L.; Brini, A. T.; MacGlashan, D. W. J.; Kinet,
J.-P.: The gene and cDNA for the human high affinity immunoglobulin
E receptor beta chain and expression of the complete human receptor. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 12782-12787, 1992.

7. Nagata, H.; Mutoh, H.; Kumahara, K.; Arimoto, Y.; Tomemori, T.;
Sakurai, D.; Arase, K.; Ohno, K.; Yamakoshi, T.; Nakano, K.; Okawa,
T.; Numata, T.; Konno, A.: Association between nasal allergy and
a coding variant of the Fc-epsilon-RI-beta gene Glu237Gly in a Japanese
population. Hum. Genet. 109: 262-266, 2001.

8. Sandford, A. J.; Shirakawa, T.; Moffatt, M. F.; Daniels, S. E.;
Ra, C.; Faux, J. A.; Young, R. P.; Nakamura, Y.; Lathrop, G. M.; Cookson,
W. O. C. M.; Hopkin, J. M.: Localisation of atopy and beta subunit
of high-affinity IgE receptor (FCER1) on chromosome 11q. Lancet 341:
332-334, 1993.

9. Shirakawa, T.; Li, A.; Dubowitz, M.; Dekker, J. W.; Shaw, A. E.;
Faux, J. A.; Ra, C.; Cookson, W. O. C. M.; Hopkin, J. M.: Association
between atopy and variants of the beta subunit of the high-affinity
immunoglobulin E receptor. Nature Genet. 7: 125-130, 1994.

10. Shirakawa, T.; Mao, X.-Q.; Sasaki, S.; Enomoto, T.; Kawai, M.;
Morimoto, K.; Hopkin, J.: Association between atopic asthma and a
coding variant of Fc-epsilon-RI-beta in a Japanese population. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 1129-1130, 1996. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
5: 2068 only, 1996.

11. Szepetowski, P.; Gaudray, P.: FCER1B, a candidate gene for atopy,
is located in 11q13 between CD20 and TCN1. Genomics 19: 399-400,
1994.

12. Traherne, J. A.; Hill, M. R.; Hysi, P.; D'Amato, M.; Broxholme,
J.; Mott, R.; Moffatt, M. F.; Cookson, W. O. C. M.: LD mapping of
maternally and non-maternally derived alleles and atopy in Fc-epsilon-RI-beta. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 2577-2585, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/1/1998
Moyra Smith - updated: 9/6/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 8/13/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/27/1992

EDITED terry: 09/24/2012
wwang: 12/5/2006
mgross: 6/1/2006
terry: 5/15/2006
alopez: 10/21/2005
terry: 9/12/2005
carol: 10/29/2001
mcapotos: 10/17/2001
carol: 9/27/2001
carol: 4/7/2000
carol: 4/6/2000
alopez: 4/1/1998
terry: 3/23/1998
mark: 9/6/1996
mark: 8/13/1996
terry: 7/10/1995
mark: 6/21/1995
carol: 2/15/1994
carol: 11/9/1993
carol: 10/20/1993
carol: 8/27/1992

600114	TITLE *600114 CHAPERONIN CONTAINING T-COMPLEX POLYPEPTIDE 1, SUBUNIT 3; CCT3
;;CHAPERONIN CONTAINING TCP1, SUBUNIT 3;;
CCT-GAMMA; CCTG;;
TCP1 RING COMPLEX, POLYPEPTIDE 5; TRIC5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Molecular chaperones are proteins capable of folding or assembling
nascent proteins in a higher order structure. A molecular chaperone
called TCP1 ring complex (TRiC) plays a role in actin and tubulin
folding. TRiC is composed of 2 heteromeric subunits of 6 to 9 different
proteins. The cytoplasmic T-complex protein-1 (TCP1; 186980), an
abundant testicular germ cell protein, has been found in this complex.
Other components of TRiC, such as TRIC5, are TCP1-related proteins
(Sevigny et al., 1994).

CLONING

Joly et al. (1994) cloned a mouse cDNA corresponding to tryptic
fragments of the bovine TRiCP5 subunit described by Frydman et al.
(1992). The mouse TRiCP5 shares 48% nucleotide and 34% amino acid
homology with mouse Tcp1. It is a cytosolic protein also found in the
nuclear matrix of several cultured human cell lines. Furthermore, like
TCP1, it is highly expressed in testis.

Sevigny et al. (1994) cloned a partial human cDNA clone homologous to
mouse TRiCP5.

Walkley et al. (1996) cloned the human cDNA from a kidney library. The
1.9-kb cDNA encodes a predicted 544-amino acid protein that is 98%
similar to the mouse sequence and 75% similar to the yeast gene. The
mRNA is expressed in a variety of human tissues and at high levels in
mouse testis.

Sevigny et al. (1996) cloned the gene coding for the mouse P5 subunit.

GENE FUNCTION

Feldman et al. (1999) demonstrated that the folding and assembly of the
VHL protein (608537) into a complex with its partner proteins, elongin B
(600787) and elongin C (600788), is directly mediated by the chaperonin
TRiC. Their results defined a novel role for TRiC in mediating
oligomerization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sevigny et al. (1996) determined that the mouse Tric5 gene contains 14
exons distributed within 25 kb of genomic DNA. Sevigny et al. (1996)
used primer extension to demonstrate multiple transcription start points
for the Tric5 gene. This was considered consistent with the lack of any
obvious TATA box upstream of the transcription start points.

MAPPING

Sevigny et al. (1994) mapped the TRIC5 gene to chromosome 1q23 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. The fact that the human TRIC5 gene
is not on chromosome 6 like other TCP1-related proteins implied to
Sevigny et al. (1994) that the genes coding the TCP1-related proteins
present in the TCP1 ring complex are probably not organized in a cluster
and thus are not synchronously regulated by a cis-acting control region
such as the LCR involved in the regulation of globin synthesis.

Sevigny et al. (1996) showed that the mouse genome contains 1 Tric5 gene
and 1 Tric5 pseudogene located on chromosomes 3F and 5B, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Feldman, D. E.; Thulasiraman, V.; Ferreyra, R. G.; Frydman, J.
: Formation of the VHL-elongin BC tumor suppressor complex is mediated
by the chaperonin TRiC. Molec. Cell 4: 1051-1061, 1999.

2. Frydman, J.; Nimmesgern, E.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Wall, J. S.;
Tempst, P.; Hartl, F.-U.: Function in protein folding of TRiC, a
cytosolic ring complex containing TCP-1 and structurally related subunits. EMBO
J. 11: 4767-4778, 1992.

3. Joly, E. C.; Sevigny, G.; Todorov, I. T.; Bibor-Hardy, V.: cDNA
encoding a novel TCP1-related protein. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1217:
224-226, 1994.

4. Sevigny, G.; Joly, E. C.; Bibor-Hardy, V.; Lemieux, N.: Assignment
of the human homologue of the mTRiC-P5 gene (TRIC5) to band 1q23 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 22: 634-636, 1994.

5. Sevigny, G.; Lemieux, N.; Steyaert, A.; Bibor-Hardy, V.: Structure
of the gene coding for the mouse TRiC-P5 subunit of the cytosolic
chaperonin TRiC. Genomics 31: 107-110, 1996.

6. Walkley, N. A.; Demaine, A. G.; Malik, A. N.: Cloning, structure
and mRNA expression of human Cctg, which encodes the chaperonin subunit
CCT-gamma. Biochem. J. 313: 381-389, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2000
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/20/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1994

EDITED mgross: 11/21/2006
mgross: 11/20/2006
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
tkritzer: 9/17/2003
mgross: 7/14/2000
mgross: 7/13/2000
mgross: 1/7/2000
alopez: 7/27/1999
alopez: 7/26/1999
mark: 5/20/1996
terry: 5/20/1996
mark: 2/7/1996
terry: 2/2/1996
carol: 9/14/1994

601896	TITLE *601896 TNF RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 3; TRAF3
;;CD40-BINDING PROTEIN; CD40BP;;
LMP1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; LAP1;;
CD40-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; CAP1;;
CD40 RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1; CRAF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CD40 (109535) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)
family. The short cytoplasmic domain of CD40 contains a region with
limited homology to the conserved cytosolic death domain of TNFR1
(191190) and FAS (134637). Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay with the
cytoplasmic domain of CD40 as bait, Hu et al. (1994) isolated B-cell
cDNAs encoding a protein that they called CD40-binding protein (CD40bp).
The predicted CD40bp protein contains a RING finger DNA-binding motif, a
cys/his-rich region, and a coiled-coil domain. Like TRAF1 (601711) and
TRAF2 (601895), both TNFR2 (75-kD TNFR; 191191)-binding proteins, CD40bp
contains a C-terminal TRAF domain. In vitro translated CD40bp has an
apparent molecular mass of 64 kD. Coimmunoprecipitation studies
indicated that CD40bp interacts with CD40 in human B cells. Hu et al.
(1994) suggested that CD40bp, along with TRAF1 and TRAF2, comprise a
family of proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic faces of the TNFR
family and have in common a TRAF domain.

Independently, Sato et al. (1995) and Cheng et al. (1995) identified
CD40bp, designating it CAP1 (CD40-associated protein-1) and CRAF1 (CD40
receptor-associated factor 1), respectively. Sato et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CAP1 binds specifically to the cytoplasmic domain of
CD40, but not to that of TNFR1, TNFR2, or FAS. The C-terminal TRAF
domain of CAP1 was sufficient to mediate binding to CD40 and
homodimerization. Cheng et al. (1995) isolated mouse and human CRAF1
cDNAs. The predicted 568-amino acid human protein is 96% identical to
mouse CRAF1. These authors divided the TRAF domain into 2 regions:
TRAF-N, the more N-terminal coiled-coil subdomain, and TRAF-C, which was
necessary and sufficient for CRAF1 to interact with CD40. Overexpression
of a truncated cDNA encoding the entire TRAF domain of CRAF1 inhibited
CD40-mediated upregulation of the CD23 (151445) gene, which suggested to
Cheng et al. (1995) that CRAF1 participates in CD40 signaling.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the TRAF3 gene to chromosome 14q32.32 based on an
alignment of the TRAF3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC075086) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

The cytoplasmic C terminus of the Epstein-Barr virus latent infection
membrane protein-1 (LMP1) is essential for B lymphocyte growth
transformation. LMP1 is an integral membrane protein that has
transforming effects in nonlymphoid cells, and may act by constitutively
activating a common cellular growth factor receptor pathway. Mosialos et
al. (1995) found that CD40bp, which they called LAP1 (LMP1-associated
protein-1), interacted with the LMP1 C-terminal domain. Expression of
LMP1 caused LAP1 and TRAF1 (EBI6) to localize to LMP1 clusters in
lymphoblast plasma membranes, and LMP1 coimmunoprecipitated with these
proteins in cell extracts. LAP1 bound to the cytoplasmic domains of CD40
and LT-beta-R (600979) in vitro, and associated with p80 (TNFR2) in
vivo. Northern blot analysis revealed that LAP1 was expressed as a
full-length 2.8-kb mRNA and an alternatively spliced 1.8-kb mRNA in all
tissues tested. Mosialos et al. (1995) concluded that the interaction of
LAP1 with LMP1 and with the cytoplasmic domains of TNFR family members
is evidence for a central role of this protein as an effector of cell
growth or death signaling pathways.

Dadgostar et al. (2003) determined that the coiled-coil domain of mouse
T3jam (608255) interacted with the isoleucine zipper domain of Traf3.
T3jam did not associate with other Traf family members. Coexpression of
T3jam and Traf3 recruited Traf3 to the detergent-insoluble fraction, and
T3jam and Traf3 synergistically activated JNK (601158), but not nuclear
factor kappa-B (see 164011).

To dissect biochemically Toll-like receptor signaling, Hacker et al.
(2006) established a system for isolating signaling complexes assembled
by dimerized adaptors. Using MyD88 (602170) as a prototypic adaptor,
they identified TRAF3 as a new component of Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes that is recruited along with TRAF6 (602355). Using
myeloid cells from Traf3- and Traf6-deficient mice, Hacker et al. (2006)
demonstrated that TRAF3 is essential for the induction of type I
interferons and the antiinflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL10;
124092), but is dispensable for expression of proinflammatory cytokines.
In fact, Traf3-deficient cells overproduced proinflammatory cytokines
owing to defective Il10 production. Despite their structural similarity,
the functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6 are largely distinct. TRAF3 is also
recruited to the adaptor TRIF (607601) and is required for marshalling
the protein kinase TBK1 (604834) into Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes, thereby explaining its unique role in activation of
the interferon response.

Oganesyan et al. (2006) demonstrated that cells lacking TRAF3 are
defective in type I interferon responses activated by several different
Toll-like receptors. Furthermore, they showed that TRAF3 associates with
the Toll-like receptor adaptors TRIF and IRAK1 (300283), as well as
downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon (605048), suggesting that
TRAF3 serves as a critical link between Toll-like receptor adaptors and
downstream regulatory kinases important for IRF activation. In addition
to TLR stimulation, Oganesyan et al. (2006) showed that TRAF3-deficient
fibroblasts are defective in their type I interferon response to direct
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also
an important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways.
Oganesyan et al. (2006) concluded that TRAF3 is a major regulator of
type I interferon production and the innate antiviral response.

Production of type I interferon is a critical host defense triggered by
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system.
Kayagaki et al. (2007) demonstrated that reduction of DUBA (300713)
augmented the PRR-induced type I interferon response in transfected
HEK293 cells, whereas ectopic expression of DUBA had the converse
effect. DUBA bound TRAF3, an adaptor protein essential for type I
interferon response. TRAF3 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that preferentially
assembled lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains in cotransfection assays.
DUBA selectively cleaved the lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains on TRAF3,
resulting in its dissociation from the downstream signaling complex
containing TBK1. A discrete ubiquitin interaction motif within DUBA was
required for efficient deubiquitination of TRAF3 and optimal suppression
of type I interferon. Kayagaki et al. (2007) concluded that their data
identified DUBA as a negative regulator of innate immune responses.

Cytokine signaling is thought to require assembly of multicomponent
signaling complexes at cytoplasmic segments of membrane-embedded
receptors, in which receptor-proximal protein kinases are activated.
Matsuzawa et al. (2008) reported that, upon ligation, CD40 formed a
complex containing adaptor molecules TRAF2 and TRAF3,
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13 (UBE2N; 603679), cellular inhibitor
of apoptosis protein-1 (CIAP1, or BIRC2; 601712) and -2 (CIAP2, or
BIRC3; 601721), IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248), and MEKK1 (MAP3K1; 600982).
TRAF2, UBC13, and IKK-gamma were required for complex assembly and
activation of MEKK1 and MAP kinase cascades. However, the kinases were
not activated unless the complex was translocated from the membrane to
the cytosol upon CIAP1/CIAP2-induced degradation of TRAF3. Matsuzawa et
al. (2008) proposed that this 2-stage signaling mechanism may apply to
other innate immune receptors and may account for spatial and temporal
separation of MAPK and IKK signaling.

Hu et al. (2013) identified the deubiquitinase OTUD7B (611748) as a
pivotal regulator of the noncanonical NF-kappa-B pathway. OTUD7B
deficiency in mice has no appreciable effect on canonical NF-kappa-B
activation but causes hyperactivation of noncanonical NF-kappa-B. In
response to noncanonical NF-kappa-B stimuli, OTUD7B binds and
deubiquitinates TRAF3, thereby inhibiting TRAF3 proteolysis and
preventing aberrant noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation. Consequently,
the OTUD7B deficiency results in B-cell hyperresponsiveness to antigens,
lymphoid follicular hyperplasia in the intestinal mucosa, and elevated
host-defense ability against an intestinal bacterial pathogen,
Citrobacter rodentium. Hu et al. (2013) concluded that their findings
established OTUD7B as a crucial regulator of signal-induced noncanonical
NF-kappa-B activation, and indicated a mechanism of immune regulation
that involves OTUD7B-mediated deubiquitination and stabilization of
TRAF3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Braggio et al. (2009) identified biallelic inactivation of TRAF3 in 3
(5.3%) of 57 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM; see 153600) samples.
TRAF3 inactivation was associated with transcriptional activation of
NF-kappa-B (NFKB1; 164011). In addition, 1 of 24 patients with a 6q
deletion had an inactivating somatic mutation in TNFAIP3 (191163),
another negative regulator of NF-kappa-B. Monoallelic deletions of
chromosome 6q23, including the TNFAIP3 gene, were identified in 38% of
patients, suggesting that haploinsufficiency can predispose to the
development of WM. The results indicated that mutational activation of
the NF-kappa-B pathway plays a role in the pathogenesis of WM.

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) investigated an 18-year-old French female
who had suffered from herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4
years and who lacked mutations in either the UNC93B1 (608204) or TLR3
(603029) genes. They identified a heterozygous C-to-T substitution at
position 352 in exon 4 of the TRAF3 gene, resulting in a nonconservative
missense change, arg118 to trp (R118W; 601896.0001). The mutation was
not found in her parents or brothers, and none had a history of HSE.
RT-PCR analysis of the patient's cells detected normal levels of TRAF3
mRNA, but Western blot analysis showed severely reduced levels of TRAF3
protein. Responsiveness to TLR3 agonists was impaired, as indicated by
deficient NFKB activation and poor production of IFNB (147640), IFNL
(IL29; 607403), and IL6 (147620). Expression of wildtype and mutant
alleles in cell lines showed that the mutant was dominant-negative.
TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts had impaired type I and type III
IFN-dependent control of viruses and deficient responses through the
TNFR (e.g., TNFRSF5; 109535) pathways. Perez de Diego et al. (2010)
concluded that, whereas complete Traf3 deficiency is neonatal lethal in
mice, decreases in TRAF3 production and function result in
predisposition to HSE, a condition that is usually fatal if untreated.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HERPES SIMPLEX ENCEPHALITIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3
TRAF3, ARG118TRP

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) reported a female French patient with
herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4 years who was healthy
without prophylaxis and showed normal resistance to other infectious
diseases, including other herpesvirus family members, at age 18 years.
They identified a de novo heterozygous 352C-T transition in exon 4 of
the TRAF3 gene, resulting in an arg118-to-trp (R118W) substitution, in
this patient, whose HSE was successfully treated with acyclovir for 3
weeks.

REFERENCE 1. Braggio, E.; Keats, J. J.; Leleu, X.; Van Wier, S.; Jimenez-Zepeda,
V. H.; Valdez, R.; Schop, R. F. J.; Price-Troska, T.; Henderson, K.;
Sacco, A.; Azab, F.; Greipp, P.; and 11 others: Identification
of copy number abnormalities and inactivating mutations in two negative
regulators of nuclear factor-kappa-B signaling pathways in Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia. Cancer Res. 69: 3579-3588, 2009.

2. Cheng, G.; Cleary, A. M.; Ye, Z.; Hong, D. I.; Lederman, S.; Baltimore,
D.: Involvement of CRAF1, a relative of TRAF, in CD40 signaling. Science 267:
1494-1498, 1995.

3. Dadgostar, H.; Doyle, S. E.; Shahangian, A.; Garcia, D. E.; Cheng,
G.: T3JAM, a novel protein that specifically interacts with TRAF3
and promotes the activation of JNK. FEBS Lett. 553: 403-407, 2003.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/5/2012.

5. Hacker, H.; Redecke, V.; Blagoev, B.; Kratchmarova, I.; Hsu, L.-C.;
Wang, G. G.; Kamps, M. P.; Raz, E.; Wagner, H.; Hacker, G.; Mann,
M.; Karin, M.: Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through
distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. Nature 439: 204-207,
2006.

6. Hu, H.; Brittain, G. C.; Chang, J.-H.; Puebla-Osorio, N.; Jin,
J.; Zal, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Cheng, X.; Chang, M.; Fu, Y.-X.; Zal, T.; Zhu,
C.; Sun, S.-C.: OTUD7B controls noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation
through deubiquitination of TRAF3. Nature 494: 371-374, 2013.

7. Hu, H. M.; O'Rourke, K.; Boguski, M. S.; Dixit, V. M.: A novel
RING finger protein interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of CD40. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 30069-30072, 1994.

8. Kayagaki, N.; Phung, Q.; Chan, S.; Chaudhari, R.; Quan, C.; O'Rourke,
K. M.; Eby, M.; Pietras, E.; Cheng, G.; Bazan, J. F.; Zhang, Z.; Arnott,
D.; Dixit, V. M.: DUBA: a deubiquitinase that regulates type I interferon
production. Science 318: 1628-1632, 2007.

9. Matsuzawa, A.; Tseng, P.-H.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Luo, J.-L.; Zhang,
W.; Wang, H.; Vignali, D. A. A.; Gallagher, E.; Karin, M.: Essential
cytoplasmic translocation of a cytokine receptor-assembled signaling
complex. Science 321: 663-668, 2008. Note: Erratum: Science 322:
375 only, 2008.

10. Mosialos, G.; Birkenbach, M.; Yalamanchili, R.; VanArsdale, T.;
Ware, C.; Kieff, E.: The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein
LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor
family. Cell 80: 389-399, 1995.

11. Oganesyan, G.; Saha, S. K.; Guo, B.; He, J. Q.; Shahangian, A.;
Zarnegar, B.; Perry, A.; Cheng, G.: Critical role of TRAF3 in the
Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. Nature 439:
208-211, 2006.

12. Perez de Diego, R.; Sancho-Shimizu, V.; Lorenzo, L.; Puel, A.;
Plancoulaine, S.; Picard, C.; Herman, M.; Cardon, A.; Durandy, A.;
Bustamante, J.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Bravo, J.; and 12 others: Human
TRAF3 adaptor molecule deficiency leads to impaired Toll-like receptor
3 response and susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis. Immunity 33:
400-411, 2010.

13. Sato, T.; Irie, S.; Reed, J. C.: A novel member of the TRAF family
of putative signal transducing proteins binds to the cytoplasmic domain
of CD40. FEBS Lett. 358: 113-118, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/21/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/5/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/11/1999

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 3/20/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/02/2013
terry: 3/21/2013
joanna: 12/7/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
terry: 10/4/2012
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/22/2009
alopez: 11/18/2008
mgross: 8/28/2008
terry: 8/28/2008
alopez: 5/7/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 5/3/2006
terry: 5/1/2006
mgross: 11/13/2003
alopez: 6/11/1999
carol: 6/18/1998
mark: 9/9/1997
alopez: 8/1/1997
alopez: 7/23/1997

146680	TITLE *146680 INSULIN-DEGRADING ENZYME; IDE
;;INSULYSIN;;
INSULINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Insulin-degrading enzyme (EC 3.4.24.56), also known as insulysin, is a
110-kD neutral metallopeptidase that can degrade a number of peptides,
including insulin (176730) and beta-amyloid (104760) (Qiu et al., 1998).

CLONING

Affholter et al. (1988) isolated and sequenced a cDNA coding for IDE.
The deduced amino acid sequence of the enzyme contained the sequences of
13 peptides derived from the isolated protein. The cDNA transcribed in
vitro yielded a synthetic RNA that in cell-free translations produced a
protein that coelectrophoresed with the native proteinase and could be
immunoprecipitated with monoclonal antibodies to IDE. Since the deduced
sequence of this proteinase did not contain the consensus sequences for
any of the known classes of proteinases (i.e., metallo, cysteine,
aspartic, or serine), it may be a member of a family of proteases that
are involved in intercellular peptide signaling. It did show homology to
an Escherichia coli proteinase (called protease III), which also cleaves
insulin and is present in the periplasmic space; thus, they may be
members of the same family of proteases.

GENE FUNCTION

Qiu et al. (1998) determined that the extracellular thiol
metalloprotease capable of degrading amyloid-beta protein identified by
Qiu et al. (1997) is the same as IDE. By Western blot analysis, they
found a full-length 110-kD IDE band in the CSF of normal individuals and
of patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) or non-Alzheimer
dementia. They found no difference in IDE levels of the normal and
patient populations. By biochemical analysis of IDE purified from the
medium of a mouse microglial cell line, they determined that IDE could
degrade both endogenous and synthetic amyloid-beta protein and that it
could catalyze the oligomerization of this protein.

Through a series of inhibitor studies, in vitro translation, and
biochemical assays of rat IDE expressed by transfected human kidney
cells, Edbauer et al. (2002) determined that IDE may be the protease
responsible for the clearance of the cytoplasmic fragment of the
amyloid-beta precursor protein (APP) following liberation of the
amyloid-beta protein.

IDE has a preferential affinity for insulin such that the presence of
insulin will inhibit IDE-mediated degradation of other substances,
including beta-amyloid. Cook et al. (2003) found that hippocampal IDE
levels were reduced by approximately 50% in AD patients with the APOE4
(107741) allele compared to AD patients without the APOE4 allele and to
controls with or without the APOE4 allele. The findings suggested that
reduced IDE expression may be a risk factor for AD, and that IDE may
interact with APOE status to affect beta-amyloid metabolism.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) causes chickenpox and shingles. While
varicella is likely spread as cell-free virus to susceptible hosts, the
virus is transmitted by cell-to-cell spread in the body and in vitro. Li
et al. (2006) found that the extracellular domain of IDE interacted with
VZV glycoprotein E (gE), a protein essential for viral infection.
Downregulation of IDE by small interfering RNA or blocking IDE with
antibody, with soluble IDE protein extracted from liver, or with
bacitracin inhibited VZV infection. Cell-to-cell spread of virus was
also impaired by blocking IDE. Transfection of cell lines impaired for
VZV infection with a plasmid expressing human IDE resulted in increased
entry and enhanced infection with cell-free and cell-associated virus.
Li et al. (2006) concluded that IDE is a cellular receptor for both
cell-free and cell-associated VZV.

MAPPING

Affholter et al. (1990) mapped the IDE gene to human chromosome 10 and
mouse chromosome 19 by hybridization of cDNA probes to human-rodent or
mouse-hamster somatic cell hybrids, respectively. By a combination of
somatic cell hybrid analysis and in situ hybridization, Espinosa et al.
(1991) localized the IDE gene to 10q23-q25.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the IDE
gene and late-onset Alzheimer disease, see AD6 (605526), which maps to
chromosome 10q23-q25.

Abraham et al. (2001) analyzed all of the coding exons, untranslated
regions, and 1,000 bp of 5-prime flanking sequence of IDE by means of
denaturing HPLC and sequencing. They detected 8 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), of which 3 were found at lower than 5% frequency.
None of them changed the amino acid sequence. Abraham et al. (2001)
found no significant association between any individual SNP and
late-onset AD (LOAD) or with any haplotypes. They concluded that IDE
does not make a substantial contribution to the etiology of late-onset
AD and therefore cannot account for the linkage between late-onset AD
and 10q.

Prince et al. (2003) used a SNP genetic association strategy to
investigate AD in relation to a 480-kb region encompassing IDE. They
interpreted the results as providing 'substantial' evidence that genetic
variation within or very close to IDE impacts both disease risk and
traits related to the severity of AD.

Risk for LOAD and plasma amyloid-beta levels (APP; 104760), an
intermediate phenotype for LOAD, show linkage to chromosome 10q.
Ertekin-Taner et al. (2004) reported pathogenic variants in the 276-kb
region of 10q harboring the IDE gene that influence intermediate DNA
phenotypes and risk for AD.

Bian et al. (2004) reported an association between a T/C polymorphism
(dbSNP rs4646953) in the 5-prime untranslated region of the the IDE
gene, and AD in Han Chinese patients with the APOE4 allele. They found
no association between several IDE polymorphisms and AD among patients
without the E4 allele.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Shen et al. (2006) reported the crystal structure of human IDE in
complex with 4 substrates, the insulin B chain (see 176730), amyloid
beta(1-40), amylin (147940), and glucagon (138030). The amino- and
carboxy-terminal domains of IDE form an enclosed cage just large enough
to encapsulate insulin. Extensive contacts between these domains keep
the degradation chamber of IDE inaccessible to substrates. Repositioning
of the IDE domains enables substrate access to the catalytic cavity. IDE
uses size and charge distribution of the substrate-binding cavity
selectively to entrap structurally diverse polypeptides. The enclosed
substrate undergoes conformational changes to form beta-sheets with 2
discrete regions of IDE for its degradation. Consistent with this model,
mutations disrupting the contacts between the amino- and carboxy-termini
of IDE increase IDE catalytic activity 40-fold.

ANIMAL MODEL

Genetic analysis of the diabetic GK rat has revealed several diabetes
susceptibility loci (see 125853). Fakhrai-Rad et al. (2000) mapped one
such locus, NIDDM1B, to a 1-cM region by genetic and pathophysiologic
characterization of new congenic substrains for the locus. The IDE gene
was also mapped to this 1-cM region, and 2 amino acid substitutions
(H18R and A890V) were identified in the GK allele which reduced
insulin-degrading activity by 31% in transfected cells. However, when
the H18R and A890V variants were studied separately, no effects were
observed, suggesting a synergistic effect of the 2 variants on insulin
degradation. No effect on insulin degradation was observed in cell
lysates, suggesting that the effect may be coupled to receptor-mediated
internalization of insulin. Congenic rats with the IDE GK allele
displayed postprandial hyperglycemia, reduced lipogenesis in fat cells,
blunted insulin-stimulated glucose transmembrane uptake, and reduced
insulin degradation in isolated muscle. Analysis of additional rat
strains demonstrated that the dysfunctional IDE allele was unique to GK
rats. The authors concluded that IDE plays an important role in the
diabetic phenotype in GK rats.

Factors that elevate amyloid-beta (104760) peptide levels are associated
with an increased risk for Alzheimer disease. Insulysin is one of
several proteases potentially involved in degradation of amyloid-beta,
based on its hydrolysis of amyloid-beta peptides in vitro. In an
insulysin-deficient gene-trap mouse model, Miller et al. (2003) found
that in vivo levels of brain A-beta-40 and A-beta-42 peptides were
increased significantly. A 6-fold increase in the level of the
gamma-secretase-generated C-terminal fragment of the A-beta precursor
protein also was found in the insulysin-deficient mouse. In mice
heterozygous for the insulysin gene trap, in which insulysin activity
levels were decreased approximately 50%, brain A-beta peptides were
increased to levels intermediate between those in wildtype mice and
homozygous insulysin gene-trap mice that had no detectable insulysin
activity. These findings indicated that there is an inverse correlation
between in vivo insulysin activity levels and brain A-beta peptide
levels and suggested that modulation of insulysin activity may alter the
risk for Alzheimer disease.

Farris et al. (2003) generated mice deficient in IDE by targeted
disruption. Ide deficiency resulted in a greater than 50% decrease in
amyloid-beta degradation in both membrane fractions and primary neuronal
cultures and a similar deficit in insulin degradation in liver. The
Ide-null mice showed increased cerebral accumulation of endogenous
amyloid-beta, a hallmark of Alzheimer disease, and had hyperinsulinemia
and glucose intolerance (see 176730), hallmarks of type II diabetes.
Moreover, the mice had elevated levels of the intracellular signaling
domain of the beta-amyloid precursor protein, which had recently been
found to be degraded by IDE in vitro. Farris et al. (2003) concluded
that, together with emerging genetic evidence, their in vivo findings
suggest that IDE hypofunction may underlie or contribute to some forms
of Alzheimer disease and type II diabetes and provide a mechanism for
the recognized association among hyperinsulinemia, diabetes, and
Alzheimer disease.

Leissring et al. (2003) found that developmentally delayed,
neuron-specific overexpression of Ide or neprilysin (MME; 120520) in
mice significantly reduced brain beta-amyloid levels, retarded or
prevented amyloid plaque formation and its associated cytopathology, and
rescued the premature lethality in APP transgenic mice. They concluded
that chronic upregulation of beta-amyloid-degrading proteases may combat
Alzheimer-type pathology in vivo.

REFERENCE 1. Abraham, R.; Myers, A.; Wavrant-DeVrieze, F.; Hamshere, M. L.;
Thomas, H. V.; Marshall, H.; Compton, D.; Spurlock, G.; Turic, D.;
Hoogendoorn, B.; Kwon, J. M.; Petersen, R. C.; and 12 others: Substantial
linkage disequilibrium across the insulin-degrading enzyme locus but
no association with late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Hum. Genet. 109:
646-652, 2001.

2. Affholter, J. A.; Fried, V. A.; Roth, R. A.: Human insulin-degrading
enzyme shares structural and functional homologies with E. coli protease
III. Science 242: 1415-1418, 1988.

3. Affholter, J. A.; Hsieh, C.-L.; Francke, U.; Roth, R. A.: Insulin-degrading
enzyme: stable expression of the human complementary DNA, characterization
of its protein product, and chromosomal mapping of the human and mouse
genes. Molec. Endocr. 4: 1125-1135, 1990.

4. Bian, L.; Yang, J. D.; Guo, T. W.; Sun, Y.; Duan, S. W.; Chen,
W. Y.; Pan, Y. X.; Feng, G. Y.; He, L.: Insulin-degrading enzyme
and Alzheimer disease: a genetic association study in the Han Chinese. Neurology 63:
241-245, 2004.

5. Cook, D. G.; Leverenz, J. B.; McMillan, P. J.; Kulstad, J. J.;
Ericksen, S.; Roth, R. A.; Schellenberg, G. D.; Jin, L.-W.; Kovacina,
K. S.; Craft, S.: Reduced hippocampal insulin-degrading enzyme in
late-onset Alzheimer's disease is associated with the apolipoprotein
E-epsilon-4 allele. Am. J. Path. 162: 313-319, 2003.

6. Edbauer, D.; Willem, M.; Lammich, S.; Steiner, H.; Haass, C.:
Insulin-degrading enzyme rapidly removes the beta-amyloid precursor
protein intracellular domain (AICD). J. Biol. Chem. 277: 13389-13393,
2002.

7. Ertekin-Taner, N.; Allen, M.; Fadale, D.; Scanlin, L.; Younkin,
L.; Petersen, R. C.; Graff-Radford, N.; Younkin, S. G.: Genetic variants
in a haplotype block spanning IDE are significantly associated with
plasma A-beta-42 levels and risk for Alzheimer disease. Hum. Mutat. 23:
334-342, 2004.

8. Espinosa, R., III; Lemons, R. S.; Perlman, R. K.; Kuo, W.-L.; Rosner,
M. R.; Le Beau, M. M.: Localization of the gene encoding insulin-degrading
enzyme to human chromosome 10, bands q23-q25. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 57:
184-186, 1991.

9. Fakhrai-Rad, H.; Nikoshkov, A.; Kamel, A.; Fernstrom, M.; Zierath,
J. R.; Norgren, S.; Luthman, H.; Galli, J.: Insulin-degrading enzyme
identified as a candidate diabetes susceptibility gene in GK rats. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2149-2158, 2000.

10. Farris, W.; Mansourian, S.; Chang, Y.; Lindsley, L.; Eckman, E.
A.; Frosch, M. P.; Eckman, C. B.; Tanzi, R. E.; Selkoe, D. J.; Guenette,
S.: Insulin-degrading enzyme regulates the levels of insulin, amyloid
beta-protein, and the beta-amyloid precursor protein intracellular
domain in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 4162-4167, 2003.

11. Leissring, M. A.; Farris, W.; Chang, A. Y.; Walsh, D. M.; Wu,
X.; Sun, X.; Frosch, M. P.; Selkoe, D. J.: Enhanced proteolysis of
beta-amyloid in APP transgenic mice prevents plaque formation, secondary
pathology, and premature death. Neuron 40: 1087-1093, 2003.

12. Li, Q.; Ali, M. A.; Cohen, J. I.: Insulin degrading enzyme is
a cellular receptor mediating varicella-zoster virus infection and
cell-to-cell spread. Cell 127: 305-316, 2006.

13. Miller, B. C.; Eckman, E. A.; Sambamurti, K.; Dobbs, N.; Chow,
K. M.; Eckman, C. B.; Hersh, L. B.; Thiele, D. L.: Amyloid-beta peptide
levels in brain are inversely correlated with insulysin activity levels
in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6221-6226, 2003.

14. Prince, J. A.; Feuk, L.; Gu, H. F.; Johansson, B.; Gatz, M.; Blennow,
K.; Brookes, A. J.: Genetic variation in a haplotype block spanning
IDE influences Alzheimer disease. Hum. Mutat. 22: 363-371, 2003.

15. Qiu, W. Q.; Walsh, D. M.; Ye, Z.; Vekrellis, K.; Zhang, J.; Podlisny,
M. B.; Rosner, M. R.; Safavi, A.; Hersh, L. B.; Selkoe, D. J.: Insulin-degrading
enzyme regulates extracellular levels of amyloid beta-protein by degradation. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 32730-32738, 1998.

16. Qiu, W. Q.; Ye, Z.; Kholodenko, D.; Seubert, P.; Selkoe, D. J.
: Degradation of amyloid beta-protein by a metalloprotease secreted
by microglia and other neural and non-neural cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
6641-6646, 1997.

17. Shen, Y.; Joachimiak, A.; Rosner, M. R.; Tang, W.-J.: Structures
of human insulin-degrading enzyme reveal a new substrate recognition
mechanism. Nature 443: 870-874, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/20/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/7/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/18/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/19/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/17/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/3/1989

EDITED ckniffin: 05/06/2010
mgross: 9/28/2009
mgross: 3/20/2007
alopez: 11/3/2006
terry: 10/31/2006
wwang: 9/29/2005
ckniffin: 9/7/2005
terry: 3/16/2005
mgross: 6/24/2004
terry: 6/18/2004
tkritzer: 5/7/2004
terry: 5/5/2004
tkritzer: 11/21/2003
terry: 11/19/2003
carol: 7/24/2003
terry: 7/24/2003
alopez: 6/27/2003
terry: 6/19/2003
carol: 5/28/2002
terry: 5/24/2002
carol: 1/16/2002
mcapotos: 1/8/2002
terry: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/4/2000
terry: 11/17/2000
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/5/1992
carol: 10/22/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 1/3/1989

603129	TITLE *603129 LIM DOMAIN ONLY 4; LMO4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The LIM domain, an approximately 55-residue cysteine-rich zinc-binding
motif, is present in a variety of proteins, including LIM homeobox
proteins that contain 2 LIM domains and 1 homeodomain. The nuclear
LIM-only proteins (e.g., LMO2; 180385) lack a DNA-binding homeodomain.
To identify novel LIM domain transcription factors, Kenny et al. (1998)
screened 2 mouse embryonic expression libraries using the LIM
interaction domain of the widely expressed nuclear LIM interactor (NLI,
or LDB1; 603451), to which the LIM domains of nuclear proteins bind with
high affinity. They reported the isolation and characterization of LMO4,
a novel LIM-only gene that is highly expressed in the T-lymphocyte
lineage, cranial neural crest cells, somite, dorsal limb bud mesenchyme,
motor neurons, and Schwann cell progenitors. LMO1 (186921), LMO2, and
LMO4 were found to have distinct expression patterns in adult tissue.
Mesenchymal and thymic blast cell expression patterns of LMO4 and LMO2
were consistent with the suggestion that LMO genes inhibit
differentiation.

Using autologous patient serum to screen a human breast tumor cDNA
expression library, followed by screening a testis cDNA library,
Racevskis et al. (1999) cloned LMO4. The 5-prime end of the transcript
is highly GC rich (74%), with some stretches exceeding 90%, and the
3-prime UTR contains an RNA destabilization motif. Except for a
proline-rich N terminus, the deduced 165-amino acid protein is composed
entirely of 2 tandem LIM domains. The mouse and human LMO4 proteins are
identical. Northern blot analysis detected LMO4 expression in most human
tissues analyzed, with highest levels in brain, skeletal muscle, testis,
and ovary. No expression was detected in liver, kidney, and pancreas.
The expression pattern was somewhat different than that found in mouse.

Using Northern blot analysis, Wittlin et al. (2003) detected LMO4
transcripts of about 2.1 and 2.3 kb in normal mammary epithelia and
breast cancer cell lines. A transcript of about 1.7 kb was also detected
in the cancer cell lines, but not in normal epithelial cells. The
variation in transcript size was due to different promoter usage and
splicing.

GENE FUNCTION

Visvader et al. (2001) explored a role for LMO4, initially described as
a human breast tumor autoantigen, in developing mammary epithelium and
breast oncogenesis. The gene was expressed predominantly in the
lobuloalveoli of the mammary gland during pregnancy. Consistent with a
role in proliferation, forced expression of this gene inhibited
differentiation of mammary epithelial cells. Overexpression of LMO4 mRNA
was observed in 5 of 10 human breast cancer cell lines. Moreover, in
situ hybridization analysis of 177 primary invasive breast carcinomas
revealed overexpression of LMO4 in 56% of specimens.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed overexpression in a high percentage (62%)
of tumors. These studies implied a role for LMO4 in maintaining
proliferation of mammary epithelium and suggested that deregulation of
this gene may contribute to breast tumorigenesis.

Using human and mouse expression plasmids in several protein interaction
assays, Sum et al. (2002) identified CTIP (604124) and BRCA1 (113705) as
LMO4-binding proteins. The LMO4-BRCA1 interaction required the
C-terminal BRCT domains of BRCA1. LDB1 also associated with a complex
containing LMO4, CTIP, and BRCA1 in transfected human embryonic kidney
cells. In functional assays, LMO4 repressed BRCA1-mediated
transcriptional activation in both yeast and mammalian cells.

Wittlin et al. (2003) found that the 2 LMO4 promoters exhibited strong
activity in breast cancer cell lines that correlated with RNA levels.
Promoter 2 appeared to be selectively activated in certain breast cancer
cell lines but not in immortalized human mammary epithelial cells,
implying aberrant activation of the LMO4 gene in the cancer cell lines.

By mammalian 2-hybrid analysis, Manetopoulos et al. (2003) showed that
the helix-loop-helix protein HEN1 (162360) interacted with both LMO2 and
LMO4. LMO4, but not LMO2, could augment HEN1-mediated repression of E47
(147141) transcriptional activity. LMO4 could also prevent HEN1-mediated
neurite extension in rat hippocampal precursor cells. Manetopoulos et
al. (2003) concluded that LMO4 can modulate the transcriptional activity
of HEN1.

Sum et al. (2005) found that downregulation of LMO4 expression by RNA
interference reduced proliferation of human breast cancer cells and
increased differentiation of mouse mammary epithelial cells.
Furthermore, transfection of small interfering RNA into breast cancer
cells reduced the capacity of the cells to migrate and invade an
extracellular matrix. Conversely, overexpression of LMO4 in noninvasive,
immortalized human breast epithelial cells promoted cell motility and
invasion. Sum et al. (2005) also found that high nuclear levels of LMO4
correlated with poor patient outcome in a cohort of 159 primary breast
cancers. They concluded that deregulation of LMO4 in breast epithelium
contributes directly to breast neoplasia by altering the rate of
cellular proliferation and promoting cell invasion.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic structure analysis, Tse et al. (1999) determined that the
mouse Lmo4 gene contains 6 exons, the last 4 of which encode the
165-amino acid protein.

Wittlin et al. (2003) determined that the LMO4 gene contains 2 5-prime
noncoding exons, exon 1a and 1b, and exon 2 encodes the first LIM
domain. Promoter 1, upstream of exon 1a, and promoter 2, upstream of
exon 1b, lack canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes, but both contain GC-rich
regions. Promoter 1 also has recognition sites for SP1 (189906) and
Kruppel-like factors (see KLF1; 600599), and promoter 2 has SP1-like
recognition elements, GC boxes, and AP2 (107580) sites.

MAPPING

Tse et al. (1999) mapped the mouse Lmo4 gene to chromosome 3 by
interspecific backcross analysis. Using FISH, they mapped the human LMO4
gene to 1p22.3, a region that is deleted in a number of human cancers.

REFERENCE 1. Kenny, D. A.; Jurata, L. W.; Saga, Y.; Gill, G. N.: Identification
and characterization of LMO4, an LMO gene with a novel pattern of
expression during embryogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 11257-11262,
1998.

2. Manetopoulos, C.; Hansson, A.; Karlsson, J.; Jonsson, J.-I.; Axelson,
H.: The Lim-only protein LMO4 modulates the transcriptional activity
of HEN1. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 307: 891-899, 2003.

3. Racevskis, J.; Dill, A.; Sparano, J. A.; Ruan, H.: Molecular cloning
of LMO4, a new human LIM domain gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1445:
148-153, 1999.

4. Sum, E. Y. M.; Peng, B.; Yu, X.; Chen, J.; Byrne, J.; Lindeman,
G. J.; Visvader, J. E.: The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with
the cofactor CtIP and the tumor suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 7849-7856, 2002.

5. Sum, E. Y. M.; Segara, D.; Duscio, B.; Bath, M. L.; Field, A. S.;
Sutherland, R. L.; Lindeman, G. J.; Visvader, J. E.: Overexpression
of LMO4 induces mammary hyperplasia, promotes cell invasion, and is
a predictor of poor outcome in breast cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
7659-7664, 2005.

6. Tse, E.; Grutz, G.; Garner, A. A.; Ramsey, Y.; Carter, N. P.; Copeland,
N.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Agulnick, A.; Forster, A.; Rabbitts,
T. H.: Characterization of the Lmo4 gene encoding a LIM-only protein:
genomic organization and comparative chromosomal mapping. Mammalian
Genome 10: 1089-1094, 1999.

7. Visvader, J. E.; Venter, D.; Hahm, K.; Santamaria, M.; Sum, E.
Y. M.; O'Reilly, L.; White, D.; Williams, R.; Armes, J.; Lindeman,
G. J.: The LIM domain gene LMO4 inhibits differentiation of mammary
epithelial cells in vitro and is overexpressed in breast cancer. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 14452-14457, 2001.

8. Wittlin, S.; Sum, E. Y. M.; Jonas, N. K.; Lindeman, G. J.; Visvader,
J. E.: Two promoters within the human LMO4 gene contribute to its
overexpression in breast cancer cells. Genomics 82: 280-287, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/23/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/27/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/7/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/13/1998

EDITED carol: 08/29/2007
mgross: 7/14/2005
terry: 6/23/2005
terry: 3/18/2004
carol: 1/20/2002
terry: 12/27/2001
mgross: 7/7/2000
carol: 12/15/1998
carol: 10/13/1998

137170	TITLE *137170 GAMMA-GLUTAMYL CYCLOTRANSFERASE; GGCT
;;GLUTAMYLCYCLOTRANSFERASE, GAMMA; GCTG;;
CHROMOSOME 7 OPEN READING FRAME 24; C7ORF24;;
CYTOCHROME c-RELEASING FACTOR, 21-KD; CRF21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GGCT (EC 2.3.2.4) catalyzes the formation of 5-oxoproline (pyroglutamic
acid) from gamma-glutamyl dipeptides and may play a significant role in
glutathione homeostasis (Oakley et al., 2008).

CLONING

By mass spectrometric analysis of peptides obtained from an
apoptosis-inducing protein, followed by database analysis and RT-PCR of
total RNA from a human leukemia cell line, Masuda et al. (2006) cloned
GGCT, which they called CRF21. SDS-PAGE detected purified CRF21 at an
apparent molecular mass of 21 kD.

Using tryptic peptides obtained from GGCT partially purified from
expired human red blood cells for database analysis, Oakley et al.
(2008) obtained a full-length GGCT cDNA. The deduced 188-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 21 kD. EST database analysis
revealed moderate GGCT expression in a wide range of human tissues, with
highest levels in bladder and salivary gland. Database analysis
identified GGCT orthologs in a range of species from C. elegans to
mammals, but not in plants.

GENE FUNCTION

Geranylgeraniol (GGO) induces apoptosis in human tumor cell lines
through a mitochondria-dependent pathway that includes cytochrome c
release. Masuda et al. (2006) found that GGO was unable to induce
cytochrome c release from isolated human mitochondria directly, and they
identified CRF21 as a cytosolic cytochrome c-releasing factor involved
in GGO-induced apoptosis. Overexpression of CRF21 in HeLa cells induced
cytochrome c release and apoptosis. Masuda et al. (2006) noted that
GGO-induced apoptosis was inhibited by a dominant-negative mutation of
JNK (MAPK8; 601158) that impeded JNK signaling, suggesting involvement
of JNK and CRF21 in GGO-induced apoptosis.

Oakley et al. (2008) confirmed that recombinant human GGCT used
gamma-glutamyl-L-alanine as its substrate. The enzymatic kinetics were
similar to those of GGCT purified from human erythrocytes.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Oakley et al. (2008) determined the crystal structure of recombinant
human GGCT to 2.4-angstrom resolution. GGCT adopted a mixed alpha/beta
topology with 6 beta stands, 5 alpha helices, and 4 short 3(10) helices,
and it assumed a unique structural fold that the authors termed a GGCT
fold. GGCT formed dimers, and each monomer featured an invagination that
Oakley et al. (2008) proposed was the active site. The site was lined
with hydrophilic and amphipathic residues, including a conserved glu98
that appeared to function as a general acid/base in the reaction.
Mutation of glu98 to ala or gln did not alter the structural fold, but
it completely inactivated the enzyme. Mutation analysis showed that
gly23 and tyr105 also contributed to substrate binding interactions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Oakley et al. (2008) determined that the GGCT gene contains 5 exons and
spans 8 kb.

MAPPING

Bissbort et al. (1984) assigned the GGCT gene to chromosome 7pter-p14 by
somatic cell hybrid studies.

By genomic sequence analysis, Oakley et al. (2008) mapped the GGCT gene
to chromosome 7p15-p14. They identified putative GGCT pseudogenes on
chromosomes 5 and 20. Oakley et al. (2008) noted that the mouse Ggct
gene maps to a region of chromosome 6 that shares homology of synteny
with human chromosome 7p15-p14.

REFERENCE 1. Bissbort, S.; Bender, K.; Grzeschik, K. H.: Assignment of the
human gene for gamma-glutamyl-cyclo-transferase (GCTG) to chromosome
7p. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37: 442 only, 1984.

2. Masuda, Y.; Maeda, S.; Watanabe, A.; Sano, Y.; Aiuchi, T.; Nakajo,
S.; Itabe, H.; Nakaya, K.: A novel 21-kDa cytochrome c-releasing
factor is generated upon treatment of human leukemia U937 cells with
geranylgeraniol. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 346: 454-460, 2006.

3. Oakley, A. J.; Yamada, T.; Liu, D.; Coggan, M.; Clark, A. G.; Board,
P. G.: The identification and structural characterization of C7orf24
as gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase: an essential enzyme in the gamma-glutamyl
cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 22031-22042, 2008. Note: Erratum: J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 32152 only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 08/09/2012
joanna: 12/24/2008
mgross: 12/9/2008
terry: 12/8/2008
mgross: 9/19/2008
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 6/4/1986

612314	TITLE *612314 GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASE, OMEGA-2; GSTO2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The omega class glutathione transferases (GST; EC 2.5.1.18) have poor
activity with common GST substrates, but exhibit novel
glutathione-dependent thioltransferase, dehydroascorbate reductase, and
monomethylarsonate reductase activities, and they modulate Ca(2+)
release by ryanodine receptors (e.g., RYR1, 180901) (Whitbread et al.,
2003).

For background information on GSTs, see 605482.

CLONING

By sequencing a chromosome 10 BAC contig containing the GSTO1 gene
(605482), Whitbread et al. (2003) identified GSTO2. The deduced
243-amino acid protein shares 64% identity with GSTO1. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2-kb GSTO2 transcript highly expressed in testis,
and a 1.26-kb GSTO2 transcript highly expressed in liver, kidney, and
skeletal muscle, with lower expression in heart and reproductive
tissues, predominantly testis, cervix, ovary, and prostate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Whitbread et al. (2003) determined that the GSTO2 gene contains 6 exons
and spans 24.5 kb.

MAPPING

By sequencing an unordered chromosome 10 contig containing GSTO1,
Whitbread et al. (2003) mapped the GSTO2 gene to chromosome 10q24-q25,
about 7.5-kb downstream of the GSTO1 gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By PCR of an existing cDNA clone and by PCR of a testis cDNA library,
Whitbread et al. (2003) identified a GSTO2 polymorphism: a 424A-C
transition resulting in an asn142-to-asp (N142D) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Whitbread, A. K.; Tetlow, N.; Eyre, H. J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Board,
P. G.: Characterization of the human omega class glutathione transferase
genes and associated polymorphisms. Pharmacogenetics 13: 131-144,
2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/24/2008

EDITED carol: 09/24/2008

600031	TITLE *600031 CHITINASE 1; CHIT1
;;CHITINASE, MACROPHAGE; CHIT;;
CHITOTRIOSIDASE;;
METHYLUMBELLIFERYL-TETRA-N-ACETYLCHITOTETRAOSIDE HYDROLASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CHIT1 gene encodes plasma methylumbelliferyl
tetra-N-acetylchitotetraoside hydrolase (chitotriosidase), a human
chitinase (EC 3.2.1.14). Chitinases play a role in degrading the chitin
walls of some microorganisms (Boot et al., 1995).

CLONING

Renkema et al. (1995) purified and characterized the chitotriosidase
protein from the spleen of a patient with Gaucher disease (230800) who
had increased serum CHIT1 enzyme activity. Two major isoforms with
isoelectric points of 7.2 and 8.0 and molecular masses of 50 and 39 kD,
respectively, were found to have identical N-terminal amino acid
sequences. An antiserum raised against the purified 39-kD
chitotriosidase precipitated all isozymes. The findings suggested that a
single gene encodes the different isoforms of chitotriosidase. The
authors postulated that the enzyme may be involved in defense against
and in degradation of chitin-containing pathogens such as fungi,
nematodes, and insects.

Boot et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA corresponding to the chitotriosidase
gene from a macrophage cDNA library. The deduced 445-amino acid protein
has a molecular mass of 49 kD, similar to the larger isoform detected by
Renkema et al. (1995). Secretion of active chitotriosidase was obtained
after transient transfection of COS-1 cells with the cloned cDNA.
Chitotriosidase contains several regions with high homology to those
present in chitinases from different species belonging to family 18 of
glycosylhydrolases. Northern blot analysis showed that expression of
chitotriosidase mRNA occurred only at a late stage of differentiation of
monocytes to activated macrophages in cell culture. The authors
speculated that the enzyme may play a role in the degradation of
chitin-containing pathogens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Boot et al. (1998) determined that the CHIT1 gene contains 12 exons and
spans about 20 kb.

MAPPING

Eiberg and Den Tandt (1997) mapped the CHIT locus to chromosome
1q31-qter between flanking markers D1S191 and D1S245. By fluorescence in
situ hybridization, Boot et al. (1998) assigned the CHIT gene to
1q31-q32.

GENE FUNCTION

Hollak et al. (1994) observed a very marked increase (more than
600-fold) of chitotriosidase activity in the plasma of 30 of 32
symptomatic patients with type I Gaucher disease (230800), which is due
to mutation in the gene encoding beta-glucosidase (GBA; 606463). The
increase in plasma chitotriosidase that they observed in Gaucher disease
patients was far more pronounced than the increase in alkaline
phosphatase (ALPL; 171760), which had been used as an important
diagnostic hallmark of the disease. Chitotriosidase activity declined
dramatically during enzyme supplementation therapy. In contrast, 3
GBA-deficient individuals without clinical symptoms had only slight
increases in chitotriosidase. The authors considered it unlikely that
chitotriosidase itself contributes to the clinical presentation of
Gaucher disease. Hollak et al. (1994) noted that the similarity between
lysozyme (LYZ; 153450) and chitotriosidase with respect to catalytic
activity toward particular substrates suggested that the latter may also
function in host defense mechanisms, e.g., through cleavage of bacterial
cell wall polysaccharide. Hollak et al. (1994) suggested that the
macrophages loaded with glucosylceramide in Gaucher disease are the main
source of the plasma enzyme activity. No elevation, or only moderate
elevation, of plasma chitotriosidase was found in a variety of
granulomatous immunologic disorders.

Boot et al. (1995) noted that homologous chitinases in plants are known
to defend against fungal pathogens. The bactericidal function of
lysozyme is also well established; nevertheless, in rabbits an inherited
deficiency in lysozyme occurs that seems to have little consequence for
susceptibility to infections. The diverse array of defense mechanisms of
the immune system in mammals probably renders sufficient tolerance to
defects in single enzymes such as lysozyme and chitotriosidase.

By comparing the antifungal properties of human macrophage
chitotriosidase and its isolated domains, Vandevenne et al. (2011)
showed that the catalytic domain was sufficient for antifungal activity
and tended to be more efficient than the intact enzyme. In contrast, the
chitin-binding domain did not possess any antifungal properties.
Mutations in chitotriosidase that rendered the macrophage enzyme
inactive could be compensated by lysozyme, which had even greater
antifungal activity than chitotriosidase, as well as antibacterial
activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In individuals with chitotriosidase deficiency (614122), Boot et al.
(1998) identified a homozygous 24-bp duplication in the CHIT1 gene
(600031.0001). The observed carrier frequency of about 35% indicated
that the duplication is the predominant cause of chitotriosidase
deficiency. The presence of the duplication in individuals from various
ethnic backgrounds suggested that this mutation is relatively old.

Grace et al. (2007) noted that the identification of CHIT1 gene
mutations that alter plasma activity is important for the use of this
biomarker to monitor disease activity and therapeutic response in
Gaucher disease. They genotyped the CHIT1 gene in 320 unrelated patients
with Gaucher disease, including 272 of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Among
all patients, 4% and 37.2% were homozygous and heterozygous,
respectively, for the 24-bp duplication. In addition, Grace et al.
(2007) identified 3 novel mutations in the CHIT1 gene
(600031.0002-600031.0004) in individuals with Gaucher disease and
chitotriosidase deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, 24-BP DUP

Boot et al. (1998) found that chitotriosidase deficiency (614122) can be
caused by a 24-bp duplication in exon 10 of the CHIT1 gene, resulting in
activation of a cryptic 3-prime splice site, generating an mRNA with an
in-frame deletion of 87 nucleotides. All chitotriosidase-deficient
individuals tested were homozygous for the duplication. Among 171 Dutch
persons, 6.4% were homozygous and 35.1% were heterozygous for the
mutation. Among 68 Ashkenazi Jewish subjects, 5.9% were homozygous and
33.8% were heterozygous. The mutant chitotriosidase is predicted to lack
amino acids 344-372. On the basis of homology with several chitinases
for which the 3-dimensional structure has been resolved by
crystallographic analysis, the authors predicted that the internal
deletion in the mutant chitotriosidase prevents the formation of a
proper barrel conformation, with resulting loss of chitinolytic
activity.

Among a total of 320 unrelated patients with Gaucher disease (232800),
including 272 of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, Grace et al. (2007) found
that 4% and 37.2% were homozygous or heterozygous for the CHIT1 24-bp
dup, respectively. The allele frequency was 0.227.

.0002
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, GLY354ARG, LEU385LEU, AND 4-BP DEL

In a Caribbean Hispanic/African type 1 Gaucher disease (230800) patient
with chitotriosidase deficiency (614122), Grace et al. (2007) identified
a complex allele of the CHIT1 gene with 3 different variations in cis: a
1060G-A transition in exon 10 resulting in a gly354-to-arg (G354R)
substitution, a 1155G-A transition in exon 10 resulting in a synonymous
leu385-to-leu (L385L) substitution, and a 4-bp deletion in intron 10
(1156delGTAA). The complex allele was designated 'E/I-10'
(exon/intron-10) allele. The patient was compound heterozygous for the
E/I-10 complex allele and the common 24-bp duplication (600031.0001). In
vitro functional expression studies showed that the complex mutant had
no residual enzyme activity. Further screening identified the complex
allele in individuals of Caribbean Hispanic, Dominican, Caribbean Black,
Puerto Rican, and American Black descent. It was not identified in those
of Caucasian or Ashkenazi Jewish descent.

.0003
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, GLU74LYS

In a type I Gaucher disease (230800) patient with chitotriosidase
deficiency (614122), Grace et al. (2007) identified a 220G-A transition
in exon 3 of the CHIT1 gene, resulting in a glu74-to-lys (E74K)
substitution. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
E74K mutant had 51% activity compared to control values. The E74K allele
was found in 3 (1.4%) of 208 Ashkenazi Jewish alleles, but not in
non-Ashkenazi Jewish alleles, indicating that it is very rare. This
mutation was not found in normal controls.

.0004
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, GLY102SER

In 3 Ashkenazi Jewish type I Gaucher disease (230800) patients with
chitotriosidase deficiency (614122), Grace et al. (2007) identified a
304G-A transition in exon 4 of the CHIT1 gene, resulting in a
gly102-to-ser (G102S) substitution. In vitro functional expression
studies showed that the G102S mutant had 23% activity compared to
control values. The G102S allele had a frequency of 0.2 to 0.3 in
various control populations.

REFERENCE 1. Boot, R. G.; Renkema, G. H.; Verhoek, M.; Strijland, A.; Bliek,
J.; de Meulemeester, T. M. A. M. O.; Mannens, M. M. A. M.; Aerts,
J. M. F. G.: The human chitotriosidase gene: nature of inherited
enzyme deficiency. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 25680-25685, 1998.

2. Boot, R. G.; Renkema. H.; Strijland, A.; van Zonneveld, A. J.;
Aerts, J. M. F. G.: Cloning of a cDNA encoding chitotriosidase, a
human chitinase produced by macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 26252-26256,
1995.

3. Eiberg, H.; Den Tandt, W. R.: Assignment of human plasma methylumbelliferyl-tetra-N-acetylchitotetraoside
hydrolase or chitinase to chromosome 1q by a linkage study. Hum.
Genet. 101: 205-207, 1997.

4. Grace, M. E.; Balwani, M.; Nazarenko, I.; Prakash-Cheng, A.; Desnick,
R. J.: Type 1 Gaucher disease: null and hypomorphic novel chitotriosidase
mutations--implications for diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring. Hum.
Mutat. 28: 866-873, 2007.

5. Hollak, C. E. M.; van Weely, S.; van Oers, M. H. J.; Aerts, J.
M. F. G.: Marked elevation of plasma chitotriosidase activity: a
novel hallmark of Gaucher disease. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 1288-1292,
1994.

6. Renkema, G. H.; Boot, R. G.; Muijsers, A. O.; Donker-Koopman, W.
E.; Aerts, J. M. F. G.: Purification and characterization of human
chitotriosidase, a novel member of the chitinase family of proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 2198-2202, 1995.

7. Vandevenne, M.; Campisi, V.; Freichels, A.; Gillard, C.; Gaspard,
G.; Frere, J.-M.; Galleni, M.; Filee, P.: Comparative functional
analysis of the human macrophage chitotriosidase. Protein Sci. 20:
1451-1463, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/2/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/24/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/14/1994

EDITED mgross: 01/07/2013
terry: 1/2/2013
terry: 8/2/2011
carol: 7/26/2011
carol: 10/24/2007
ckniffin: 10/17/2007
alopez: 2/11/1999
carol: 11/11/1998
terry: 11/2/1998
mark: 12/9/1997
terry: 12/2/1997
mark: 1/24/1996
mark: 1/22/1996
mimadm: 9/23/1995
mark: 3/20/1995
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 7/14/1994

606827	TITLE *606827 PLEXIN DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; PLXDC2
;;TUMOR ENDOTHELIAL MARKER 7-RELATED PROTEIN; TEM7R
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE), St Croix et al. (2000)
identified partial cDNAs corresponding to several tumor endothelial
markers (TEMs) that displayed elevated expression during tumor
angiogenesis. Among the genes they identified was PLXDC1 (606826), which
they called TEM7. While searching databases for the mouse Plxdc1
ortholog, Carson-Walter et al. (2001) identified Plxdc2, which they
called Tem7r. They subsequently identified the human PLXDC2 sequence,
which encodes a predicted 529-amino acid transmembrane protein that
shares 91% amino acid identity with mouse Plxdc2.

In situ hybridization analysis of human colorectal cancer by
Carson-Walter et al. (2001) demonstrated that TEM7R was expressed
clearly in the endothelial cells of the tumor stroma but not in the
endothelial cells of normal colonic tissue. Using in situ hybridization
to assay expression in various adult mouse tissues, Carson-Walter et al.
(2001) detected Tem7r expression at high levels not only in tumor
endothelium but also in vessels of some normal tissues, with highest
expression in muscle and lung.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PLXDC2
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP WI-15162).

REFERENCE 1. Carson-Walter, E. B.; Watkins, D. N.; Nanda, A.; Vogelstein, B.;
Kinzler, K. W.; St. Croix, B.: Cell surface tumor endothelial markers
are conserved in mice and humans. Cancer Res. 61: 6649-6655, 2001.

2. St. Croix, B.; Rago, C.; Velculescu, V.; Traverso, G.; Romans,
K. E.; Montgomery, E.; Lal, A.; Riggins, G. J.; Lengauer, C.; Vogelstein,
B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Genes expressed in human tumor endothelium. Science 289:
1197-1202, 2000.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 4/4/2002

EDITED wwang: 11/21/2006
mgross: 4/4/2002

611158	TITLE *611158 KERATIN 77; KRT77
;;KERATIN 1B; K1B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Keratins, such as KRT77, are filament proteins that make up one of the
major structural fibers of epithelial cells (Rogers et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using database analysis to identify keratin genes within the type II
keratin gene domain on chromosome 12, Rogers et al. (2005) identified
KRT77, which they called K1B. The deduced 578-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 61.8 kD. Like other type II keratins, K1B
has N- and C-terminal domains and a central rod domain consisting of 4
alpha-helical regions separated by 3 nonhelical linker sequences. In
addition, it has numerous GGG and GGX repeats in its head and tail
domains. Northern blot analysis detected weak expression of a 3.0-kb K1B
transcript in skin, but not in scalp or in any other tissues or organs
examined.

Using in situ hybridization and indirect immunofluorescence, Langbein et
al. (2005) detected strong K1B expression in the ducts of eccrine sweat
glands, but not in the deeper secretory portion of the glands.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rogers et al. (2005) mapped the KRT77 gene
to chromosome 12q13.13.

REFERENCE 1. Langbein, L.; Rogers, M. A.; Praetzel, S.; Cribier, B.; Peltre,
B.; Gassler, N.; Schweizer, J.: Characterization of a novel human
type II epithelial keratin K1b, specifically expressed in eccrine
sweat glands. J. Invest. Derm. 125: 428-444, 2005.

2. Rogers, M. A.; Edler, L.; Winter, H.; Langbein, L.; Beckmann, I.;
Schweizer, J.: Characterization of new members of the human type
II keratin gene family and a general evaluation of the keratin gene
domain on chromosome 12q13.13. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 536-544, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/2/2007

EDITED wwang: 07/02/2007

602454	TITLE *602454 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, RECEPTOR-TYPE, U; PTPRU
;;PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE J; PTPJ;;
PANCREATIC CARCINOMA PHOSPHATASE 2; PCP2;;
PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, RECEPTOR-TYPE, PSI;;
PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, RECEPTOR-TYPE, LAMBDA, MOUSE, HOMOLOG
OF
DESCRIPTION For general information about receptor protein-tyrosine phosphatases
(PTPases), see PTPRA (176884).

CLONING

To identify protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) involved in the
oncogenic process leading to the development of pancreatic carcinoma,
Wang et al. (1996) performed PCR on pooled poly(A)+ RNA from 9 human
pancreatic carcinoma cell lines using PTPase consensus oligonucleotide
primers. One of the novel PCR products recovered was termed PCP2 and was
used to screen a human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cDNA library. The full
sequence of PCP2 predicts a 1,430 amino acid protein consisting of a
putative extracellular domain of 740 amino acids, a single transmembrane
domain, and an intracellular domain of 666 amino acids. The
intracellular region contains 2 tandemly repeated PTP catalytic domains
with a high degree of identity to the catalytic domains of mouse
PTP-kappa and PTP-mu. In addition to a signal peptide and 13 potential
N-linked glycosylation sites, the extracellular domain contains a MAM
(meprin/A5/PTP-mu) domain followed by 1 Ig-like repeat and 4 putative
fibronectin type III repeats. The MAM domain, found in Xenopus A5
glycoprotein, meprin A, and meprin B, as well as in PTP-kappa and
PTP-mu, may be involved in attachment to the cytoskeleton. PCP2,
PTP-kappa, and PTP-mu appear to form a subfamily of MAM-containing
receptor-like PTPs (RPTPs). PCP2 also contains the tripeptide HAV,
implicated in cell-cell contact in the cadherins. By Northern blot
analysis, Wang et al. (1996) demonstrated that the 5.5-kb PCP2
transcript is widely distributed at varying levels, with very high
expression in brain, skeletal muscle, and pancreas, but no expression in
placenta or spleen. Subcellular localization using laser scanning
immunofluorescence microscopy showed localization of PCP2 at
intercellular adhesions and colocalization with beta-catenin and
E-cadherin. Wang et al. (1996) hypothesized that PCP2 and other members
of this subfamily of RPTPases may function as cell contact receptors
that mediate and control cell-cell signals.

Wang et al. (1997) used degenerate PCR to clone PTPJ, a member of the
type II receptor PTPase family. The PTPJ cDNA encodes a 1,436-amino acid
polypeptide that includes a single transmembrane domain and a
cytoplasmic domain containing 2 tandemly repeated PTP catalytic domains.
The presence of 2 PTP domains indicates that this gene is a member of
the type II receptor PTPases. Northern blot analysis detected expression
in skeletal muscle, heart, prostate, pancreas, and placenta.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (1996) showed that PCP2 had tyrosine phosphatase activity
using an in vitro pNPP assay.

Wang et al. (1997) found that in lymphocytes or lymphoma cells,
expression of PTPJ was downregulated following stimulation by either
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) or calcium ionophore, suggesting that
PMA or calcium signaling pathways may be involved in regulating the
expression of PTPJ.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the PTPRU gene to chromosome 1p35.3 based on an
alignment of the PTPRU sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB208855) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/16/2011.

2. Wang, B.; Kishihara, K.; Zhang, D.; Hara, H.; Nomoto, K.: Molecular
cloning and characterization of a novel human receptor protein tyrosine
phosphatase gene, hPTP-J: down-regulation of gene expression by PMA
and calcium ionophore in Jurkat T lymphoma cells. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 231: 77-81, 1997.

3. Wang, H; Lian, Z; Lerch, M. M.; Chen, Z; Xie, W; Ullrich, A.:
Characterization of PCP-2, a novel receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase
of the MAM domain family. Oncogene 12: 2555-2562, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 02/16/2011
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 7/15/1999

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 3/19/1998

EDITED mgross: 02/16/2011
carol: 11/3/1999
alopez: 7/15/1999
dholmes: 4/9/1998

608221	TITLE *608221 MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED SERINE/THREONINE KINASE-LIKE; MASTL
;;FLJ14813;;
GREATWALL; GWL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Gandhi et al. (2003) identified MASTL, which they called FLJ14813,
within the region of chromosome 10p where Drachman et al. (2000) had
mapped autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia, also known as
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), by linkage analysis. The protein
product of the MASTL gene is a putative kinase that contains 2 highly
conserved kinase domains. Gandhi et al. (2003) noted that a similar
gene, 'greatwall,' had been described in Drosophila. EMS-induced
mutations in the greatwall gene cause a metaphase-arrest phenotype and
problems in chromosome condensation.

GENE FUNCTION

A particular form of protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A; see 176915)
containing a B55-delta subunit (PPP2R2D; 613992) is the major protein
phosphatase that acts on model CDK substrates in Xenopus egg extracts
and has antimitotic activity. The activity of PP2A-B55-delta is high in
interphase and low in mitosis, exactly the opposite of CDK1 (116940).
Mochida et al. (2010) reported that inhibition of PP2A-B55-delta results
from a small protein known as alpha-endosulfine (ENSA; 603061), that is
phosphorylated in mitosis by the protein kinase Greatwall (Gwl, also
known as MASTL). This converts Ensa into a potent and specific inhibitor
of PP2A-B55-delta. Mochida et al. (2010) concluded that this pathway
represents a previously unknown element in the control of mitosis.
Mochida et al. (2010) also showed that Arpp19 (605487) is a substrate of
Gwl.

Initiation and maintenance of mitosis require the inhibition of PP2A,
which dephosphorylates mitotic substrates. The protein kinase Greatwall
is required to maintain mitosis through PP2A inhibition. Gharbi-Ayachi
et al. (2010) described how Gwl activation results in PP2A inhibition.
They identified Arpp19 and Ensa as 2 substrates of Gwl that, when
phosphorylated by this kinase, associate with and inhibit PP2A, thus
promoting mitotic entry. Conversely, in the absence of Gwl activity,
Arpp19 and Ensa are dephosphorylated and lose their capacity to bind and
inhibit PP2A. Gharbi-Ayachi et al. (2010) stated that although both
proteins can inhibit PP2A, endogenous Arpp19, but not Ensa, is
responsible for PP2A inhibition and mitotic entry in Xenopus egg
extracts.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By extensive sequencing of multiple genes located in the critical
segment on 10p, Gandhi et al. (2003) demonstrated a missense mutation in
the MASTL gene (608221.0001) in a family with thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2;
188000) mapping to this region.

However, Pippucci et al. (2011) found no mutations in the MASTL gene in
4 families with autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia mapping to
chromosome 10p. Instead, Pippucci et al. (2011) identified 6 different
heterozygous mutations in the 5-prime promoter region of the ANKRD26
gene (see, e.g., 610855.0001-610855.0003), which maps to the THC2 locus
on chromosome 10p12-p11.2, in 9 of 20 unrelated families with autosomal
dominant nonsyndromic thrombocytopenia-2.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
MASTL, GLU167ASP

By sequencing multiple genes in the critical region of autosomal
dominant thrombocytopenia (188000), also known as thrombocytopenia-2
(Drachman et al., 2000), Gandhi et al. (2003) found a missense mutation
in the MASTL gene: a 565G-C transversion predicted to result in a
glu167-to-asp (E167D) amino acid substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Drachman, J. G.; Jarvik, G. P.; Mehaffey, M. G.: Autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia: incomplete megakaryocyte differentiation and linkage
to human chromosome 10. Blood 96: 118-125, 2000.

2. Gandhi, M. J.; Cummings, C. L.; Drachman, J. G.: FLJ14813 missense
mutation: a candidate for autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia on human
chromosome 10. Hum. Hered. 55: 66-70, 2003.

3. Gharbi-Ayachi, A.; Labbe, J.-C.; Burgess, A.; Vigneron, S.; Strub,
J.-M.; Brioudes, E.; Van-Dorsselaer, A.; Castro, A.; Lorca, T.: The
substrate of Greatwall kinase, Arpp19, controls mitosis by inhibiting
protein phosphatase 2A. Science 330: 1673-1677, 2010.

4. Mochida, S.; Maslen, S. L.; Skehel, M.; Hunt, T.: Greatwall phosphorylates
an inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A that is essential for mitosis. Science 330:
1670-1673, 2010.

5. Pippucci, T.; Savoia, A.; Perrotta, S.; Pujol-Moix, N.; Noris,
P.; Castegnaro, G.; Pecci, A.; Gnan, C.; Punzo, F.; Marconi, C.; Gherardi,
S.; Loffredo, G.; and 11 others: Mutations in the 5-prime UTR of
ANKRD26, the ankirin repeat domain 26 gene, cause an autosomal-dominant
form of inherited thrombocytopenia, THC2. Am. J. Hum.  Genet. 88:
115-120, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/2/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/28/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/31/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/23/2011
wwang: 2/24/2011
ckniffin: 2/2/2011
alopez: 2/1/2011
terry: 1/28/2011
alopez: 4/23/2008
wwang: 10/6/2006
alopez: 10/31/2003

612159	TITLE *612159 RABPHILIN 3A; RPH3A
;;KIAA0985
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Exocytosis of neurotransmitters and hormones is fundamental to synaptic
neurotransmission and cell-cell communication. RAB3A (179390) is a small
G protein that is thought to act at late stages of exocytosis, and RPH3A
is a RAB3A effector (Lin et al., 2007).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned RPH3A, which they designated
KIAA0985. The deduced 694-amino acid protein shares 86.9% identity over
703 amino acids with rat Rph3a. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression
in fetal brain, followed by adult spinal cord and whole brain. Much
lower expression was detected in adult lung, testis, and spleen.
Expression was high in all specific adult brain regions tested, with
highest abundance in subthalamic nuclei and thalamus.

Inagaki et al. (1994) cloned mouse Rph3a, which encodes a deduced
681-amino acid protein with an N-terminal Rab3a-binding region and 2
C-terminal internal repeats homologous to the regulatory domain (C2
domain) of protein kinase C (see PRKCZ; 176982). Northern blot analysis
detected Rph3a highly expressed in brain and in several mammalian
endocrine and hormone-secreting cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Lin et al. (2007) found that direct interaction with rabphilin was
required for hydrolysis of GTP by Rab3a in stimulated rat
pheochromocytoma cells and for dissociation of Rab3a from vesicles and
exocytosis.

Smith et al. (2007) stated that the amount of Rph3a protein was reduced
in different brain regions in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington
disease (HD; 143100) and that Rph3a interacted with the SNARE synaptic
complex via Snap25 (600322). Western blot and immunohistochemical
analysis showed that levels of both SNAP25 and RPH3A were reduced in
human HD cortex. SNAP25 protein levels were lower even in HD brains with
limited neuropathology; the level of RPH3A deceased in HD brains with
higher neuropathologic grade and higher CAG repeats. The loss of SNAP25
and RPH3A was not due to general loss of synapses in HD cortex, since
the levels of other synapse-related proteins, including RAB3A, were
unaltered in the same patient samples.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the RPH3A gene
to chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Inagaki, N.; Mizuta, M.; Seino, S.: Cloning of a mouse rabphilin-3A
expressed in hormone-secreting cells. J. Biochem. 116: 239-242,
1994.

2. Lin, C.-C.; Huang, C.-C.; Lin, K.-H.; Cheng, K.-H.; Yang, D.-M.;
Tsai, Y.-S.; Ong, R.-Y.; Huang, Y.-N.; Kao, L.-S.: Visualization
of Rab3A dissociation during exocytosis: a study by total internal
reflection microscopy. J. Cell. Physiol. 211: 316-326, 2007.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

4. Smith, R.; Klein, P.; Koc-Schmitz, Y.; Waldvogel, H. J.; Faull,
R. L. M.; Brundin, P.; Plomann, M.; Li, J.-Y.: Loss of SNAP-25 and
rabphilin 3a in sensory-motor cortex in Huntington's disease. J.
Neurochem. 103: 115-123, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/2/2008

EDITED wwang: 07/02/2008

182271	TITLE *182271 SMALL PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN 3; SPRR3
DESCRIPTION See 182265. Gibbs et al. (1993) concluded that there is a single gene
for the SPRR3 subfamily of small proline-rich proteins. All SPRR genes
are closely linked within a 300-kb DNA segment on 1q21-q22.

REFERENCE 1. Gibbs, S.; Fijneman, R.; Wiegant, J.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; van
de Putte, P.; Backendorf, C.: Molecular characterization and evolution
of the SPRR family of keratinocyte differentiation markers encoding
small proline-rich proteins. Genomics 16: 630-637, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/18/1993

EDITED terry: 7/11/1994
carol: 6/18/1993

603799	TITLE *603799 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 3; CHST3
;;CHONDROITIN 6-SULFOTRANSFERASE; C6ST;;
C6ST1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans, which consist of a core protein with
at least 1 covalently attached glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chain, are
distributed on the surfaces of most cells and the extracellular matrix
in virtually every tissue. See 118661. Chondroitin sulfate has a linear
polymer structure that possesses repetitive, sulfated disaccharide units
containing glucuronic acid (GlcA) and N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc).
The major chondroitin sulfate found in mammalian tissues has sulfate
groups at position 4 or 6 of GalNAc residues. Chondroitin
6-sulfotransferase (C6ST) catalyzes the transfer of sulfate from PAPS
(3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate) to position 6 of the
GalNAc residues. By screening a placenta library with a chicken C6ST
cDNA, Tsutsumi et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding human C6ST. The
predicted 479-amino acid protein shares 74% and 36% identity with chick
C6ST and human keratan sulfate gal-6-sulfotransferase (CHST1; 603797),
respectively. Recombinant human enzyme displayed C6ST activity with a
marked specificity for a GlcA-GalNAc sequence. In addition, C6ST
catalyzed the sulfation of keratan sulfate. They noted that a deficiency
in C6ST has been associated with a heritable form of spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia (271630).

Independently, Fukuta et al. (1998) cloned human C6ST cDNAs. Using
Northern blot analysis, they found that the 7.8-kb C6ST mRNA was
ubiquitous. Smaller transcripts were also observed in skeletal muscle
and heart.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tsutsumi et al. (1998) reported that the C6ST gene contains 3 exons and
spans more than 20 kb.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Iida et al. (2002) characterized single-nucleotide polymorphisms and
insertion-deletion polymorphisms in both the CHST1 gene (603797) and the
CHST3 gene.

In affected members of a large inbred Omani kindred with
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital joint dislocations (143095),
Thiele et al. (2004) identified a homozygous arg304-to-gln mutation in
the CHST3 gene (R304Q; 603799.0001).

In 6 unrelated patients born with joint dislocations, some of whom
carried a diagnosis of recessive Larsen syndrome and others,
humerospinal dysostosis, Hermanns et al. (2008) identified homozygosity
or compound heterozygosity for 9 different mutations in the CHST3 gene
(see, e.g., 603799.0002-603799.0006). Noting the relatively narrow
phenotypic spectrum of these conditions, Hermanns et al. (2008)
suggested that the disorders previously designated as Omani-type
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and humerospinal dysostosis, as well as
some patients given a diagnosis of recessive Larsen syndrome, might
represent different age-related descriptions of the same condition.

In 2 Turkish sibs with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital joint
dislocations, born of consanguineous parents, van Roij et al. (2008)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the CHST3 gene
(603799.0007).

In 2 sibs and their affected uncle from a consanguineous Turkish
pedigree with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and subluxation of the radial
head, Tuysuz et al. (2009) identified homozygosity for a missense
mutation in the CHST3 gene (T141M; 603799.0009).

Unger et al. (2010) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in CHST3 in 18 patients with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and
congenital joint dislocations from 17 families. The patients had
presented with various diagnoses, including 15 who had been diagnosed
with Larsen syndrome (see, e.g., 603799.0011 and 603799.0012), 2 with
chondrodysplasia with multiple dislocations (see, e.g., 603799.0002), 1
with humerospinal dysostosis (see 603799.0010), 1 with Desbuquois
syndrome (see 251450), and 1 with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, ARG304GLN

In affected members of the large inbred kindred with spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia with congenital joint dislocations (143095), first described
by Rajab et al. (2004) and designated 'Omani type,' Thiele et al. (2004)
identified a homozygous 911G-A transition in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene,
resulting in an arg304-to-gln (R304Q) substitution. The mutation occurs
in the highly conserved 3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate
(PAPS) binding site.

.0002
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, LEU259PRO

In a 10.5-year-old Turkish-German girl with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
and congenital joint dislocations (143095), born of consanguineous
parents, Hermanns et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a 776T-C
transition in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene, resulting in a leu259-to-pro
(L259P) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The parents were
heterozygous for the mutation, and the patient had an unaffected
brother. Functional analysis in cultured skin fibroblasts revealed that
the L259P mutation severely impaired or abolished CHST3 function. Unger
et al. (2010) restudied this patient and noted that although she had
initially been diagnosed as having Larsen syndrome (see 245600), there
was now clear evidence of SED with severe spinal degeneration.

In a Lebanese boy with SED and congenital joint dislocations, who was
originally reported by Megarbane and Ghanem (2004) and given the
diagnosis of 'chondrodysplasia with multiple dislocations,' Unger et al.
(2010) identified homozygosity for the L259P mutation in the CHST3 gene.

.0003
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, ARG222TRP

In a 17-year-old Swiss patient with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with
congenital joint dislocations (143095), born of parents from the same
small village, Hermanns et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a
664C-T transition in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene, resulting in an
arg222-to-trp (R222W) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation, and the patient had an
unaffected brother. Functional analysis in cultured skin fibroblasts
revealed that the R222W mutation severely impaired or abolished CHST3
function. Unger et al. (2010) restudied this patient and noted that
although initially the diagnosis had been Larsen syndrome (see 245600),
there was now clear evidence of SED with severe spinal degeneration.

.0004
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, LEU307PRO

In a Sardinian boy with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital
joint dislocations (143095), Hermanns et al. (2008) identified
homozygosity for a 920T-C transition in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene,
resulting in a leu307-to-pro (L307P) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The parents were heterozygous for the mutation. Although the
patient previously carried a diagnosis of recessive Larsen syndrome
(245600), the authors noted that his appearance was 'identical' to that
of the patient originally reported with humerospinal dysostosis by Hall
(1997) (see 603799.0010).

Unger et al. (2010) studied cultured fibroblasts from the Sardinian boy
who was homozygous for L307P and observed almost no C6ST activity
compared to controls.

.0005
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, 1-BP DEL, 1086G

In a 31-year-old Spanish man with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with
congenital joint dislocations (143095), originally reported as having
humerospinal dysostosis (HSD) at 2 years of age by Cortina et al.
(1979), Hermanns et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity for a
1-bp deletion (1086delG) in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene, resulting in a
frameshift and premature termination of the protein, and a 603C-A
transversion in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene, resulting in a tyr201-to-ter
(Y201X; 603799.0006) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
parents were each heterozygous for one of the mutations, respectively,
and he had an unaffected sister. In another Spanish patient who had
originally been diagnosed with HSD, Hermanns et al. (2008) identified
compound heterozygosity for 1086delG and a 1114G-A transition in exon 3
of the CHST3 gene, resulting in a glu372-to-lys (E372K) substitution at
a highly conserved residue. The E372K mutation was not found in more
than 250 control chromosomes.

.0006
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, TYR201TER

See 603799.0005 and Hermanns et al. (2008).

.0007
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, LEU286PRO

In 2 Turkish sibs with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital joint
dislocations (143095), born of second-cousin parents, van Roij et al.
(2008) identified homozygosity for an 857T-C transition in the CHST3
gene, predicted to result in a leu286-to-pro (L286P) substitution at a
highly conserved residue adjacent to the binding site for PAPS.
Functional studies in patient fibroblasts showed dramatically reduced
C6ST1 activity compared to wildtype.

.0008
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, GLU372LYS

See 603799.0005 and Hermanns et al. (2008).

.0009
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, THR141MET

In 2 sibs and their affected paternal uncle from a consanguineous
Turkish pedigree with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital joint
dislocations (143095), Tuysuz et al. (2009) identified homozygosity for
a 422C-T transition in exon 3 of the CHST3 gene, resulting in a
thr141-to-met (T141M) substitution at a conserved residue. Western blot
analysis showed comparable expression levels of the mutant and wildtype
proteins, but sulfotransferase activity of the mutant was reduced to
less than 30% of wildtype.

.0010
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, PHE159ILE

In a 15-year-old patient with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and
congenital joint dislocations (143095), originally reported by Hall
(1997) with a diagnosis of humerospinal dysostosis, Unger et al. (2010)
identified homozygosity for a 475T-A transversion in the CHST3 gene,
resulting in a phe159-to-ile (F159I) substitution. The mutation was not
found in more than 250 control chromosomes. Follow-up evaluation of the
patient by Unger et al. (2010) showed a dysplastic mitral valve with
stenosis and moderate insufficiency, as well as a mildly thickened
aortic valve.

.0011
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, LEU161PHE

In a patient with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital joint
dislocations (143095), who was referred for evaluation of presumed
Larsen syndrome (see 245600), Unger et al. (2010) identified
homozygosity for a 481C-T transition in the CHST3 gene, resulting in a
leu161-to-phe (L161F) substitution. The mutation was not found in more
than 250 control chromosomes.

.0012
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH CONGENITAL JOINT DISLOCATIONS
CHST3, GLN330TER

In a patient with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and congenital joint
dislocations (143095), who had initially been diagnosed with Larsen
syndrome (see 150250) but who was negative for mutation in the FLNB gene
(603381), Unger et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 988C-T
transition in the CHST3 gene, resulting in a gln330-to-ter (Q330X)
substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Cortina, H.; Vidal, J.; Vallcanera, A.; Alberto, C.; Muro, D.;
Dominguez, F.: Humero-spinal dysostosis. Pediat. Radiol. 8: 188-190,
1979.

2. Fukuta, M.; Kobayashi, Y.; Uchimura, K.; Kimata, K.; Habuchi, O.
: Molecular cloning and expression of human chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1399: 57-61, 1998.

3. Hall, B. D.: Humero-spinal dysostosis: report of the fourth case
with emphasis on generalized skeletal involvement, abnormal craniofacial
features, and mitral valve thickening. J. Pediat. Orthop. B 6: 11-14,
1997.

4. Hermanns, P.; Unger, S.; Rossi, A.; Perez-Aytes, A.; Cortina, H.;
Bonafe, L.; Boccone, L.; Setzu, V.; Dutoit, M.; Sangiorgi, L.; Pecora,
F.; Reicherter, K.; Nishimura, G.; Spranger, J.; Zabel, B.; Superti-Furga,
A.: Congenital joint dislocations caused by carbohydrate sulfotransferase
3 deficiency in recessive Larsen syndrome and humero-spinal dysostosis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 82: 1368-1374, 2008. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
83: 293 only, 2008.

5. Iida, A.; Saito, S.; Sekine, A.; Mishima, C.; Kitamura, Y.; Kondo,
K.; Harigae, S.; Osawa, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Catalog of 77 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the carbohydrate sulfotransferase 1 (CHST1)
and carbohydrate sulfotransferase 3 (CHST3) genes. J. Hum. Genet. 47:
14-19, 2002.

6. Megarbane, A.; Ghanem, I.: A newly recognized chondrodysplasia
with multiple dislocations. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 130A: 107-109,
2004.

7. Rajab, A.; Kunze, J.; Mundlos, S.: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
Omani type: a new recessive type of SED with progressive spinal involvement. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 126A: 413-419, 2004.

8. Thiele, H.; Sakano, M.; Kitagawa, H.; Sugahara, K.; Rajab, A.;
Hohne, W.; Ritter, H.; Leschik, G.; Nurnberg, P.; Mundlos, S.: Loss
of chondroitin 6-O-sulfotransferase-1 function results in severe human
chondrodysplasia with progressive spinal involvement. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 101: 10155-10160, 2004.

9. Tsutsumi, K.; Shimakawa, H.; Kitagawa, H.; Sugahara, K.: Functional
expression and genomic structure of human chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase. FEBS
Lett. 441: 235-241, 1998.

10. Tuysuz, B.; Mizumoto, S.; Sugahara, K.; Celebi, A.; Mundlos, S.;
Turkmen, S.: Omani-type spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with cardiac
involvement caused by a missense mutation in CHST3. Clin. Genet. 75:
375-383, 2009.

11. Unger, S.; Lausch, E.; Rossi, A.; Megarbane, A.; Sillence, D.;
Alcausin, M.; Aytes, A.; Mendoza-Londono, R.; Nampoothiri, S.; Afroze,
B.; Hall, B.; Lo, I. F. M.; and 17 others: Phenotypic features
of carbohydrate sulfotransferase 3 (CHST3) deficiency in 24 patients:
congenital dislocations and vertebral changes as principal diagnostic
features. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2543-2549, 2010.

12. van Roij, M. H. H.; Mizumoto, S.; Yamada, S.; Morgan, T.; Tan-Sindhunata,
M. B.; Meijers-Heijboer, H.; Verbeke, J. I. L. M.; Markie, D.; Sugahara,
K.; Robertson, S. P.: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Omani type: further
definition of the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 2376-2384,
2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/18/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/1/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/18/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/1/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/13/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/11/1999

EDITED carol: 09/24/2013
carol: 5/10/2012
carol: 11/18/2010
carol: 6/25/2009
wwang: 4/15/2009
terry: 4/1/2009
joanna: 9/24/2008
wwang: 9/23/2008
terry: 9/18/2008
tkritzer: 9/7/2004
tkritzer: 9/3/2004
tkritzer: 9/2/2004
terry: 9/1/2004
mgross: 2/21/2002
mgross: 2/13/2002
alopez: 5/11/1999

138300	TITLE +138300 GLUTATHIONE REDUCTASE; GSR
GLUTATHIONE REDUCTASE, HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA DUE TO DEFICIENCY OF, IN RED
CELLS, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION Long (1967) found in a black American a variant red cell GSR (EC
1.6.4.2) characterized by greater electrophoretic mobility and enzyme
activity per unit of hemoglobin than the normal. Inheritance was
autosomal codominant. Three homozygotes were identified. The relation to
gout, suggested by Long (1967), is problematical. Long (1972) observed 2
variant forms of red cell GSR which appear to bind far more avidly than
the common form of the enzyme. In cases of mosaic trisomy for chromosome
8, de la Chapelle et al. (1976) found elevated glutathione reductase
activity, with other enzymes normal. George and Francke (1976) assigned
the gene to the region 8p21-p23 by the gene dosage method. In an infant
with terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 8, de la Chapelle
et al. (1976) found low GSR activity. They concluded that the GSR locus
is in the region 8pter-p21. Sinet et al. (1977) narrowed the assignment
to 8p21. The GSR locus has also been assigned by somatic cell
hybridization; it is one of the enzyme-markers for each chromosome
(table 1 in Shows and Sakaguchi, 1980), useful for synteny mapping.

Lohr and Waller (1962) observed a 'new' form of enzyme-deficiency
hemolytic anemia in which glutathione reductase was deficient and
glutathione (GSH) was low as a consequence. (This condition is
apparently distinct from that described by Oort et al. (1961) in which
GSH was also low, but glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and glutathione
reductase were normal.) Lohr (1963) observed 10 homozygotes and 5
heterozygotes in a family distribution consistent with autosomal
recessive inheritance. Blume et al. (1968) studied a kindred with many
persons who were demonstrably heterozygous by chemical test. Hampel et
al. (1969) found a markedly increased frequency of chromosomal
aberrations in a patient with pancytopenia and absent GSR-II band in the
electropherogram. The mother was hematologically normal but had absent
GSR-II band and a moderate increase in the frequency of chromosomal
aberrations. Addition of chloramphenicol to the cultures increased the
number of damaged chromosomes in both the mother and the son. Staal et
al. (1969) described a variety of glutathione reductase anemia in which
the variant enzyme had diminished affinity for flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD). The patient's anemia was corrected by vitamin B2.
Administration of flavin compounds to normal individuals or addition to
hemolysates of most normal persons causes an increase in activity of GSR
(Beutler, 1969). In a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus,
Fajnholc et al. (1971) found red cell GSR deficiency which was
correctable in vivo with riboflavin and in vitro with FAD. The same
deficiency was found in the mother and some of her relatives (who were
asymptomatic) but not in the father and his relatives. Enzyme kinetics
were normal. These workers concluded that the defect was not in the
apoenzyme. Loos et al. (1976) found virtually complete absence of GSR
activity in the erythrocytes of 3 children of a consanguineous marriage
and intermediate levels in the parents. Activity was not restored by FAD
in vitro or riboflavin in vivo. Clinically the deficiency was manifested
by favism in 1 child and by cataracts in 2. Reduced GSR was found in
leukocytes, as well as evidence of impaired bactericidal capacity, but
there was no history of repeated infections. Furthermore, Roos et al.
(1979) found that chemotaxis, phagocytosis of opsonized S. aureus, and
degranulation proceeded normally. Intracellular killing appeared normal
at low ratios of bacteria to phagocytes, but higher ratios resulted in
defective bacterial killing. GSR deficiency is a frequent occurrence in
northern Thailand. Flatz (1971) found a high frequency of GSR deficiency
in northern Thailand but concluded that it was probably secondary to
dietary riboflavin deficiency because activity of the enzyme was raised
markedly in most deficient persons by administration of riboflavin.
Studies of the families of 6 persons with poor response to riboflavin
gave no evidence supporting 'simple dominant inheritance,' and the
proband with low GSR values had no hematologic evidence of a hemolytic
tendency. Nevin et al. (1990) found increased GSR activity in a child
with an inverted tandem duplication of 8p23.1-p12.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using a combination of behavioral analysis of 6 inbred mouse strains
with quantitative gene expression profiling of several brain regions,
Hovatta et al. (2005) identified 17 genes with expression patterns that
correlated with anxiety-like behavioral phenotypes. To determine if 2 of
the genes, glyoxalase-1 (138750) and glutathione reductase-1, have a
causal role in the genesis of anxiety, Hovatta et al. (2005) performed
genetic manipulation using lentivirus-mediated gene transfer. Local
overexpression of these genes in the mouse brain resulted in increased
anxiety-like behavior, while local inhibition of glyoxalase-1 expression
by RNA interference decreased the anxiety-like behavior. Hovatta et al.
(2005) concluded that both of these genes are involved in oxidative
stress metabolism, linking this pathway with anxiety-related behavior.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Carson et al. (1961); de la Chapelle et al. (1976); Flatz  (1971);
Gutensohn et al. (1978); Jensen et al. (1984); Jensen et al. (1982);
Kurz and Hohenwallner (1970); Lohr and Waller (1963); Magenis et al.
(1978); Nichols and Ruddle (1975)
REFERENCE 1. Beutler, E.: Effect of flavin compounds on glutathione reductase
activity: in vivo and in vitro studies. J. Clin. Invest. 48: 1957-1966,
1969.

2. Blume, K. G.; Gottwik, M.; Lohr, G. W.; Rudiger, H. W.: Familienuntersuchungen
zum Glutathionreduktasemangel menschlicher Erythrocyten. Humangenetik 6:
163-170, 1968.

3. Carson, P. E.; Brewer, G. J.; Ickes, C.: Decreased glutathione
reductase with susceptibility to hemolysis. (Abstract) J. Lab. Clin.
Med. 58: 804 only, 1961.

4. de la Chapelle, A.; Icen, A.; Aula, P.; Leisti, J.; Turleau, C.;
de Grouchy, J.: Mapping of the gene for glutathione reductase on
chromosome 8. Ann. Genet. 19: 253-256, 1976.

5. de la Chapelle, A.; Vuopio, P.; Icen, A.: Trisomy 8 in the bone
marrow associated with high red cell glutathione reductase activity. Blood 47:
815-826, 1976.

6. Fajnholc, N. E.; Kaminsky, E.; Machtey, I.; De Vries, A.: Hereditary
erythrocyte glutathione reductase deficiency. Rev. Europ. Clin. Biol. 16:
987-991, 1971.

7. Flatz, G.: Population study of erythrocyte glutathione reductase
activity. I. Stimulation of the enzyme by flavin adenine dinucleotide
and by riboflavin supplementation. Humangenetik 11: 269-277, 1971.

8. Flatz, G.: Population study of erythrocyte glutathione reductase
activity. II. Hematological data of subjects with low enzyme activity
and stimulation characteristics in their families. Humangenetik 11:
278-285, 1971.

9. George, D. L.; Francke, U.: Gene dose effect: regional mapping
of human glutathione reductase on chromosome 8. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 17:
282-286, 1976.

10. Gutensohn, W.; Rodewald, A.; Haas, B.; Schulz, P.; Cleve, H.:
Refined mapping of the gene for glutathione reductase on human chromosome
8. Hum. Genet. 43: 221-224, 1978.

11. Hampel, K. E.; Lohr, G. W.; Blume, K. G.; Rudiger, H. W.: Spontane
und chloramphenicolinduzierte Chromosomenmutationen und biochemische
Befunde bei zwei Faellen mit Glutathionreduktasemangel (NAD(P)H: glutathione
oxidoreductase, E.C. 1.6.4.2). Humangenetik 7: 305-313, 1969.

12. Hovatta, I.; Tennant, R. S.; Helton, R.; Marr, R. A.; Singer,
O.; Redwine, J. M.; Ellison, J. A.; Schadt, E. E.; Verma, I. M.; Lockhart,
D. J.; Barlow, C.: Glyoxalase 1 and glutathione reductase 1 regulate
anxiety in mice. Nature 438: 662-666, 2005.

13. Jensen, P. K. A.; Junien, C.; de la Chapelle, A.: Gene for glutathione
reductase localized to subband 8p21.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 37: 497 only, 1984.

14. Jensen, P. K. A.; Junien, C.; Despoisse, S.; Bernsen, A.; Thelle,
T.; Friedrich, U.; de la Chapelle, A.: Inverted tandem duplication
of the short arm of chromosome 8: a non-random de novo structural
aberration in man. Localization of the gene for glutathione reductase
in subband 8p21.1. Ann. Genet. 25: 207-211, 1982.

15. Kurz, R.; Hohenwallner, W.: Familiaerer Glutathionreduktasemangel
und Stoerung der Glutathionsynthese im Erythrozyten. Helv. Paediat.
Acta 25: 542-552, 1970.

16. Lohr, G. W.: Personal Communication. Marburg, Germany  1963.

17. Lohr, G. W.; Waller, H. D.: Eine neue enzymopenische haemolytische
Anaemie mit Glutathionreduktase-Mangel. Med. Klin. 57: 1521-1525,
1962.

18. Lohr, G. W.; Waller, H. D.: Zur Biochemie einiger angeborener
haemolytischer Anaemien. Folia Haemat. 8: 377-397, 1963.

19. Long, W. K.: Personal Communication. Austin, Texas  1972.

20. Long, W. K.: Glutathione reductase in red blood cells: variant
associated with gout. Science 155: 712-713, 1967.

21. Loos, J. A.; Roos, D.; Weening, R. S.; Hauwerzijl, J.: Familial
deficiency of glutathione reductase in human blood cells. Blood 48:
53-62, 1976.

22. Magenis, R. E.; Reiss, J.; Bigley, R.; Champerlin, J.; Lovrien,
E.: Exclusion of glutathione reductase from 8pter-8p22 and localization
to 8p21. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 22: 446-448, 1978.

23. Nevin, N. C.; Morrison, P. J.; Jones, J.; Reid, M. M.: Inverted
tandem duplication of 8p12-p23.1 in a child with increased activity
of glutathione reductase. J. Med. Genet. 27: 135-136, 1990.

24. Nichols, E. A.; Ruddle, F. H.: Polymorphism and linkage of glutathione
reductase in Mus musculus. Biochem. Genet. 13: 323-330, 1975.

25. Oort, M.; Loos, J. A.; Prins, H. K.: Hereditary absence of reduced
glutathione in the erythrocytes--a new clinical and biochemical entity. Vox
Sang. 6: 370-373, 1961.

26. Roos, D.; Weening, R. S.; Voetman, A. A.; van Schaik, M. L. J.;
Bot, A. A. M.; Meerhof, L. J.; Loos, J. A.: Protection of phagocytic
leukocytes by endogenous glutathione: studies in a family with glutathione
reductase deficiency. Blood 53: 851-866, 1979.

27. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

28. Shows, T. B.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.: Gene transfer and gene mapping
in mammalian cells in culture. In Vitro 16: 55-76, 1980.

29. Sinet, P. M.; Bresson, J. L.; Couturier, J.; Prieur, M.; Rethore,
M.-O.; Taillemite, J. L.; Toudec, D.; Jerome, H.; Lejeune, J.: Localisation
probable du gene de la glutathion reductase (EC 1.6.4.2.) sur la bande
8p21. Ann. Genet. 20: 13-17, 1977.

30. Staal, G. E. J.; Helleman, P. W.; De Wael, J.; Veeger, C.: Purification
and properties of an abnormal glutathione reductase from human erythrocytes. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 185: 63-69, 1969.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Heme:
Hemolytic anemia

Lab:
Glutathione reductase deficiency

Inheritance:
Autosomal recessive

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 02/01/2006
terry: 1/30/2006
terry: 5/17/2005
mgross: 3/17/2004
joanna: 8/12/1997
mimadm: 9/24/1994
terry: 5/10/1994
pfoster: 2/18/1994
carol: 7/12/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/26/1991

613567	TITLE *613567 ZINC FINGER, MYM-TYPE 6; ZMYM6
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 258; ZNF258;;
ZINC FINGER BED DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 7; ZBED7;;
BUSTER2;;
KIAA1353
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZBED proteins, such as ZMYM6, or ZBED7, originated from domesticated hAT
DNA transposons and encode regulatory proteins with diverse, fundamental
functions in vertebrates (Hayward et al., 2013).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences encoding zinc finger-like
proteins, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a human thymus cDNA
library, Smedley et al. (1999) cloned ZNF258. The deduced 724-amino acid
protein contains 5 tandem myeloproliferative and mental retardation
(MYM) motifs, conserved motifs that closely resemble zinc-binding
sequences. However, 2 of the repeats are imperfect and each lacks 2
conserved cysteines. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression
of several ZNF258 transcripts in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned ZMYM6, which they designated
KIAA1353. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in its
5-prime end. The deduced protein contains 640 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected ZMYM6 expression in all adult and fetal tissues and specific
adult brain regions examined.

By searching databases for ZBED genes, Hayward et al. (2013) identified
ZMYM6, which they called ZBED7.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Smedley et al. (1999) mapped
the ZMYM6 gene to chromosome 14q12. However, using radiation hybrid
analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the ZMYM6 gene to chromosome 1.
Gross (2013) mapped the ZMYM6 gene to chromosome 1p34.3 based on an
alignment of the ZMYM6 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC117463) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

EVOLUTION

Hayward et al. (2013) found that the ZBED genes originated from at least
2 independent hAT DNA transposon domestication events in ancestors of
primitive jawed vertebrates, since no orthologs of ZBED were found in
jawless fish or more primitive vertebrates. ZBED7 belongs to the Buster
family of domesticated hAT DNA transposons, which also includes ZBED5
(615251), ZBED8 (C5ORF54; 615253), and ZBED9 (SCAND3; 615254).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/29/2013.

2. Hayward, A.; Ghazal, A.; Andersson, G.; Andersson, L.; Jern, P.
: ZBED evolution: repeated utilization of DNA transposons as regulators
of diverse host functions. PLoS One 8: e59940, 2013. Note: Electronic
Article.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

4. Smedley, D.; Hamoudi, R.; Lu, Y.-J.; Cooper, C.; Shipley, J.:
Cloning and mapping of members of the MYM family. Genomics 60: 244-247,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/29/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/20/2010

EDITED mgross: 05/29/2013
mgross: 5/29/2013
alopez: 9/20/2010

604909	TITLE *604909 CCR4-NOT TRANSCRIPTION COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 2; CNOT2
;;NEGATIVE REGULATOR OF TRANSCRIPTION 2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;
NOT2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The yeast CCR4-NOT protein complex is a global regulator of RNA
polymerase II transcription. It is comprised, in part, of CCR4 (see
608951), NOT1 to NOT5, and CAF1 (also referred to as POP2). By searching
sequence databases, Albert et al. (2000) identified human ESTs encoding
homologs of yeast NOT1, NOT2, NOT3, NOT4, and CAF1. They assembled a
human NOT2 cDNA containing a full-length coding sequence. The deduced
540-amino acid human NOT2 protein shares 26% overall sequence identity
with the 191-amino acid yeast NOT2 protein. Compared to yeast NOT2,
human NOT2 has an N-terminal extension. Human NOT2 contains an
N-terminal putative bipartite nuclear localization signal. Using the
yeast 2-hybrid assay, Albert et al. (2000) demonstrated that recombinant
human NOT2 can interact with yeast NOT1 and an N-terminally truncated
human NOT1 protein (604917); it did not significantly interact with
human NOT3 (604910) or yeast CCR4. Northern blot analysis detected a
3.2-kb NOT2 transcript in all human tissues examined, namely brain,
heart, lung, liver, kidney, small intestine, colon, spleen, thymus,
peripheral blood leukocytes, skeletal muscle, and placenta. Like the
expression of human NOT1, NOT3, and CALIF (603731), NOT2 expression was
high in brain, kidney, and placenta and very low in skeletal muscle and
colon. Albert et al. (2000) found that recombinant human NOT2 could not
complement the temperature-sensitive phenotype conferred by the yeast
not2-1 mutation.

GENE FUNCTION

Sessions et al. (2009) identified insect host factors required for
dengue virus (see 614371) propagation by carrying out a genomewide RNA
interference screen in D. melanogaster cells using a well established
22,632 double-stranded RNA library. This screen identified 116 candidate
dengue virus host factors (DVHFs). Although some were previously
associated with flaviviruses, most of the DVHFs were newly implicated in
dengue virus propagation. The dipteran DVHFs had 82 readily recognizable
human homologs and, using a targeted short interfering RNA screen, they
showed that 42 of these are human DVHFs. These include NPR2 (108961),
SEC61B (609214), TMEM214, TAZ (300394), EXDL2, and CNOT2. Sessions et
al. (2009) concluded that this overlap indicates notable conservation of
required factors between dipteran and human hosts.

REFERENCE 1. Albert, T. K.; Lemaire, M.; van Berkum, N. L.; Gentz, R.; Collart,
M. A.; Timmers, H. T. M.: Isolation and characterization of human
orthologs of yeast CCR4-NOT complex subunits. Nucleic Acids Res. 28:
809-817, 2000.

2. Sessions, O. M.; Barrows, N. J.; Souza-Neto, J. A.; Robinson, T.
J.; Hershey, C. L.; Rodgers, M. A.; Ramirez, J. L.; Dimopoulos, G.;
Yang, P. L.; Pearson, J. L.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.: Discovery of insect
and human dengue virus host factors. Nature 458: 1047-1050, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/14/2009

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 5/2/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/01/2011
alopez: 5/14/2009
mgross: 9/28/2004
carol: 11/6/2000
mcapotos: 5/11/2000
psherman: 5/4/2000

604468	TITLE *604468 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE KINASE KINASE 6; MAP3K6
;;MAPKKK6;;
APOPTOSIS SIGNAL-REGULATING KINASE 2; ASK2
DESCRIPTION Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades consist of a 3-kinase
module: MAPK, MAPK kinase (MAP2K, MAPKK, or MKK), and MKK kinase (MAP3K,
MAPKKK, or MEKK). These kinase cascades relay signals from the cell
surface to the nucleus, resulting in gene transcription. Growth factors
and mitogens activate the extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway,
while stress stimuli and proinflammatory cytokines activate 2 closely
related but distinct parallel pathways, the c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK), or stress-activated kinase (SAPK), pathway and the p38 kinase
pathway. Multiple upstream kinases, the MAP3Ks, have been identified.
MAP3K5 (602448) activates the JNK and p38 pathways and induces apoptosis
when overexpressed in stably transfected cells. Using a portion of
MAP3K5 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid system, Wang et al. (1998) isolated a
partial cDNA encoding a novel protein kinase, MAP3K6, which they called
MAPKKK6. They isolated a full-length human skeletal muscle MAP3K6 cDNA
encoding a predicted 1,280-amino acid serine/threonine kinase containing
all 11 kinase subdomains. MAP3K6 and MAP3K5 share 45% amino acid
sequence identity; their catalytic domains share 82% identity. The
authors confirmed the interaction of MAP3K6 with MAP3K5 in vivo using
coimmunoprecipitation. Recombinant MAP3K6 weakly activated the JNK but
not the ERK or p38 kinase pathways. Northern blot analysis detected an
approximately 5.0-kb MAP3K6 transcript in several tissues, with the
highest expression in heart and skeletal muscle.

REFERENCE 1. Wang, X. S.; Diener, K.; Tan, T.-H.; Yao, Z.: MAPKKK6, a novel
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase, that associates with
MAPKKK5. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 33-37, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/27/2000

EDITED mgross: 07/26/2010
mgross: 1/28/2000
psherman: 1/27/2000

603481	TITLE *603481 PROTEASOME 26S SUBUNIT, NON-ATPase, 13; PSMD13
;;p40.5;;
PROTEASE 26S, SUBUNIT 11; S11
DESCRIPTION Ubiquitinated proteins are degraded by a 26S ATP-dependent protease. The
protease is composed of a 20S catalytic proteasome and PA700, a 700-kD
regulatory complex (see PSMC1; 602706).

Hori et al. (1998) determined the partial protein sequences of bovine
p28 (PSMD10; 603480) and p40.5, 2 components of PA700. By searching a
sequence database, they identified cDNAs encoding the human p28 and
p40.5 homologs. The predicted human p40.5 protein contains 376 amino
acids and has a molecular mass of 43 kD. Using computerized homology
searches, Hori et al. (1998) identified Nas7, an S. cerevisiae gene
encoding a protein with 31% identity to p40.5. They disrupted the Nas7
gene and found that Nas7-deficient yeast cells were sensitive to heat
stress. Northern blot analysis revealed that p40.5 was expressed as a
1.3-kb mRNA in all human tissues tested.

By sequencing peptides obtained from purified 26S proteasome subunits,
followed by database analysis and PCR of human myeloblast cell line RNA,
Hoffman et al. (1999) cloned the PSMD13 gene, which they called subunit
11 (S11). The deduced 376-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 42.9 kD, and it shares 97% identity with mouse S11. Western blot
analysis detected S11 at about 43 kD.

By Far Western blot analysis, Hoffman et al. (1999) determined that S11
bound the 26S proteasome and the 19S regulatory complex, but not the 20S
proteasome.

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PSMD13
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP STS-T99644).

REFERENCE 1. Hoffman, L.; Gorbea, C.; Rechsteiner, M.: Identification, molecular
cloning, and characterization of subunit 11 of the human 26S proteasome. FEBS
Lett. 449: 88-92, 1999.

2. Hori, T.; Kato, S.; Saeki, M.; DeMartino, G. N.; Slaughter, C.
A.; Takeuchi, J.; Toh-e, A.; Tanaka, K.: cDNA cloning and functional
analysis of p28 (Nas6p) and p40.5 (Nas7p), two novel regulatory subunits
of the 26S proteasome. Gene 216: 113-122, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2006

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/3/1999

EDITED carol: 05/19/2008
wwang: 3/3/2006
wwang: 2/14/2006
terry: 2/8/2006
alopez: 2/3/1999

607860	TITLE *607860 YY1 ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; YY1AP1
;;YY1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; YAP;;
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; HCCA2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential display PCR of normal hepatic tissue and hepatocellular
carcinomas, followed by screening a placenta cDNA library, Wang et al.
(2001) cloned YY1AP1, which they called HCCA2. The deduced 467-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 50.65 kD. HCCA2 contains
2 SH3-binding domains, 2 N-glycosylation sites, 6 N-myristoylation
sites, and numerous phosphorylation sites, but it does not have a
transmembrane domain, signal peptide, or targeting sequences. Northern
blot analysis detected 1.8- and 2.5-kb transcripts in all adult tissues
examined except liver. Expression was also detected in fetal liver,
lung, brain, and spleen. Western blot analysis of transfected embryonic
kidney fibroblasts detected HCCA2 at an apparent molecular mass of about
50 kD. Immunohistochemical staining showed that HCCA2 protein was
localized in the cytoplasm of liver cancer tissues, and it was not found
in surrounding nontumor hepatocytes.

Kuryshev et al. (2006) determined that YY1AP1 was formed by fusion of
the 5-prime region of the ASH1L gene (607999) and the 3-prime region of
the GON4L gene (610393) during a tandem segmental duplication on
chromosome 1. YY1AP1 contains the partial promoter and untranslated
first exon of ASH1L and coding exons 13 to 21 of GON4L. The 3-prime
region of YY1AP1 originated from a long terminal repeat of an endogenous
retrovirus, known as the MER51A repeat, that was inserted into exon 21
of GON4L after the duplication. The deduced YY1AP1 protein contains 750
amino acids, 748 of which correspond to amino acids 590 to 1,337 of the
GON4L protein. The last 2 C-terminal residues of YY1AP1 come from the
long terminal repeat of MER51A. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of
YY1AP1, with highest levels in testis and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) determined that HCCA2 was not expressed in normal
adult liver tissue, but it was expressed in 79% of hepatocellular
carcinomas tested. HCCA2 expression was associated with invasion of the
tumor capsule.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kuryshev et al. (2006) mapped the YY1AP1
gene to chromosome 1q22.

REFERENCE 1. Kuryshev, V. Y.; Vorobyov, E.; Zink, D.; Schmitz, J.; Rozhdestvensky,
T. S.; Munstermann, E.; Ernst, U.; Wellenreuther, R.; Moosmayer, P.;
Bechtel, S.; Schupp, I.; Horst, J.; Korn, B.; Poustka, A.; Wiemann,
S.: An anthropoid-specific segmental duplication on human chromosome
1q22. Genomics 88: 143-151, 2006.

2. Wang, Z.-X.; Wang, H.-Y.; Wu, M.-C.: Identification and characterization
of a novel human hepatocellular carcinoma-associated gene. Brit.
J. Cancer 85: 1162-1167, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/29/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/6/2003

EDITED wwang: 04/18/2008
mgross: 9/11/2006
terry: 8/29/2006
mgross: 6/6/2003

608879	TITLE *608879 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 13, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, C; VPS13C
;;KIAA1421
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned VPS13C, which they designated
KIAA1421. The deduced protein contains 1,463 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected VPS13C expression in all adult and fetal tissues and all
specific brain regions examined. Expression was intermediate in most
tissues, but it was lower in adult pancreas and lung and in fetal liver
and brain.

By searching databases for sequences similar to VPS13A (605978),
followed by RT-PCR of lymphoid cell line and brain RNA, Velayos-Baeza et
al. (2004) cloned VPS13C. They identified 2 main splice variants,
variant 1A and variant 2A, as well as 4 different 3-prime end splice
variants. Variant 1A encodes a deduced 3,710-amino acid protein, and
variant 2A encodes a deduced 3,753-amino acid protein. VPS13C shares
significant similarity with yeast Vps13 and other human VPS13 proteins,
mostly in the N and C termini. Northern blot analysis detected
expression of variant 1A in all tissues tested, whereas variant 2A was
expressed only in brain, although at a higher level than variant 1A.

GENE STRUCTURE

Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) determined that the VPS13C gene contains 86
exons, including 1 alternative exon (exon 81b), and spans 208 kb.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the VPS13C
gene to chromosome 15. By genomic sequence analysis, Velayos-Baeza et
al. (2004) mapped the VPS13C gene to chromosome 15q21.3. They mapped the
mouse Vps13c gene to chromosome 9C.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

2. Velayos-Baeza, A.; Vettori, A.; Copley, R. R.; Dobson-Stone, C.;
Monaco, A. P.: Analysis of the human VPS13 gene family. Genomics 84:
536-549, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/27/2004

EDITED mgross: 08/27/2004
mgross: 8/27/2004

605237	TITLE *605237 XENOTROPIC AND POLYTROPIC RETROVIRUS RECEPTOR; XPR1
;;X RECEPTOR;;
SYG1, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; SYG1
DESCRIPTION There are 4 classes of murine leukemia virus (MLV): xenotropic (X),
ecotropic (E), amphotropic (A), and polytropic (P). X- and E-MLV cannot
exogenously infect mouse cells and are inherited as part of the mouse
genome. While X-MLV can infect other mammalian species but not cells
from laboratory mice, A- (see SLC20A2; 158378) and P-MLV can infect
mouse and other species. See Levy (1999) for a review of MLVs.

By cloning a human T-lymphocyte cDNA library into a retroviral vector,
transducing the library into naturally X-MLV-resistant mouse
fibroblasts, and PCR amplification, Tailor et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA
encoding XPR1. Expression of XPR1 in mouse and hamster MLV-resistant
fibroblasts rendered the cells susceptible to both X- and P-MLV. The
deduced 696-amino acid XPR1 protein contains 8 or 9 potential
membrane-spanning regions, 7 potential N-glycosylation sites, and 7
dileucines that may stimulate endocytosis via clathrin-coated pits.
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.5-kb XPR1 transcript in all tissues
tested, with highest expression in pancreas, kidney, placenta,
hematopoietic tissues, and heart, and lowest expression in skeletal
muscle. Expression of XPR1 was greater in fetal liver than adult liver.
A 9.5-kb XPR1 transcript was also detected in all tissues tested except
liver and bone marrow.

Using methods similar to those of Tailor et al. (1999), Battini et al.
(1999) isolated a cDNA encoding XPR1. Sequence analysis predicted that
XPR1, which shares 25% amino acid identity with the yeast Syg1 protein,
contains a 236-amino acid, hydrophilic N-terminal region that precedes
the 8 hydrophobic domains.

By radiation hybrid analysis, Battini et al. (1999) mapped the XPR1 gene
to 1q25.1, flanked by the AT3 (107300) and LAMC1 (150290) genes. Yang et
al. (1999) and Tailor et al. (1999) mapped the mouse Xpr1 gene, also
called Rmc1, to chromosome 1.

REFERENCE 1. Battini, J.-L.; Rasko, J. E. J.; Miller, A. D.: A human cell-surface
receptor for xenotropic and polytropic murine leukemia viruses: possible
role in G protein-coupled signal transduction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
1385-1390, 1999.

2. Levy, J. A.: Xenotropism: the elusive viral receptor finally uncovered. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 802-804, 1999.

3. Tailor, C. S.; Nouri, A.; Lee, C. G.; Kozak, C.; Kabat, D.: Cloning
and characterization of a cell surface receptor for xenotropic and
polytropic murine leukemia viruses. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 927-932,
1999.

4. Yang, Y.-L.; Guo, L.; Xu, S.; Holland, C. A.; Kitamura, T.; Hunter,
K.; Cunningham, J. M.: Receptors for polytropic and xenotropic mouse
leukaemia viruses encoded by a single gene at Rmc1. Nature Genet. 21:
216-219, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/29/2000

EDITED mgross: 08/29/2000

189905	TITLE *189905 TRANSCOBALAMIN I; TCN1
;;TC I;;
TC1;;
HAPTOCORRIN;;
VITAMIN B12-BINDING PROTEIN 1;;
COBALOPHILIN;;
B12-BINDING ALPHA-GLOBULIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

There are 3 types of human vitamin B12-binding proteins: gastric
intrinsic factor (GIF; 609342), also known as transcobalamin III; plasma
transcobalamin II (TCN2; 613441); and transcobalamin I (TCN1), an R
binder protein. R binder proteins are a class of immunologically
identical but electrophoretically distinct glycoproteins found in many
secretions, such as saliva, gastric juice, tears, milk and leukocytes,
and differ only in their carbohydrate content; 'R' denotes 'rapid,'
referring to electrophoretic mobility (Azen and Denniston, 1979).
Transcobalamin I is also found in neutrophils, where it is restricted to
the secondary granules (Johnston et al., 1989).

CLONING

Johnston et al. (1989) isolated and characterized full-length cDNA
clones encoding the TCN1 gene from a human granulocyte cDNA library. The
deduced 433-residue protein showed extensive areas of homology with rat
gastric intrinsic factor, which implicated regions potentially important
for vitamin B12 binding.

GENE STRUCTURE

Johnston et al. (1992) determined that the TCN1 gene contains 9 exons.
Comparison of the genomic structures of TCN1 and GIF suggested that the
2 genes arose by a gene duplication.

MAPPING

Yang-Feng et al. (1991) mapped the TCN1 gene to chromosome 11q11-q12 by
in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Azen and Denniston (1979) demonstrated genetic polymorphism of the
vitamin B12-binding proteins. Data on gene frequencies of allelic
variants were tabulated by Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

REFERENCE 1. Azen, E. A.; Denniston, C.: Genetic polymorphism of vitamin B12
binding (R) protein of human saliva detected by isoelectric focusing. Biochem.
Genet. 17: 909-920, 1979.

2. Johnston, J.; Bollekens, J.; Allen, R. H.; Berliner, N.: Structure
of the cDNA encoding transcobalamin I, a neutrophil granule protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 15754-15757, 1989.

3. Johnston, J.; Yang-Feng, T.; Berliner, N.: Genomic structure and
mapping of the chromosomal gene for transcobalamin I (TCN1): comparison
to human intrinsic factor. Genomics 12: 459-464, 1992. Note: Erratum:
Genomics 14: 208 only, 1992.

4. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World Distribution.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

5. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Berliner, N.; Deverajan, P.; Johnston, J.: Assignment
of two human neutrophil secondary granule protein genes, transcobalamin
I and neutrophil collagenase to chromosome 11. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 58: 1974 only, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/26/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/12/1989

EDITED carol: 05/31/2012
carol: 6/15/2010
carol: 3/5/2008
ckniffin: 2/26/2008
alopez: 3/29/2006
alopez: 5/10/2001
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/21/1992
carol: 2/18/1992
carol: 9/12/1991
carol: 8/7/1991
carol: 8/6/1991

611848	TITLE *611848 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L43; MRPL43
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL43 is 1 of more
than 70 protein components of mitochondrial ribosomes that are encoded
by the nuclear genome (Kenmochi et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl43 as query, followed by PCR of
human genomic DNA, Kenmochi et al. (2001) cloned MRPL43.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and analysis of an integrated BAC-STS map,
Kenmochi et al. (2001) mapped the MRPL43 gene to chromosome 10q24.

REFERENCE 1. Kenmochi, N.; Suzuki, T.; Uechi, T.; Magoori, M.; Kuniba, M.; Higa,
S.; Watanabe, K.; Tanaka, T.: The human mitochondrial ribosomal protein
genes: mapping of 54 genes to the chromosomes and implications for
human disorders. Genomics 77: 65-70, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/04/2008

611569	TITLE *611569 CYTOSKELETON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; CKAP2
;;TUMOR- AND MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; TMAP;;
LB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CKAP2 is a cytoskeleton-associated protein involved in mitotic
progression (Seki and Fang, 2007).

CLONING

By differential screening of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, followed by
database analysis, RT-PCR, and screening a human Jurkat T-cell cDNA
library, Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) cloned CKAP2, which they called
LB1. The transcript contains 2 consensus polyadenylation signals and an
AU-rich mRNA-destabilizing motif. The deduced 683-amino acid protein has
a leucine- and isoleucine-rich domain and numerous potential
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected variable
expression of a major 3.6- to 3.9-kb transcript and a minor 2.2-kb
transcript in all human tissues and cell lines examined. In vitro
transcription/translation produced a protein with an apparent molecular
mass of 85 kD by SDS-PAGE. Immunofluorescence analysis of transfected
COS cells showed that epitope-tagged CKAP2 localized to cytoplasmic
cytoskeletal filaments.

By differential display-PCR of primary human gastric adenocarcinomas,
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Bae et al. (2003) cloned
full-length CKAP2 and a shorter variant, CKAP2S, resulting from
alternative splicing in exon 6. The full-length CKAP2 protein contains
682 amino acids, and the CKAP2S protein contains 494 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis showed that CKAP2 expression was higher in brain,
thymus, kidney, and placenta than in heart, skeletal muscle, lung,
leukocytes, and gastrointestinal tract. A second, smaller transcript was
detected in tissues with high CKAP2 expression. Endogenous CKAP2 and
fluorescence-tagged CKAP2 associated with the microtubule-organizing
center and with microtubules in HeLa cells, and this localization was
lost following treatment with a microtubule-destabilizing agent. Western
blot analysis detected endogenous CKAP2 at an apparent molecular mass of
75 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) found that expression of LB1 was
upregulated in a patient with an immunoblastic subtype of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma and in a patient with a multilobated centroblastic
subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. In contrast, expression was
low or undetectable in 4 patients with polymorphic centroblastic diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas.

Using ribonuclease protection assays and RT-PCR, Bae et al. (2003) found
that CKAP2 and CKAP2S expression was upregulated in gastric tumor
tissues compared with matched normal mucosa. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected no CKAP2 protein in normal gastric mucosa, but it was
detected in all gastric adenocarcinomas and tubular adenomas examined.

Jeon et al. (2006) found that CKAP2 was not expressed in G0/G1-arrested
human foreskin fibroblasts, but that it was expressed in actively
dividing cells, gradually increasing between late G1 and G2/M. Knockdown
of CKAP2 reduced RB1 (614041) phosphorylation and increased p27 (CDKN1B;
600778) expression, and consequently reduced cell proliferation, whereas
constitutive CKAP2 expression increased RB phosphorylation and enhanced
proliferation.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C; see 608473) is a
ubiquitin ligase that controls sister chromatid separation and exit from
mitosis. It recognizes 2 motifs in its substrates: the destruction (D)
box and the KEN box. Seki and Fang (2007) found that CKAP2 was degraded
by CDH1 (192090)-activated APC/C in Xenopus interphase extracts, but not
in mitotic extracts. CKAP2 contains 4 D boxes and a KEN box, and
mutation analysis showed that only the KEN box was required for
ubiquitination by APC/C-CDH1 and degradation in CDH1-activated
interphase extracts. Overexpression of CDH1 in HeLa cells reduced CKAP2
levels in a KEN box-dependent manner, whereas knockdown of CDH1
increased the half-life of CKAP2. CKAP2 associated with centrosomal
microtubules in late G2 in HeLa cells, but only after separation of
duplicated centrosomes. During mitosis, CKAP2 associated with spindle
poles and with spindle microtubules from prophase through anaphase and
disappeared from microtubules during cytokinesis. Knockdown of CKAP2 did
not alter the cell cycle distribution of cells or generate mitotic
effects. On the other hand, ectopic expression of either wildtype CKAP2
or a nondegradable CKAP2 mutant led to mitotic arrest with monopolar
spindles containing highly bundled microtubules. Seki and Fang (2007)
concluded that regulation of CKAP2 by APC/C is critical for normal
mitotic progression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) mapped the CKAP2 gene to
chromosome 13q14.

REFERENCE 1. Bae, C.-D.; Sung, Y.-S.; Jeon, S.-M.; Suh, Y.; Yang, H.-K.; Kim,
Y. I.; Park, K.-H.; Choi, J.; Ahn, G.; Park, J.: Up-regulation of
cytoskeletal-associated protein 2 in primary human gastric adenocarcinomas. J.
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 621-630, 2003.

2. Jeon, S.-M.; Choi, B.; Hong, K. U.; Kim, E.; Seong, Y.-S.; Bae,
C.-D.; Park, J.: A cytoskeleton-associated protein, TMAP/CKAP2, is
involved in the proliferation of human foreskin fibroblasts. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 348: 222-228, 2006. Note: Erratum: Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 354: 839 only, 2007.

3. Maouche-Chretien, L.; Deleu, N.; Badoual, C.; Fraissignes, P.;
Berger, R.; Gaulard, P.; Romeo, P. H.; Leroy-Viard, K.: Identification
of a novel cDNA, encoding a cytoskeletal associated protein, differentially
expressed in diffuse large B cell lymphomas. Oncogene 17: 1245-1251,
1998.

4. Seki, A.; Fang, G.: CKAP2 is a spindle-associated protein degraded
by APC/C-Cdh1 during mitotic exit. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15103-15113,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2007

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 3/1/2011
mgross: 10/31/2007

107910	TITLE *107910 CYTOCHROME P450, FAMILY 19, SUBFAMILY A, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP19A1
;;CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XIX; CYP19;;
AROMATASE; ARO
CYP19A1/CGNL1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
CYP19A1/TMOD3 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
CYP19A1/TRPM7 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Aromatase (EC 1.14.14.1), also called estrogen synthetase, is a member
of the cytochrome P450 superfamily. The enzyme catalyzes the conversion
of androgen to estrogen, a rate-limiting step in estrogen biosynthesis
(Harada et al., 1992).

CLONING

In reviewing the regulation of expression of P450 genes, Whitlock (1986)
discussed P450-aromatase, which is induced by follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH; see 136530) via formation of cyclic AMP. Presumably the
increased activity reflects increased transcription of the
P450-aromatase gene. Aromatase is present in many tissues including
skin, muscle, fat, and nerve, where it may contribute to sex-specific
differences in cellular metabolism.

Chen et al. (1986) and Evans et al. (1986) cloned and sequenced partial
human placental cDNAs corresponding to the aromatase gene. Evans et al.
(1986) found that the radiolabeled aromatase cDNA hybridized to several
size species of mRNA in both placental and adipose stromal cell RNA
fractions.

Harada (1988) isolated a complete cDNA clone encoding human aromatase
from a placenta cDNA library. A study of the deduced 503-amino acid
sequence and a comparison with other forms of cytochrome P450 indicated
that this enzyme is a unique member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily.

Corbin et al. (1988) also cloned a full-length human cDNA for
P450-aromatase encoding a deduced 503-amino acid protein with striking
similarity to other members of the cytochrome P450 gene superfamily.
Corbin et al. (1988) expressed the cDNA in COS-1 monkey kidney tumor
cells and found that the expressed protein was similar in size to human
placental aromatase, as detected by immunoblot analysis, and catalyzed
the aromatization of all 3 major physiologic substrates:
androstenedione, testosterone, and 16-alpha-hydroxyandrostenedione. The
activity was inhibited by known aromatase inhibitors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Toda et al. (1990) found that the CYP19 gene spans at least 70 kb of
genomic DNA and contains 10 exons. The translational initiation site and
the termination site are located in exon 2 and exon 10, respectively.

By analysis of overlapping BAC clones identified by homology searching
of public databases, Sebastian and Bulun (2001) determined the
organization of the CYP19 gene. Their analysis shows that the entire
gene spans more than 123 kb of DNA. Only the 30-kb 3-prime region
encodes aromatase, whereas a large 93-kb 5-prime flanking region serves
as the regulatory unit of the gene. The most proximal promoters, the
ovarian-specific promoter II and 2 other proximal promoters, I.3
(expressed in adipose tissue and breast cancer) and I.6 (expressed in
bone), are located within 1 kb of the translation start site.

Sebastian et al. (2002) stated that the CYP19 gene contains 9
alternative untranslated first exons, each with an individual promoter.
They identified a tenth alternative first exon, exon I.7. Exon I.7
contains no TATA or CAAT boxes, but it has 2 consensus GATA (see GATA1;
305371) motifs and other cis-acting motifs.

MAPPING

Sparkes et al. (1987) used the CYP19 cDNA identified by Chen et al.
(1986) in the study of human/mouse somatic cell hybrids for assignment
of the gene to human chromosome 15. By in situ hybridization, Chen et
al. (1988) mapped the ARO gene to 15q21.1.

Using data from the Human Genome Project and screening a BAC plasmid
library, Shozu et al. (2003) mapped the CGNL1 gene (607856), the
tropomodulin-3 gene (TMOD3; 605112), and the aromatase gene, in that
order from telomere to centromere, to 15q21.1-q21.3. They found that the
aromatase gene is normally transcribed in the direction opposite to that
of TMOD3 and CGNL1.

GENE FUNCTION

Aromatase is located in the ovary and placenta and participates in the
regulation of reproductive functions. The enzyme is also widely
distributed in extragonadal tissues such as muscle, liver, hair
follicles, adipose tissue, and brain. This finding suggests that
estrogen produced by this enzyme has physiologic functions not only as a
sex steroid hormone but also in growth or differentiation (summary by
Harada et al., 1992).

Zhou et al. (1991) studied structure-function relationships in human
aromatase using site-directed mutagenesis and a stable expression system
that involved a plasmid containing human placenta aromatase cDNA in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. A phe406-to-arg mutant was completely
inactive. Only small changes in enzyme kinetics occurred with mutants
tyr361 to phe and tyr361 to leu, leading to the conclusion that tyr361
is not directly involved in substrate binding. The mutant pro308 to phe
had altered catalytic properties, suggesting that pro308 is situated in
the active site of the enzyme.

Biosynthesis of estrogens from C19 steroids is catalyzed by aromatase
and its tissue-specific expression is determined at least in part by
alternative use of tissue-specific promoters, which give rise to
transcripts with unique 5-prime noncoding termini. The distal promoter
(I.1) is responsible for expression uniquely in the placenta, while the
proximal promoter (II), which regulates expression via a cAMP-dependent
signaling pathway, is responsible for expression in the gonads.
Transcripts in breast adipose tissue contain 5-prime termini
corresponding to expression derived from use of promoters I.4
predominantly as well as II and I.3. Promoter I.4 contains a
glucocorticoid response element and an interferon-gamma activation site
element, and is responsible for expression in the presence of
glucocorticoids and members of the class I cytokine family. Agarwal et
al. (1997) determined the distribution of these various transcripts in
adipose tissue from abdomen, buttocks, and thighs of women to
characterize the factors regulating aromatase expression in these sites.
They used competitive RT-PCR to amplify unique 5-prime ends of each of
the transcripts of the CYP19 gene expressed and the coding region to
evaluate total transcript levels in adipose tissue . They found that
exon I.4-specific transcripts were predominant in adipose tissue
obtained from women regardless of the tissue site or the age of the
individual. They also found that transcript levels increased in direct
proportion to advancing age and were the highest in buttocks, followed
by thighs, and lowest in abdomen adipose tissue. Thus it appears that in
normal human adipose tissue, aromatase expression is mainly under local
control by a number of cytokines via paracrine and autocrine mechanisms
in the presence of systemic glucocorticoids.

The distinct gender-specific patterns of fat distribution in men and
women (android and gynoid) suggest a role for sex steroids. It has been
suggested that estrogens can promote preadipocyte cell proliferation
and/or differentiation. The enzyme CYP19 is responsible for the
conversion of androgen precursor steroids to estrogens and may,
therefore, have a role in regulating adipose tissue mass and its
distribution. McTernan et al. (2002) investigated the glucocorticoid
regulation of aromatase expression in adipose tissue, specifically to
define any site- and gender-specific differences. Abdominal subcutaneous
and omental adipose tissue was obtained from male and female patients
undergoing elective surgery. Cortisol-induced aromatase activity in
omental adipocytes from postmenopausal females was higher than that in
premenopausal females (P less than 0.001). Insulin had no independent
effect on aromatase expression, but coincubation of preadipocytes with
cortisol and insulin eliminated both gender- and site-specific
differences. The authors concluded that in women, but not men, cortisol
increases aromatase activity at subcutaneous sites, and this may
facilitate predilection for subcutaneous adiposity in females. They
suggested that the observed site-, gender-, and menopausal-specific
differences in the glucocorticoid regulation of this enzyme may
contribute to the gender- and menopausal-specific patterns of fat
distribution.

By standards of other CYP genes, CYP19 is extraordinarily large (more
than 50 kb). The large size of the gene is probably related to the
transcription of CYP19 in different cell types under the regulation of
different promoters. Simpson et al. (1997) summarized their findings of
several distinct CYP19 promoters with alternative splicing which leads
to the production of the same enzyme in all cells. Numerous untranslated
first exons occur in aromatase transcripts in a tissue-specific fashion
due to differential splicing as a consequence of the use of
tissue-specific promoters. Thus, expression in the ovary uses a proximal
promoter that is regulated primarily by cAMP. On the other hand,
expression in the placenta uses a distal promoter located at least 40 kb
upstream of the start of transcription that is regulated by retinoids.
Other promoters are used in brain and adipose tissue. In the latter
case, class I cytokines such as IL6 (147620) and IL11 (147681), as well
as TNF-alpha (TNFA; 191160), are important regulatory factors. A common
3-prime splice junction located upstream of the start of translation is
used in all of the splicing events involved in the use of these various
promoters. Thus, the coding region of the transcripts, and hence the
protein, are identical regardless of the tissue site of expression; what
differs in a tissue-specific fashion is the 5-prime end of the
transcripts. This pattern of expression has great significance both from
a phylogenetic and ontogenetic standpoint, as well as for the physiology
and pathophysiology of estrogen formation.

Wang et al. (2001) presented the results of in vivo and in vitro
analyses indicating that aromatase is a physiologic target of DAX1
(NR0B1; 300473) in Leydig cells, and that increased aromatase expression
may account, in part, for the infertility and Leydig cell hyperplasia in
Dax1-deficient mice.

Aquila et al. (2002) noted that testicular expression of CYP19 has been
shown in both somatic and germ cell types in several species, whereas in
humans, testicular expression is confined to the somatic cells. They
investigated whether CYP19 is present in human ejaculated spermatozoa.
Using RT-PCR and specific primers, they amplified the highly conserved
helical, aromatic, and heme-binding sequences of the conventional human
CYP19 from RNA isolated from human spermatozoa. Employing a rabbit
polyclonal antiserum directed against human placental CYP19,
immunoblotting analysis demonstrated aromatase protein expression, which
was localized primarily to the tail and midpiece of spermatozoa. Aquila
et al. (2002) concluded that human spermatozoa are a potential site of
estrogen biosynthesis.

Using RT-PCR and semiquantitative RT-PCR, Sebastian et al. (2002) found
that CYP19 variants containing exon I.7, an alternative untranslated
first exon, were highly expressed in some subcutaneous adipose tissue
samples, but not in normal breast adipose tissue or any other normal
tissue examined. Exon I.7-containing CPY19 was highly expressed in
breast cancer tissue and in breast adipose tissue adjacent to cancer.

Sebastian et al. (2002) determined that the 2 consensus GATA sites
within the promoter region of alternative exon I.7 were critical for
basal CYP19 promoter activity in human microvascular endothelial cells.
GATA2 (137295), but not GATA1, bound the GATA sites and activated
expression of a reporter gene in a concentration-dependent manner.

In human endometriotic stromal cells, markedly high levels of CYP19 mRNA
and promoter II activity are present and can be vigorously stimulated by
prostaglandin-E2 via a cAMP-dependent pathway to give rise to
physiologically significant estrogen biosynthesis. Yang et al. (2002)
evaluated the possible roles of C/EBP isoforms in the regulation of
P450-aromatase expression in endometriotic versus eutopic endometrial
stromal cells. They disrupted several potential sequences and found that
mutations of a -211/-197-bp cAMP-response element (CRE) and a
-317/-304-bp C/EBP binding site abolished both baseline and cAMP-induced
promoter II activity. The authors concluded that both -317/-304 and
-211/-197-bp elements in promoter II are critical for the robust
cAMP-dependent induction in endometriosis. C/EBP-alpha upregulates,
whereas C/EBP-beta and C/EBP-delta inhibit, P450-aromatase promoter
activity via binding primarily to the -211/-197-bp CRE under in vitro
conditions. In vivo downregulation of C/EBP-beta in endometriotic
stromal cells and its upregulation in endometrial stromal cells may in
part account for the induction of CYP19 expression in endometriosis and
its inhibition in endometrium.

Shozu et al. (2002) noted that the CYP19 gene is expressed in several
extragonadal sites and regulated in a tissue-specific fashion, which is
achieved by alternative use of the 7 different promoters, and
corresponding exons 1, of the CYP19 gene. To elucidate the mechanism by
which aromatase P450 is overexpressed in leiomyomas, they sought to
determine the promoter used for aromatase P450 expression in leiomyomas.
By 5-prime-RACE analysis Shozu et al. (2002) revealed that of 6
leiomyoma nodules tested, 4 contained I.4-specific transcript of
aromatase P450 alone, 1 contained PII-specific transcript alone, and the
remaining nodule contained both I.4- and PII-specific transcripts
simultaneously. The transcriptional ability of the promoter I.4 sequence
was confirmed by transient transfection assay using primary cells
released from leiomyomas and established cells from normal myometrium
(KW cells). Luciferase vectors containing promoter I.4 sequence
(-340/+14 or longer) showed a significant increase in luciferase
activity in response to dexamethasone. Deletion or mutation of a
putative glucocorticoid-responsive element in the promoter I.4 sequence
eliminated promoter activity. The authors concluded that promoter I.4 is
the major promoter responsible for overexpression of aromatase P450 in
leiomyomas and that a glucocorticoid-responsive element within it plays
a substantial role in the expression of aromatase P450.

Imir et al. (2007) reported that aromatase expression is regulated via
the alternatively used promoters in the placenta (I.1 and I.2a), fat
(I.4, I.3, and II), bone (I.6), and gonads (II). A prostaglandin
E2/cAMP-dependent pathway regulates coordinately the proximal promoters
I.3/II, whereas glucocorticoids and cytokines regulate the distal
promoter I.4. They demonstrated that aromatase expression in leiomyoma
tissue in vivo is primarily regulated by the promoter I.3/II region
rather than I.4.

Ishikawa et al. (2008) demonstrated that cAMP-induced binding of
CEBP-beta (189965) to multiple motifs in the CYP19 promoter I.3/II
region is a critical mechanism regulating aromatase expression in
leiomyoma smooth muscle cells in primary culture. The authors concluded
that definition of this mechanism further may assist in designing
inhibitors of aromatase specific for leiomyoma tissue.

Parakh et al. (2006) found that expression of beta-catenin (CTNNB1;
116806) lacking the N-terminal 90-amino acids that lead to its
degradation significantly enhanced FSH-mediated induction of CYP19A1 and
CYP11A1 (118485) mRNA. CYP19A1 transactivation by SF1 (601516) required
a functional interaction with beta-catenin and an intact
beta-catenin-binding site. The beta-catenin-binding site was also
critical for the synergistic actions of FSH and SF1 on CYP19A1. The
actions of beta-catenin on CYP19A1 were dependent on hormone-induced
cAMP cascades. Parakh et al. (2006) concluded that beta-catenin is
essential for FSH/cAMP-regulated gene expression in ovary and that
beta-catenin has a role in estrogen biosynthesis.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Diaz-Cruz et al. (2005) studied the effects of nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs and COX1 (176805)- and COX2 (600262)-selective
inhibitors on aromatase activity and expression in human breast cancer
cells. The data from these experiments revealed dose-dependent decreases
in aromatase activity after treatment with all agents. Real-time PCR
analysis of aromatase gene expression showed a significant decrease in
mRNA levels when compared with control for all agents. These results
were consistent with enzyme activity data, suggesting that the effect of
COX inhibitors on aromatase begins at the transcriptional level.
Exon-specific real-time PCR studies suggested that promoters I.3, I.4,
and II are involved in this process.

- Crystal Structure

Ghosh et al. (2009) presented the crystal structure of human placental
aromatase, the only natural mammalian full-length P450, and the first
P450 in hormone biosynthetic pathways to be crystallized. Unlike the
active sites of many microsomal P450s that metabolize drugs and
xenobiotics, aromatase has an androgen-specific cleft that binds the
androstenedione molecule snugly. Hydrophobic and polar residues
exquisitely complement the steroid backbone. The locations of
catalytically important residues shed light on the reaction mechanism.
The relative juxtaposition of the hydrophobic amino-terminal region and
the opening to the catalytic cleft shows why membrane anchoring is
necessary for the lipophilic substrates to gain access to the active
site. Ghosh et al. (2009) suggested that the molecular basis for the
enzyme's androgenic specificity and unique catalytic mechanisms can be
used for developing next-generation aromatase inhibitors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Aromatase Deficiency

In an 18-year-old 46,XX female with aromatase deficiency (613546), Ito
et al. (1993) described compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
CYP19A1 gene (107910.0001-107910.0002). They indicated that this was the
first definitive case of an adult with aromatase deficiency to be
reported.

Harada et al. (1992) demonstrated that the aromatase deficiency in the
case reported by Shozu et al. (1991) was caused by the expression of an
abnormal aromatase protein molecule resulting from a genetic defect in
the fetus. Specifically, the CYP19A1 gene was found to have an insert of
87 bp, encoding 29 amino acids in-frame with no termination codon
(107910.0003). By transient expression in COS-7 cells, the aromatase
cDNA of the patient was found to contain a protein with a trace of
activity. Harada et al. (1992) suggested that the defect in the
placental aromatase gene, a feature of the infant's genotype, might be
inherited since the parents were consanguineous in the 'fifth degree.'
They showed that the offspring was homozygous for a defect that was
present in heterozygous state in both parents (107910.0003).

In a brother and sister with aromatase deficiency, Morishima et al.
(1995) identified homozygosity for a mutation in the aromatase gene
(107910.0004).

- Aromatase Excess Syndrome

In 3 patients with gynecomastia due to increased aromatase activity
(139300), Shozu et al. (2003) identified 2 distinct heterozygous
inversions in 15q21.2-q21.3 that resulted in a cryptic promoter in the
aromatase gene, including part of the TMOD3 or CGNL1 promoter,
respectively, and caused estrogen excess; see 107910.0010 and
107910.0011.

- Breast Cancer Susceptibility

Siegelmann-Danieli and Buetow (1999) genotyped 348 Caucasian women with
breast cancer (114480) and 145 Caucasian women controls for a published
tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism in intron 4 of the CYP19 gene. Six
common and 2 rare alleles were identified. The 171-bp allele was
overrepresented in patients; of 14 individuals homozygous for this
allele, 13 were patients. The control individual homozygous for this
allele was a 46-year-old woman. The 171-bp allele was found to be
associated with a silent polymorphism (G-to-A at val80). The
relationship between the high-risk allele and cancer development
remained to be elucidated.

Haiman et al. (2003) employed a haplotype-based approach to search for
breast cancer-associated CYP19 variants in the Multiethnic Cohort Study
(MEC). The authors observed significant haplotype effects, and also
found a common long-range haplotype that was associated with increased
risk of breast cancer. The authors hypothesized that women with the
long-range CYP19 haplotype 2b-3c may be carriers of a predisposing
breast cancer susceptibility allele.

Among 5,356 patients with invasive breast cancer and 7,129 controls
composed primarily of white women of European descent, Haiman et al.
(2007) found that common haplotypes spanning the coding and proximal
5-prime region of the CYP19A1 gene were significantly associated with a
10 to 20% increase in endogenous estrogen levels in postmenopausal
women. The effect per copy of the A-A haplotype of SNPs dbSNP rs749292
and dbSNP rs727479 was the most significant (p = 4.4 x 10(-15)),
although this accounted for less than 2% of the variation in estrogen
levels. No significant associations with these SNPs or other common
haplotypes were observed for breast cancer risk. Haiman et al. (2007)
concluded that although genetic variation in CYP19A1 produced measurable
differences in estrogen levels among postmenopausal women, the magnitude
of the change was insufficient to contribute detectably to breast
cancer.

- Height

To determine whether CYP19 gene or Y chromosome loci are associated with
variation in height, Ellis et al. (2001) performed an association study
using common biallelic polymorphisms in CYP19 and the Y chromosome in
413 adult males and 335 females drawn at random from a large population
sample. An association between CYP19 and height was found, but this was
more evident in men than in women. An association was also found with
the Y chromosome. Additionally, when men were grouped according to
haplotypes of the CYP19 and Y chromosome polymorphisms, a difference of
4.2 cm was detected. The authors concluded that in men, genetic
variation in CYP19 and on the Y chromosome are involved in determining
normal adult height, and that these loci may interact in an additive
fashion.

- Bone Mineral Density

To assess the role of bioavailable estradiol and the CYP19 TTTA(n)
repeat polymorphism in bone loss in elderly men, van Pottelbergh et al.
(2003) performed a longitudinal study in a cohort of 214 healthy
community-dwelling men aged 70 to 86. Bioavailable estrogen was
consistently associated with prospectively assessed bone mineral density
(BMD) changes at all measured sites. Moreover, the CYP19 TTTA(n) repeat
polymorphism was an additional independent determinant of BMD changes at
the distal forearm. Furthermore, the CYP19 genotype was associated with
self-reported clinical fracture risk as well as fracture history in
first-degree relatives. The authors concluded that the results of this
study provided an indication that the aromatase enzyme may exert a
direct modulatory action on bone metabolism at the tissue level in
elderly men.

Gennari et al. (2004) studied the role of the TTTA repeat polymorphism
in intron 4 of the CYP19 gene as a genetic determinant of BMD in a
sample of elderly males who were recruited by direct mailing and
followed longitudinally. Men with a high repeat genotype (more than 9
repeats) showed higher lumbar BMD values, lower bone turnover markers,
higher estradiol levels, and a lower rate of BMD change than men with a
low repeat genotype (fewer than 9 repeats). The association with BMD was
not significant in the subgroup of patients with high body mass index
(greater than 25), suggesting that the effect of CYP19 genotypes on bone
may be masked by the increase in fat mass. Gennari et al. (2004)
concluded that differences in estrogen levels due to polymorphism at the
aromatase CYP19 gene may predispose men to increased age-related bone
loss and fracture risk.

In a case-control study of 252 postmenopausal women aged 64.5 +/- 9.2
years (mean +/- SD), Somner et al. (2004) studied the association
between 2 common polymorphisms in the CYP17 (609300) and CYP19 genes,
-34T-C (Zmuda et al., 2001) and a silent G-to-A transition at val80 in
exon 3 (Siegelmann-Danieli and Buetow, 1999), respectively, and bone
mineral density (BMD) and serum androgen/estradiol. There was no
significant difference in serum estradiol concentrations between
osteoporosis cases and controls. The CYP19 genotype was significantly
associated with serum estradiol (P = 0.002). Women with the AA genotype
had higher serum estradiol concentrations compared with those with the
GG genotype (P = 0.03). In older women, those with CYP19 GA and GG
genotypes had an increased prevalence of osteoporosis (P = 0.04) and
fractures (P = 0.003). Somner et al. (2004) found no significant
association between CYP17 genotype and serum androgens and estradiol
concentrations. However, a significant association was seen between BMD
values at the femoral neck with CYP17 genotype in cases (P = 0.04) and
in the whole study population (P = 0.012). Subjects with the CC genotype
had significantly lower BMD (mean +/- SD: TT, 0.7 +/- 0.16; CC, 0.6 +/-
0.08 g/cm2; P = 0.006). Somner et al. (2004) concluded that both CYP17
and CYP19 are candidate genes for osteoporosis in postmenopausal women.

In a case-control study of 135 women with vertebral fractures due to
postmenopausal osteoporosis and 312 controls, Riancho et al. (2007)
studied 4 SNPs of the CYP19A1 gene (dbSNP rs1062033, dbSNP rs767199,
dbSNP rs4775936, and dbSNP rs700518) and identified a common haplotype,
present in about half the population, that was associated with an
increased risk of fracture (OR, 1.8, p = 0.006). Total aromatase
expression was 4 times lower in fat samples from homozygotes for the
unfavorable alleles than in the opposite homozygotes (p = 0.007).

ANIMAL MODEL

Leshin et al. (1981) showed that a similar lesion exists in the henny
feathering trait of Sebright Bantam chickens. Further, they concluded
that this trait results from a regulatory mutation affecting aromatase
activity ( Leshin et al., 1981). George et al. (1990) showed that the
henny feathering trait in the Golden Campine chicken is identical to
that in the Sebright Bantam; indeed, it may be the same gene, the trait
in the Campine having been derived from the Sebright. In the chicken the
trait behaves as an incomplete dominant; heterozygotes express half the
levels of extraglandular aromatase as do homozygotes on average.

Fisher et al. (1998) generated mice lacking functional aromatase enzyme
by targeted disruption of the cyp19 gene. Male and female knockout mice
were born with the expected mendelian frequency from F1 parents and grew
to adulthood. At 9 weeks of age, female knockout mice displayed
underdeveloped external genitalia and uteri. Ovaries contained numerous
follicles with abundant granulosa cells and evidence of antrum formation
that appeared arrested before ovulation. No corpora lutea were present.
Additionally, the stroma were hyperplastic with structures that appeared
to be atretic follicles. Development of the mammary glands approximated
that of prepubertal females. Male mice of the same age showed
essentially normal internal anatomy, but the male accessory sex glands
were enlarged because of increased content of secreted material. The
testes appeared normal. Male knockout mice were capable of breeding and
produced litters of approximately average size. Whereas serum estradiol
levels were at the limit of detection, testosterone levels were
elevated, as were the levels of follicle-stimulating hormone and
luteinizing hormone (see 152780). The phenotype of these animals
differed markedly from that of the previously reported estrogen receptor
knockout mice in which the estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1; 133430) was
deleted by targeted disruption.

Robertson et al. (1999) investigated spermatogenesis in mice that lack
aromatase because of the targeted disruption of the cyp19 gene. Male
mice deficient in aromatase were initially fertile but developed
progressive infertility, until their ability to sire pups was severely
impaired. The mice deficient in aromatase developed disruptions to
spermatogenesis between 4.5 months and 1 year, despite no decreases in
gonadotropins or androgens. Spermatogenesis primarily was arrested at
early spermiogenic stages, as characterized by an increase in apoptosis
and the appearance of multinucleated cells, and there was a significant
reduction in round and elongated spermatids, but no changes in Sertoli
cells or early germ cells. In addition, Leydig cell
hyperplasia/hypertrophy was evident, presumably as a consequence of
increased circulating luteinizing hormone. The findings indicated that
local expression of aromatase is essential for spermatogenesis and
provided evidence for a direct action of estrogen on male germ cell
development and thus fertility.

Aromatase knockout (ArKO) mice, lacking a functional Cyp19 gene, cannot
synthesize endogenous estrogens. Jones et al. (2000) examined the
adipose deposits of male and female ArKO mice, observing that these
animals progressively accumulated significantly more intraabdominal
adipose tissue than their wildtype littermates, reflected in increased
adipocyte volume at gonadal and infrarenal sites. This increased
adiposity was not due to hyperphagia or reduced resting energy
expenditure, but was associated with reduced spontaneous physical
activity levels, reduced glucose oxidation, and a decrease in lean body
mass. A striking accumulation of lipid droplets was observed in the
livers of ArKO animals. The findings demonstrated an important role for
estrogen in the maintenance of lipid homeostasis in both males and
females. Along the same lines, Heine et al. (2000) studied male and
female Esr1 knockout mice and found that signaling by this receptor is
critical in female and male white adipose tissue. Obesity in the males
involved a mechanism of reduced energy expenditure rather than increased
energy intake.

Yue et al. (2005) generated APP23 mice (see 104760), a mouse model of
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), that were also estrogen-deficient due to
heterozygous disruption of the aromatase gene. Compared to control APP23
mice with normal aromatase activity, the estrogen-deficient mice showed
decreased brain estrogen, earlier onset of amyloid plaques, and
increased brain beta-amyloid deposition. Microglia cultures from these
mice showed impaired beta-amyloid clearance. In contrast, ovariectomized
APP23 mice had normal brain estrogen levels and showed plaque pathology
similar to control APP23 mice. In addition, Yue et al. (2005) found that
postmortem brain tissue from 10 female AD patients showed 60% and 85%
decreased levels of total and free estrogen, respectively, as well as
decreased levels of aromatase mRNA compared to 10 female controls.
However, serum estrogen levels were not different between the 2 groups.
Yue et al. (2005) concluded that reduced brain estrogen production may
be a risk factor for developing AD neuropathology.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, ARG435CYS

Ito et al. (1993) described compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in
the CYP19 gene in a patient with aromatase deficiency (613546) suspected
on the basis of clinical and biochemical evidence. The patient was an
18-year-old 46,XX female with sexual infantilism, primary amenorrhea,
ambiguous external genitalia at birth, and polycystic ovaries. Coding
exons 2 to 10 of the CYP19 gene were amplified by PCR from genomic DNA
and sequenced directly. In exon 10, a C-to-T transition at bp 1303
resulted in a change of arginine-435 to cysteine (R435C). The results of
RFLP analysis and direct sequencing of the amplified exon 10 DNA from
the patient's mother indicated maternal inheritance of the R435C
mutation. The other mutation, inherited from the father, was a G-to-A
transition in exon 10 at bp 1310 resulting in a change of cysteine-437
to tyrosine (C436Y; 107210.0002). Transient expression experiments
showed that the R435C mutant protein had approximately 1.1% of the
activity of the wildtype, whereas C437Y was totally inactive.

.0002
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, CYS437TYR

See 107910.0001 and Ito et al. (1993).

.0003
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, IVS6, T-C, +2

Shozu et al. (1991) observed progressive virilization of a primigravida
during pregnancy, as well as female pseudohermaphroditism of her baby,
and showed that these conditions were caused by deficiency of placental
aromatase activity (613546). Harada et al. (1992) showed that the
aromatase gene from the placenta was transcribed as an abnormally large
mRNA with an 87-bp insertion and was translated as an abnormally large
protein molecule with 29 extra amino acids, resulting in an almost
inactive enzyme. Harada et al. (1992) showed that the splice donor
sequence (GT) of intron 6 in controls was mutated to GC in the patient,
whereas the parents showed both GT and GC, indicating their heterozygous
state.

.0004
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, ARG375CYS

Morishima et al. (1995) described a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1123
in exon IX of the CYP19 gene in a 28-year-old XX proband and her
24-year-old XY sib. The mother of the proband exhibited signs of
progressive virilization during both pregnancies that regressed
postpartum. The XX proband, followed since infancy, exhibited the
cardinal features of aromatase deficiency (613546). She had nonadrenal
female pseudohermaphroditism at birth and underwent repair of the
external genitalia, including a clitorectomy. At puberty, she developed
progressive signs of virilization, pubertal failure with no signs of
estrogen action, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, polycystic ovaries on
pelvic sonography, and tall stature. The basal concentrations of plasma
testosterone, androstenedione, and 17-hydroxyprogesterone were elevated,
whereas plasma estradiol was low. Hormone replacement therapy led to
breast development, menses, resolution of ovarian cysts, and suppression
of the elevated FSH and LH values. Her adult height was 177.6 cm. Her
brother was 204 cm tall with eunuchoid skeletal proportions. He was
sexually fully mature and had macroorchidism. The bone age was 14 years
at a chronologic age of 24 years. Striking osteopenia was noted at the
wrist and at other sites. The observations in these sibs were considered
consistent with the following interpretations by Morishima et al.
(1995): (1) estrogens are essential for normal skeletal maturation and
proportions (but not linear growth) in men as well as in women, the
accretion and maintenance of bone mineral density and mass, and the
control of the rate of bone turnover; (2) estrogens have a significant
role in the sex steroid-gonadotropin feedback mechanism in the male,
even in the face of high circulating testosterone; (3) deficient
estrogens in the adult male are associated with hyperinsulinemia and
abnormal plasma lipids; and (4) placental aromatase has a critical role
in protecting the female fetus from fetal masculinization and the
pregnant woman from virilization.

Bilezikian et al. (1998) found that treatment for 3 years with
conjugated estrogen resulted in restoration of bone mass in the patient
reported by Morishima et al. (1995).

.0005
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, 1-BP DEL, C, CODON 408

Mullis et al. (1997) reported a female with aromatase deficiency
(613546) who was a compound heterozygote for 2 point mutations in the
CYP19 gene. The maternal allele had a basepair (C) deletion at codon 408
(CCC) that caused a frameshift resulting in a nonsense codon 111 bp (37
amino acids) 3-prime to the deletion. The paternal allele had a G-to-A
transition at the 5-prime splice site (conserved GT to AT) between exon
and intron 3 (IVS3+1G-A; 107910.0006). This mutation ignores the 5-prime
splice site resulting in a read-through to a stop codon 3 bp downstream.
Aromatase deficiency was suspected because of the marked prepartum
virilization in the mother, and the diagnosis was confirmed shortly
after birth. Extremely low levels of serum estrogens were found in
contrast to high levels of androgens. Ultrasonographic studies of the
child showed persistently enlarged ovaries containing numerous large
cysts and normal-appearing large tertiary follicles at 2 years of age.
Basal and GNRH-induced FSH levels remained strikingly elevated. Low-dose
estradiol given for 50 days at the age of 3.5 years resulted in
normalization of serum gonadotropin levels, regression of ovarian size,
and increase of whole body and lumbar spine bone mineral density. The
FSH levels and ovarian size returned to pretreatment levels 150 days
after cessation of estradiol therapy.

.0006
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, IVS3, G-A, +1

See 107910.0005 and Mullis et al. (1997).

.0007
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, ARG365GLN

In a man with aromatase deficiency (613546) whose parents were first
cousins, Carani et al. (1997) identified a G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 1094 in exon 9 of the P-450 aromatase gene, resulting in a
glutamine instead of an arginine at codon 365. The mutation abolished a
site cleaved by the restriction enzyme Acc651; restriction analysis
showed that both parents were heterozygous for the mutation. Expression
studies in COS-1 cells showed that the aromatase activity of the mutant
protein was 0.4% of that of the wildtype protein in the presence of the
same amount of total cellular protein. At 18 years of age the patient
was 170 cm tall and he continued to grow, reaching a height of 187 cm at
the age of 31 and 190 cm at the age of 38. Androgen therapy was
ineffective; estrogen therapy resulted in increased spinal bone mineral
density and complete epiphyseal closure after 9 months. The increases in
bone mineral density, serum levels of alkaline phosphatase and
osteocalcin, and urinary excretion of pyridinoline were similar to those
that occurred during normal skeletal maturation during puberty. Thus,
the authors proposed that eunuchoid skeletal features may result mainly
from a deficiency of estrogen, rather than a deficiency of androgen. The
lack of eunuchoid skeletal development in patients with complete
androgen insensitivity supported this view. Skeletal pain, especially in
the knees, was a clinical feature. At age 31 years his arm span was 204
cm and the ratio of upper segment to lower segment was 0.85. He showed
bilateral genu valgum. There was no gynecomastia and penis size and
pattern of pubic hair were normal. Psychosexual orientation was
heterosexual and his libido and erections were normal.

.0008
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, 1-BP DEL, C, CODON 156

Deladoey et al. (1999) identified a point mutation in the CYP19 gene
that was responsible for aromatase deficiency (613546) in a 46,XY male
infant with unremarkable clinical findings at birth. The boy was
homozygous for a 1-bp deletion (codon 156, C) in exon 5 of the CYP19
gene. Aromatase deficiency was suspected prenatally because of the
severe virilization of the mother during the early pregnancy, and the
diagnosis was confirmed shortly after birth. Four weeks after birth, the
boy showed extremely low levels of serum estrogens but had a normal
level of serum free testosterone; in comparison with the high serum
concentration of androstenedione at birth, a striking decrease occurred
by 4 weeks postnatally. The authors had previously reported elevated
basal and stimulated FSH levels in a female infant with aromatase
deficiency in the first year of life. In contrast, in the male infant,
basal FSH and peak FSH levels after standard GnRH stimulation tests were
normal. The authors concluded that the contribution of estrogen to the
hypothalamic-pituitary gonadotropin-gonadal feedback mechanism is
different in boys and girls during infancy and early childhood. They
hypothesized that in normal girls serum estradiol concentrations
strongly correlate with circulating inhibin levels, and thus, low
inhibin levels may contribute to the striking elevation of FSH in young
girls with aromatase deficiency. In contrast, estradiol levels are
physiologically about 7-fold lower in boys than in girls, and serum
inhibin levels remain elevated even though levels of FSH, LH, and
testosterone are decreased.

.0009
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, IVS4, C-A, -3

Herrmann et al. (2002) described a novel homozygous mutation in the
CYP19 gene in a 27-year-old male with aromatase deficiency (613546)
whose parents were consanguineous. A C-to-A substitution in intron 5 at
position -3 of the splicing acceptor site before exon 6 of the CYP19
gene is the likely cause of loss of aromatase activity. The mRNA of the
patient led to a frameshift and a premature stop codon 8 nucleotides
downstream at the end of exon 5. Apart from genua valga, kyphoscoliosis,
and pectus carinatum, the physical examination was normal, including
secondary male characteristics with normal testicular size. To
substitute for the deficiency, the patient was treated with 50 mg
transdermal estradiol twice weekly for 3 months, followed by 25 mg twice
weekly. Bone density of the distal radius increased and bone mineral
density of the lumbar spine increased. Semen analysis revealed
oligozoospermia. After 3 months of treatment, the sperm count increased
and decreased rapidly during the following 3 months. The authors
concluded that in this rare incidence of estrogen deficiency, estrogen
replacement demonstrated its importance for bone mineralization and
maturation and glucose metabolism in a male carrying a novel mutation in
the CYP19 gene.

.0010
AROMATASE EXCESS SYNDROME
CYP19A1, INV, CGNL1 PROMOTER

In a 36-year-old man and his 7-year-old son with severe gynecomastia of
prepubertal onset and mild hypogonadotropic hypogonadism caused by
elevated estrogen levels (139300), Shozu et al. (2003) identified an
inversion on 15q21.2-q21.3 that moved the promoter of the FLJ14957 gene
(CGNL1; 607856) into a 5-prime position in relation to the aromatase
coding region. The father in this case had progressive gynecomastia and
a linear growth spurt at the age of 5 years, which was quickly followed
by the development of pubic hair and penile enlargement. He stopped
growing at the age of 14 years when his height was below the first
percentile. He underwent bilateral mastectomy at the age of 16 years.
The son was born when the father was 30 years old. Physical examination
demonstrated a high-pitched voice, lack of facial hair, mastectomy
scars, and unremarkable external genitalia. In the son the gynecomastia
and accelerated linear growth likewise first occurred at the age of 5
years: his height and weight were above the 99th percentile, breast
development was Tanner stage III, and he had normal prepubertal external
genitalia. At the chronologic age of 5.5 years, his bone age was 13
years.

.0011
AROMATASE EXCESS SYNDROME
CYP19A1, INV, TMOD3 PROMOTER

Shozu et al. (2003) demonstrated that severe gynecomastia of prepubertal
onset associated with elevated estrogen levels (139300) in a 17-year-old
boy was caused by an inversion in 15q21.2-q21.3 that brought the
promoter of the TMOD3 gene (605112) into a position immediately 5-prime
of the aromatase gene.

.0012
AROMATASE DEFICIENCY
CYP19A1, GLU210LYS

In a 29-year-old man with aromatase deficiency (613546), Maffei et al.
(2004) detected a homozygous G-to-A transition at the last nucleotide of
exon 5 of the CYP19A1 gene that resulted in a glu210-to-lys (E210K)
amino acid substitution. Continuing linear growth, eunuchoid body
proportions, diffuse bone pain, and bilateral cryptorchidism were
observed. The patient had a complex dysmetabolic syndrome characterized
by insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus type 2, acanthosis nigricans,
liver steatohepatitis, and signs of precocious atherogenesis.
Testosterone treatment at high doses resulted in a severe imbalance in
the estradiol-to-testosterone ratio together with insulin resistance and
diabetes mellitus type 2. Estrogen treatment resulted in an improvement
of acanthosis nigricans, insulin resistance, and liver steatohepatitis,
coupled with a better glycemic control and the disappearance of 2
carotid plaques. Testis biopsy showed a pattern of total germ cell
depletion that might be due to the concomitant presence of bilateral
cryptorchidism. The authors concluded that this case of aromatase
deficiency confirmed previous data on bone maturation and mineralization
and revealed a high risk for the precocious development of
cardiovascular disease in young aromatase-deficient men.

.0013
AROMATASE EXCESS SYNDROME
CYP19A1, CYP19A1/TRPM7 FUSION

In a Russian kindred with aromatase excess syndrome (139300) with 16
affected individuals in 5 generations, Tiulpakov et al. (2005) detected
heterozygosity for a novel chimeric transcript composed of exon 1 of the
TRPM7 gene (605692) spliced to the common acceptor splice site of CYP19
exon 2. This rearrangement was predicted to result in aberrant aromatase
expression driven by the TRPM7 promoter. In both sexes the disorder
manifested in early childhood with breast enlargement, growth, and bone
age acceleration. Tiulpakov et al. (2005) stated that the mechanism of
this chromosomal defect appeared to be different from that described by
Shozu et al. (2003) (see 107910.0010, 107910.0011), which most likely
were the result of heterozygous inversions. The CYP19 and TRPM7 genes
are transcribed in the same direction, with TRPM7 lying 3-prime
(downstream) of CYP19. Thus, rearrangement bringing CYP19 under the
control of the TRPM7 promoter could not result from simple inversion of
the 15q21.2 portion. A more complex heterozygous rearrangement such as
partial duplication of 15q21.2 with placing of the TRPM7 regulatory
regions in front of the CYP19 coding exons would be required to produce
the chimeric transcripts discovered in this study. Tiulpakov et al.
(2005) were unable to determine the chromosomal breakpoints resulting in
the chimeric CYP19 transcripts in this family.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES George and Wilson (1980); Leibermann and Zachmann (1992); Lin et al.
(2007); Mango et al. (1978)
REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, V. R.; Ashanullah, C. I.; Simpson, E. R.; Bulun, S. E.
: Alternatively spliced transcripts of the aromatase cytochrome P450
(CYP19) gene in adipose tissue of women. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82:
70-74, 1997.

2. Aquila, S.; Sisci, D.; Gentile, M.; Middea, E.; Siciliano, L.;
Ando, S.: Human ejaculated spermatozoa contain active P450 aromatase. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 3385-3390, 2002.

3. Bilezikian, J. P.; Morishima, A.; Bell, J.; Grumbach, M. M.: Increased
bone mass as a result of estrogen therapy in a man with aromatase
deficiency. New Eng. J. Med. 339: 599-603, 1998.

4. Carani, C.; Qin, K.; Simoni, M.; Faustini-Fustini, M.; Serpente,
S.; Boyd, J.; Korach, K. S.; Simpson, E. R.: Effect of testosterone
and estradiol in a man with aromatase deficiency. New Eng. J. Med. 337:
91-95, 1997.

5. Chen, S.; Besman, M. J.; Sparkes, R. S.; Zollman, S.; Klisak, I.;
Mohandas, T.; Hall, P. F.; Shively, J. E.: Human aromatase: cDNA
cloning, Southern blot analysis, and assignment of the gene to chromosome
15. DNA 7: 27-38, 1988.

6. Chen, S.; Shively, J. E.; Nakajin, S.; Shinoda, M.; Hall, P. F.
: Amino terminal sequence analysis of human placenta aromatase. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 135: 713-719, 1986.

7. Corbin, C. J.; Graham-Lorence, S.; McPhaul, M.; Mason, J. I.; Mendelson,
C. R.; Simpson, E. R.: Isolation of a full-length cDNA insert encoding
human aromatase system cytochrome P-450 and its expression in nonsteroidogenic
cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 8948-8952, 1988.

8. Deladoey, J.; Fluck, C.; Bex, M.; Yoshimura, N.; Harada, N.; Mullis,
P. E.: Aromatase deficiency caused by a novel P450(arom) gene mutation:
impact of absent estrogen production on serum gonadotropin concentration
in a boy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 4050-4054, 1999.

9. Diaz-Cruz, E. S.; Shapiro, C. L.; Brueggemeier, R. W.: Cyclooxygenase
inhibitors suppress aromatase expression and activity in breast cancer
cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 2563-2570, 2005.

10. Ellis, J. A.; Stebbing, M.; Harrap, S. B.: Significant population
variation in adult male height associated with the Y chromosome and
the aromatase gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 4147-4150, 2001.

11. Evans, C. T.; Ledesma, D. B.; Schulz, T. Z.; Simpson, E. R.; Mendelson,
C. R.: Isolation and characterization of a complementary DNA specific
for human aromatase-system cytochrome P-450 mRNA. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 83: 6387-6391, 1986.

12. Fisher, C. R.; Graves, K. H.; Parlow, A. F.; Simpson, E. R.:
Characterization of mice deficient in aromatase (ArKO) because of
targeted disruption of the cyp19 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
6965-6970, 1998.

13. Gennari, L.; Masi, L.; Merlotti, D.; Picariello, L.; Falchetti,
A.; Tanini, A.; Mavilia, C.; Del Monte, F.; Gonnelli, S.; Lucani,
B.; Gennari, C.; Brandi, M. L.: A polymorphic CYP19 TTTA repeat influences
aromatase activity and estrogen levels in elderly men: effects on
bone metabolism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 2803-2810, 2004.

14. George, F. W.; Matsumine, H.; McPhaul, M. J.; Somes, R. G., Jr.;
Wilson, J. D.: Inheritance of the henny feathering trait in the Golden
Campine chicken: evidence for allelism with the gene that causes henny
feathering in the Sebright Bantam. J. Hered. 81: 107-110, 1990.

15. George, F. W.; Wilson, J. D.: Pathogenesis of the henny feathering
trait in the Sebright Bantam chicken. J. Clin. Invest. 66: 57-65,
1980.

16. Ghosh, D.; Griswold, J.; Erman, M.; Pangborn, W.: Structural
basis for androgen specificity and oestrogen synthesis in human aromatase. Nature 457:
219-223, 2009.

17. Haiman, C. A.; Dossus, L.; Setiawan, V. W.; Stram, D. O.; Dunning,
A. M.; Thomas, F.; Thun, M. J.; Albanes, D.; Altshuler, D.; Ardanaz,
E.; Boeing, H.; Buring, J.; and 27 others: Genetic variation at
the CYP19A1 locus predicts circulating estrogen levels but not breast
cancer risk in postmenopausal women. Cancer Res. 67: 1893-1897,
2007.

18. Haiman, C. A.; Stram, D. O.; Pike, M. C.; Kolonel, L. N.; Burtt,
N. P.; Altshuler, D.; Hirschhorn, J.; Henderson, B. E.: A comprehensive
haplotype analysis of CYP19 and breast cancer risk: the Multiethnic
Cohort. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 2679-2692, 2003.

19. Harada, N.: Cloning of a complete cDNA encoding human aromatase:
immunochemical identification and sequence analysis. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 156: 725-732, 1988.

20. Harada, N.; Ogawa, H.; Shozu, M.; Yamada, K.: Genetic studies
to characterize the origin of the mutation in placental aromatase
deficiency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 666-672, 1992.

21. Harada, N.; Ogawa, H.; Shozu, M.; Yamada, K.; Suhara, K.; Nishida,
E.; Takagi, Y.: Biochemical and molecular genetic analyses on placental
aromatase (P-450-AROM) deficiency. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 4781-4785,
1992.

22. Heine, P. A.; Taylor, J. A.; Iwamoto, G. A.; Lubahn, D. B.; Cooke,
P. S.: Increased adipose tissue in male and female estrogen receptor-alpha
knockout mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 12729-12734, 2000.

23. Herrmann, B. L.; Saller, B.; Janssen, O. E.; Gocke, P.; Bockisch,
A.; Sperling, H.; Mann, K.; Broecker, M.: Impact of estrogen replacement
therapy in a male with congenital aromatase deficiency caused by a
novel mutation in the CYP19 gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 5476-5484,
2002.

24. Imir, A. G.; Lin, Z.; Yin, P.; Deb, S.; Yilmaz, B.; Cetin, M.;
Cetin, A.; Bulun, S. E.: Aromatase expression in uterine leiomyomata
is regulated primarily by proximal promoters I.3/II. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 92: 1979-1982, 2007.

25. Ishikawa, H.; Fenkci, V.; Marsh, E. E.; Yin, P.; Chen, D.; Cheng,
Y.-H.; Reisterd, S.; Lin, Z.; Bulun, S. E.: CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta regulates aromatase expression via multiple and novel
cis-regulatory sequences in uterine leiomyoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
981-991, 2008. Note: Erratum: J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 94: 1476 only,
2009.

26. Ito, Y.; Fisher, C. R.; Conte, F. A.; Grumbach, M. M.; Simpson,
E. R.: Molecular basis of aromatase deficiency in an adult female
with sexual infantilism and polycystic ovaries. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 90: 11673-11677, 1993.

27. Jones, M. E. E.; Thorburn, A. W.; Britt, K. L.; Hewitt, K. N.;
Wreford, N. G.; Proietto, J.; Oz, O. K.; Leury, B. J.; Robertson,
K. M.; Yao, S.; Simpson, E. R.: Aromatase-deficient (ArKO) mice have
a phenotype of increased adiposity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 12735-12740,
2000.

28. Leibermann, E.; Zachmann, M.: Familial adrenal feminization probably
due to increased steroid aromatization. Hormone Res. 37: 96-102,
1992.

29. Leshin, M.; Baron, J.; George, F. W.; Wilson, J. D.: Increased
estrogen formation and aromatase activity in fibroblasts cultured
from the skin of chickens with the Henny feathering trait. J. Biol.
Chem. 256: 4341-4344, 1981.

30. Leshin, M.; George, F. W.; Wilson, J. D.: Increased estrogen
synthesis in the Sebright bantam is due to a mutation that causes
increased aromatase activity. Trans. Assoc. Am. Phys. 94: 97-105,
1981.

31. Lin, L.; Ercan, O.; Raza, J.; Burren, C. P.; Creighton, S. M.;
Auchus, R. J.; Dattani, M. T.; Achermann, J. C.: Variable phenotypes
associated with aromatase (CYP19) insufficiency in humans. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 92: 982-990, 2007.

32. Maffei, L.; Murata, Y.; Rochira, V.; Tubert, G.; Aranda, C.; Vazquez,
M.; Clyne, C. D.; Davis, S.; Simpson, E. R.; Carani, C.: Dysmetabolic
syndrome in a man with a novel mutation of the aromatase gene: effects
of testosterone, alendronate, and estradiol treatment. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 89: 61-70, 2004.

33. Mango, D.; Montemurro, A.; Scirpa, P.; Bompiani, A.; Menini, E.
: Four cases of pregnancy with low estrogen production due to placental
enzymatic deficiency. Europ. J. Obstet. Gynec. Reprod. Biol. 8:
65-71, 1978.

34. McTernan, P. G.; Anderson. L. A.; Anwar, A. J.; Eggo, M. C.; Crocker,
J.; Barnett, A. H.; Stewart, P. M.; Kumar, S.: Glucocorticoid regulation
of P450 aromatase activity in human adipose tissue: gender and site
differences. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 1327-1336, 2002.

35. Morishima, A.; Grumbach, M. M.; Simpson, E. R.; Fisher, C.; Qin,
K.: Aromatase deficiency in male and female siblings caused by a
novel mutation and the physiological role of estrogens. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 80: 3689-3698, 1995.

36. Mullis, P. E.; Yoshimura, N.; Kuhlmann, B.; Lippuner, K.; Jaeger,
P.; Harada, H.: Aromatase deficiency in a female who is compound
heterozygote for two new point mutations in the P450(arom) gene: impact
of estrogens on hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, multicystic ovaries,
and bone densitometry in childhood. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82:
1739-1745, 1997.

37. Parakh, T. N.; Hernandez, J. A.; Grammer, J. C.; Weck, J.; Hunzicker-Dunn,
M.; Zeleznik, A. J.; Nilson, J. H.: Follicle-stimulating hormone/cAMP
regulation of aromatase gene expression requires beta-catenin. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 12435-12440, 2006.

38. Riancho, J. A.; Valero, C.; Naranjo, A.; Morales, D. J.; Sanudo,
C.; Zarrabeitia, M. T.: Identification of an aromatase haplotype
that is associated with gene expression and postmenopausal osteoporosis. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 660-665, 2007.

39. Robertson, K. M.; O'Donnell, L.; Jones, M. E. E.; Meachem, S.
J.; Boon, W. C.; Fisher, C. R.; Graves, K. H.; McLachlan, R. I.; Simpson,
E. R.: Impairment of spermatogenesis in mice lacking a functional
aromatase (cyp 19) gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 7986-7991, 1999.

40. Sebastian, S.; Bulun, S. E.: A highly complex organization of
the regulatory region of the human CYP19 (aromatase) gene revealed
by the Human Genome Project. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 4600-4602,
2001.

41. Sebastian, S.; Takayama, K.; Shozu, M.; Bulun, S. E.: Cloning
and characterization of a novel endothelial promoter of the human
CYP19 (aromatase P450) gene that is up-regulated in breast cancer
tissue. Molec. Endocr. 16: 2243-2254, 2002.

42. Shozu, M.; Akasofu, K.; Harada, T.; Kubota, Y.: A new cause of
female pseudohermaphroditism: placental aromatase deficiency. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 72: 560-566, 1991.

43. Shozu, M.; Sebastian, S.; Takayama, K.; Hsu, W.-T.; Schultz, R.
A.; Neely, K.; Bryant, M.; Bulun, S. E.: Estrogen excess associated
with novel gain-of-function mutations affecting the aromatase gene. New
Eng. J. Med. 348: 1855-1865, 2003.

44. Shozu, M.; Sumitani, H.; Segawa, T.; Yang, H.-J.; Murakami, K.;
Kasai, T.; Inoue, M.: Overexpression of aromatase P450 in leiomyoma
tissue is driven primarily through promoter I.4 of the aromatase P450
gene (CYP19). J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 2540-2548, 2002.

45. Siegelmann-Danieli, N.; Buetow, K. H.: Constitutional genetic
variation at the human aromatase gene (Cyp19) and breast cancer risk. Brit.
J. Cancer 79: 456-463, 1999.

46. Simpson, E. R.; Michael, M. D.; Agarwal, V. R.; Hinshelwood, M.
M.; Bulun, S. E.; Zhao, Y.: Expression of the CYP19 (aromatase) gene:
an unusual case of alternative promoter usage. FASEB J. 11: 29-36,
1997.

47. Somner, J.; McLellan, S.; Cheung, J.; Mak, Y. T.; Frost, M. L.;
Knapp, K. M.; Wierzbicki, A. S.; Wheeler, M.; Fogelman, I.; Ralston,
S. H.; Hampson, G. N.: Polymorphisms in the P450 c17 (17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase)
and P450 c19 (aromatase) genes: association with serum sex steroid
concentrations and bone mineral density in postmenopausal women. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 344-351, 2004.

48. Sparkes, R. S.; Mohandas, T.; Chen, S.; Besman, M. J.; Zollman,
S.; Shively, J. E.: Assignment of the aromatase gene to human chromosome
15q21. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 696-697, 1987.

49. Tiulpakov, A.; Kalintchenko, N.; Semitcheva, T.; Polyakov, A.;
Dedov, I.; Sverdlova, P.; Kolesnikova, G.; Peterkova, V.; Rubtsov,
P.: A potential rearrangement between CYP19 and TRPM7 genes on chromosome
15q21.2 as a cause of aromatase excess syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 90: 4184-4190, 2005.

50. Toda, K.; Merashima, M.; Kawamoto, T.; Sumimoto, H.; Yokoyama,
Y.; Kuribayashi, I.; Mitsuuchi, Y.; Maeda, T.; Yamamoto, Y.; Sagara,
Y.; Ikeda, H.; Shizuta, Y.: Structural and functional characterization
of human aromatase P-450 gene. Europ. J. Biochem. 193: 559-565,
1990.

51. van Pottelbergh, I.; Goemaere, S.; Kaufman, J. M.: Bioavailable
estradiol and an aromatase gene polymorphism are determinants of bone
mineral density changes in men over 70 years of age. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 88: 3075-3081, 2003.

52. Wang, Z. J.; Jeffs, B.; Ito, M.; Achermann, J. C.; Yu, R. N.;
Hales, D. B.; Jameson, J. L.: Aromatase (Cyp19) expression is up-regulated
by targeted disruption of Dax1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7988-7993,
2001.

53. Whitlock, J. P., Jr.: The regulation of cytochrome P-450 gene
expression. Annu. Rev. Pharm. Toxicol. 26: 333-369, 1986.

54. Yang, S.; Fang, Z.; Suzuki, T.; Sasano, H.; Zhou, J.; Gurates,
B.; Tamura, M.; Ferrer, K.; Bulun, S.: Regulation of aromatase P450
expression in endometriotic and endometrial stromal cells by CCAAT/enhancer
binding proteins (C/EBPs): decreased C/EBP-beta in endometriosis is
associated with overexpression of aromatase. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87:
2336-2345, 2002.

55. Yue, X.; Lu, M.; Lancaster, T.; Cao, P.; Honda, S.-I.; Staufenbiel,
M.; Harada, N.; Zhong, Z.; Shen, Y.; Li, R.: Brain estrogen deficiency
accelerates A-beta plaque formation in an Alzheimer's disease animal
model. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 19198-19203, 2005.

56. Zhou, D.; Pompon, D.; Chen, S.: Structure-function studies of
human aromatase by site-directed mutagenesis: kinetic properties of
mutants pro308-to-phe, tyr361-to-phe, tyr361-to-leu, and phe406-to-arg. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 410-414, 1991.

57. Zmuda, J. M.; Cauley, J. A.; Kuller, L. H.; Ferrell, R. E.: A
common promoter variant in the cytochrome P450c17-alpha (CYP17) gene
is associated with bioavailable testosterone levels and bone size
in men. J. Bone Miner. Res. 16: 911-917, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/23/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/3/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/13/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/17/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 12/17/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/18/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/9/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/23/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/25/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/31/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/26/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/12/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/4/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/29/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/3/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/31/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/29/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/26/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/14/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/26/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/28/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/18/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/31/1987

EDITED alopez: 01/30/2013
carol: 5/23/2011
terry: 1/10/2011
carol: 10/1/2010
carol: 9/16/2010
terry: 9/16/2010
carol: 9/15/2010
terry: 12/16/2009
wwang: 5/4/2009
alopez: 4/23/2009
mgross: 3/23/2009
terry: 3/20/2009
alopez: 1/28/2009
terry: 1/27/2009
carol: 10/31/2008
wwang: 7/3/2008
ckniffin: 7/3/2008
carol: 2/13/2008
carol: 12/17/2007
alopez: 7/12/2007
alopez: 5/18/2007
mgross: 11/10/2006
terry: 11/9/2006
wwang: 10/6/2006
alopez: 5/23/2006
alopez: 4/25/2006
wwang: 4/5/2006
ckniffin: 3/31/2006
alopez: 10/26/2005
alopez: 10/4/2005
terry: 9/12/2005
alopez: 2/7/2005
alopez: 8/6/2004
carol: 7/1/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
carol: 2/23/2004
carol: 8/8/2003
tkritzer: 7/17/2003
carol: 6/5/2003
terry: 6/5/2003
terry: 6/3/2003
carol: 3/5/2003
cwells: 2/4/2003
alopez: 1/29/2003
alopez: 1/3/2003
alopez: 10/31/2002
tkritzer: 7/29/2002
tkritzer: 7/26/2002
alopez: 2/27/2002
carol: 10/11/2001
carol: 9/19/2001
mcapotos: 9/18/2001
mcapotos: 9/14/2001
mgross: 7/26/2001
mgross: 12/4/2000
terry: 11/30/2000
terry: 11/10/2000
alopez: 8/23/1999
terry: 8/10/1999
alopez: 5/24/1999
terry: 5/18/1999
carol: 10/12/1998
carol: 9/16/1998
terry: 9/11/1998
alopez: 7/6/1998
terry: 6/30/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
terry: 9/16/1997
terry: 9/10/1997
jenny: 9/2/1997
jenny: 5/28/1997
alopez: 5/27/1997
alopez: 5/20/1997
terry: 5/16/1997
mark: 3/27/1997
mark: 3/6/1997
mark: 2/2/1996
terry: 1/25/1996
mimadm: 4/18/1994
carol: 3/28/1994
carol: 12/22/1992
carol: 12/14/1992
carol: 6/11/1992
carol: 5/5/1992

107770	TITLE *107770 LOW DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 1; LRP1
;;LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN; LRP;;
ALPHA-2-MACROGLOBULIN RECEPTOR; A2MR;;
APOLIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR; APR;;
APOLIPOPROTEIN E RECEPTOR; APOER;;
CD91;;
CED1, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LRP1 is synthesized as a 600-kD precursor transmembrane glycoprotein
that is cleaved in trans-Golgi network by furin (136950) to generate a
515-kD alpha subunit and an 85-kD beta subunit. The alpha and beta
subunits remain noncovalently associated during LRP1 transport to the
cell membrane. LRP1 interacts with a broad range of secreted proteins
and cell surface molecules and mediates their endocytosis and/or
activates signaling pathways through multiple cytosolic adaptor and
scaffold proteins. Phosphorylation of the LRP1 tail regulates ligand
internalization and signal transduction (summary by Deane et al., 2004).

CLONING

Herz et al. (1988) cloned a cDNA for the low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein (LRP) by virtue of its close homology to the
LDL receptor (606945). The 4,544-amino acid protein contains a single
transmembrane segment. Northern blot analysis detected LRP1 mRNA in
liver, brain, and lung. Kristensen et al. (1990) and Strickland et al.
(1990) demonstrated that LRP is identical to alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M;
103950) receptor (A2MR). Like mannose-6-phosphate receptor (147280), the
A2MR/LRP molecule is probably bifunctional.

In the free-living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, Yochem and Greenwald
(1993) isolated and sequenced a gene more than 23 kb long that encodes a
large integral membrane protein with a predicted structure similar to
that of LRP of mammals. The 4,753-amino acid product predicted for the
C. elegans gene shared a nearly identical number and arrangement of
amino acid sequence motifs with human LRP, and several exons of the C.
elegans LRP gene corresponded to exons of related parts of the human LRP
gene.

Ranganathan et al. (2011) stated that the heavy chain of LRP1 contains 4
clusters of ligand-binding repeats. The light chain includes the
transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic domain, which contains 2 NPxY
motifs and 2 dileucine repeats that contribute to LRP1 endocytosis.
Ranganathan et al. (2011) also purified a soluble form of LRP1 from
human plasma.

MAPPING

Myklebost et al. (1989) mapped the gene for the LRP-related protein to
12q13-q14 by study of DNA from rodent-human cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization; the symbol APOER was used initially because of the
putative APOE receptor function.

By pulsed field gel analysis, Forus et al. (1991) found that the APR and
GLI genes are closely situated; probes for either gene hybridized to DNA
fragments of molecular weight 300-400 kb. More detailed restriction
analysis showed that the intergenic region was between 200 and 300 kb
(Forus and Myklebost, 1992). Hilliker et al. (1992) confirmed the
assignment to 12q13-q14 using both nonisotopic and isotopic in situ
hybridization. Also by in situ hybridization, they assigned the
corresponding locus to mouse chromosome 15. Binder et al. (2000) pointed
out that gp96 and CD91 both map to the long arm of chromosome 12.

GENE FUNCTION

Herz et al. (1988) found that LRP showed strong calcium binding.

Kounnas et al. (1995) showed that LRP mediates the endocytosis and
degradation of secreted amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760),
suggesting that a single metabolic pathway links 2 molecules implicated
in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300). Narita et al.
(1997) showed that A2M, via LRP, mediates the clearance and degradation
of APP-generated beta-amyloid (A-beta), the major component of amyloid
plaques in AD.

Kang et al. (2000) demonstrated in vitro that LRP1 is required for the
A2M-mediated clearance of A-beta 40 and 42 via a bona fide
receptor-mediated cellular uptake mechanism. Analysis of postmortem
human brain tissue showed that LRP expression normally declines with
age, and that LRP expression in AD brains was significantly lower than
in controls. Within the AD group, higher LRP levels were correlated with
later age of onset of AD and death. Kang et al. (2000) concluded that
reduced LRP expression is a contributing risk factor for AD, possibly by
impeding the clearance of soluble beta-amyloid.

The heat-shock protein gp96 (TRA1; 191175) is an intracellular protein
capable of chaperoning exogenous antigens from tumors or virus-infected
cells to antigen-presenting cells for presentation through major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I rather than class II molecules,
thereby eliciting CD8 (186910)-positive T-cell responses. Using a mouse
system, Binder et al. (2000) determined that the receptor for gp96 is
CD91 (A2MR) and that A2M, a protein found in blood, inhibits gp96
binding to CD91. They proposed that CD91 acts as a sensor for necrotic
cell death in tissues, leading to proinflammatory immune responses.

Basu et al. (2001) used fluorescence-labeled heat-shock proteins (HSPs)
to show that not only GP96, but also HSP90 (HSPCA; 140571), HSP70 (see
HSPA1A, 140550), and calreticulin (CALR; 109091) use CD91 as a common
receptor. The ability of the cells to bind HSPs correlates with the
proteasome- and TAP (170260)-dependent ability to re-present
HSP-chaperoned peptides.

Forus et al. (1991) found that the APR and GLI (165220) genes are
coamplified in a rhabdomyosarcoma cell line.

Smeijers et al. (2002) showed that murine Lrp1 is a cell surface
receptor for Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxin A.

Wang et al. (2003) demonstrated that tissue plasminogen activator (tPA,
or PLAT; 173370) upregulates MMP9 (120361) in cell culture and in vivo.
MMP9 levels were lower in tPA knockout compared with wildtype mice after
focal cerebral ischemia. In human cerebral microvascular endothelial
cells, MMP9 was upregulated when recombinant tPA was added. RNA
interference suggested that this response was mediated by LRP1, which
avidly binds tPA and possesses signaling properties.

THBS1 (188060) or a peptide of the 19-amino acid active site in its
heparin-binding domain signals focal adhesion disassembly through
interaction with a cell surface form of calreticulin (CRT, or CALR;
109091). Using bovine aortic endothelial cells and wildtype and Lrp -/-
mouse fibroblasts, Orr et al. (2003) showed that Lrp interacted with Crt
and was required to mediate focal adhesion disassembly and downstream
signaling for reorganization of focal adhesions. Binding of the LRP
ligand RAP to purified human LRP inhibited interaction between
recombinant human CRT and LRP.

Deane et al. (2004) found that wildtype A-beta 40 bound immobilized LRP
with higher affinity than A-beta 42 or mutant A-beta 40 due to the lower
beta sheet content of wildtype A-beta 40 compared with the other
molecules. Lrp at mouse brain capillaries mediated clearance of wildtype
A-beta 40 across the blood-brain barrier at a rate much higher than
those for A-beta 42 and mutant A-beta 40. In primary human brain
endothelial capillaries in culture, high concentrations of all A-beta
species reduced LRP content via degradation in proteasomes. Loss of the
LRP-binding protein Rap (LRPAP1; 104225) in Rap -/- mice reduced brain
capillary clearance of all A-beta species. Expression of LRP was reduced
in AD and Dutch-type cerebrovascular beta-amyloidosis (605714) brain
tissue, suggesting that inadequate LRP-mediated A-beta clearance
contributes to the formation of neurotoxic A-beta oligomers and
progressive neuronal dysfunction.

The cysteine-rich extracellular domains (CRDs) of frizzled proteins (see
FZ1, or FZD1; 603408) function as Wnt (see WNT3A; 606359) receptors.
Using transfected HEK293 cells, Zilberberg et al. (2004) showed that
LRP1 or a C-terminal fragment of LRP1 containing the fourth cluster of
ligand-binding repeats, the transmembrane domain, and the cytoplasmic
tail bound the CRD of human FZ1 and inhibited FZ1-dependent Wnt
signaling. LRP1 did not mediate FZ1 internalization and degradation, but
sequestered FZ1 and inhibited its formation of a functional Wnt
signaling complex with LRP6 (603507).

Since BACE1 (604252) and APP interact and traffic with one another, and
APP interacts with and traffics with LRP1, von Arnim et al. (2005)
investigated interactions between BACE1 and LRP1. They found that BACE1
interacted with the light chain of LRP1 on the cell surface in
association with lipid rafts. The BACE-LRP1 interaction led to increased
LRP1 extracellular domain cleavage and subsequent release of the LRP1
intracellular domain from the membrane. Von Arnim et al. (2005)
concluded that LRP1 is a BACE1 substrate.

Kinchen et al. (2005) showed that in C. elegans, CED1 (LRP1), CED6 (see
608165), and CED7 (see 601615) are required for actin reorganization
around the apoptotic cell corpse, and that CED1 and CED6 colocalize with
each other and with actin around the dead cell. Furthermore, Kinchen et
al. (2005) found that the CED10 (RAC1; 602048) GTPase acts genetically
downstream of these proteins to mediate corpse removal, functionally
linking the 2 engulfment pathways and identifying the CED1, CED6, and
CED7 signaling module as upstream regulators of Rac activation.

Using knockout mice, Liu et al. (2007) found that expression of Lrp1 was
elevated following deletion of App, its homolog Aplp2 (104776), or
components of the App-processing gamma-secretase complex (see 104311).
Lrp1 expression was also elevated following inhibition of
gamma-secretase activity. Elevated Lrp1 mRNA and protein was accompanied
by increased catabolism of Apoe (107741) and cholesterol. Reporter gene
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that the App
intracellular domain (AICD), which is released along with A-beta by
gamma-secretase activity, bound the Lrp1 promoter together with Fe65
(APBB1; 602709) and Tip60 (KAT5; 601409) and suppressed Lrp1 expression.

Gaultier et al. (2008) found that Schwann cells in injured rodent nerve
exhibited increased expression of Lrp1. A soluble fragment of Lrp1 with
an intact alpha chain (sLrp-alpha) was shed by Schwann cells in vitro
and in the peripheral nervous system after injury. Injection of purified
sLrp-alpha into mouse sciatic nerves prior to chronic constriction
injury inhibited p38 Mapk (MAPK14; 600289) activation and decreased
expression of Tnf-alpha (191160) and Il1-beta (147720) locally.
sLrp-alpha also inhibited injury-induced spontaneous neuropathic pain
and decreased inflammatory cytokine expression in the spinal dorsal
horn, where neuropathic pain processing occurs. In cultured rat Schwann
cells, astrocytes, and microglia, sLrp-alpha inhibited Tnf-alpha-induced
activation of p38 Mapk and Erk/Mapk.

The cell surface receptor CED1 mediates apoptotic cell recognition by
phagocytic cells, enabling cell corpse clearance in C. elegans. Chen et
al. (2010) found that the C. elegans intracellular protein sorting
complex, retromer, was required for cell corpse clearance by mediating
the recycling of CED1. The mammalian retromer complex contains sorting
nexins 1/2 (601272, 605929) (C. elegans homolog snx1) and 5/6 (605937,
606098) (C. elegans homolog snx6). Retromer was recruited to the
surfaces of phagosomes containing cell corpses, and its loss of function
caused defective cell corpse removal. The retromer probably acted
through direct interaction with CED1 in the cell corpse recognition
pathway. In the absence of retromer function, CED1 associated with
lysosomes and failed to recycle from phagosomes and cytosol to the
plasma membrane. Thus, Chen et al. (2010) concluded that retromer is an
essential mediator of apoptotic cell clearance by regulating phagocytic
receptor(s) during cell corpse engulfment.

Ranganathan et al. (2011) noted that previous work (Cao et al., 2006)
had shown colocalization of LRP1 with integrin alpha-M (ITGAM;
120980)/beta-2 (ITGB2; 600065) at the trailing edge of migrating
macrophages and that macrophage migration depended upon coordinated
action of LRP1 and alpha-M/beta-2, as well as tissue plasminogen
activator and its inhibitor, PAI1 (SERPINE1; 173360). Ranganathan et al.
(2011) found that LRP1 specifically bound integrin alpha-M/beta-2, but
not the homologous receptor integrin alpha-L (ITGAL; 153370)/beta-2.
Activation of alpha-M/beta-2 by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) enhanced
interaction between LRP1 and alpha-M/beta-2 in macrophages. Transfection
experiments in HEK293 cells revealed that both the heavy and light
chains of LRP1 contributed to alpha-M/beta-2 binding. Within the LRP1
heavy chain, binding was mediated primarily via ligand-binding motifs 2
and 4. Within alpha-M, the sequence EQLKKSKTL within the I domain was
the major LRP1 recognition site. Exposure of alpha-M/beta-2-expressing
HEK293 cells to soluble LRP1 inhibited cell attachment to fibrinogen
(see 134820). Mouse macrophages lacking Lrp1 were deficient in
alpha-M/beta-2 internalization upon LPS stimulation. Ranganathan et al.
(2011) concluded that LRP1 has a role in macrophage migration and that
it is critical for internalization of integrin alpha-M/beta-2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Association with Alzheimer disease

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein gene was an
attractive candidate for Alzheimer disease (AD) for several reasons. The
multifunctional LRP had been shown to function as a receptor for the
uptake of apolipoprotein E-containing lipoprotein particles by neurons.
The apoE4 (107741) allele is strongly associated with an increased risk
of late-onset familial Alzheimer disease and both late-onset and
early-onset sporadic AD. The LRP receptor is prominently located in the
soma regions and proximal processes of neurons. In a case-control study
of 183 familial and sporadic AD patients and 118 controls, Lendon et al.
(1997) found a moderate association (odds ratio = 1.57, p = 0.024)
between AD and the 87-bp allele of a tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism
located 5-prime to the LRP1 gene. Furthermore, Pericak-Vance et al.
(1997) found in a genomic screen and follow-up analysis of 54 late-onset
AD families, 4 regions potentially harboring AD genes; one of these
regions, on chromosome 12, was located about 10 cM proximal of LRP1.
Scott et al. (1998) examined 144 late-onset multiplex AD families, 436
sporadic AD cases, and 240 controls and found no evidence of linkage or
association of LRP1 and AD. Their data indicated that genetic variation
in the LRP1 gene is not a major risk factor in the etiology of Alzheimer
disease.

Among 157 patients with late-onset AD (85 with a family history and 72
without a family history), Kang et al. (1997) found increased frequency
of the C allele of a 766C-T polymorphism in exon 3 of the LRP1 gene
compared to controls, although the C allele was common in controls. The
authors suggested that the polymorphism, predicted to be silent, may be
in linkage disequilibrium with a putative nearby AD susceptibility
locus. Studies by Hollenbach et al. (1998) and Baum et al. (1998) also
provided evidence of increased frequency of the 766C allele in patients
with AD. McIlroy et al. (2001) found no association with the exon 3
polymorphism and development of AD.

Kang et al. (2000) noted that LRP and its ligands, APOE and
alpha-2-macroglobulin, are all genetically associated with AD.

Bian et al. (2005) investigated the potential genetic contribution of 4
polymorphisms in LRP1 to AD in the Han Chinese population by studying
216 late-onset AD patients and 200 control subjects. The LRP1 CTCG
haplotype (exon 3 T/C; intron 6 T/C, dbSNP rs2306692; exon 22 T/C;
intron 83 A/G, dbSNP rs1800164) was overrepresented in the control group
(p = 0.002). This difference was still statistically significant in the
APOE4-negative subjects (p = 0.003), indicating that the CTCG haplotype
of LRP1 may reduce the risk for late-onset AD.

- Association with Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the LRP1
gene and abdominal aortic aneurysm, see AAA4 (614375).

- Intellectual Disability

For discussion of mutation in the LRP1 gene as a possible cause of
intellectual disability, see 107770.0001.

ANIMAL MODEL

Boucher et al. (2003) developed tissue-specific knockout mice that
lacked Lrp1 only in vascular smooth muscle cells. To increase
susceptibility to spontaneous atherosclerotic lesion development, these
animals were crossed to LDL receptor (Ldlr; 606945) knockout mice to
generate Ldlr-/smooth muscle Lrp- mice. The presence or absence of Lrp1
expression in smooth muscle cells had no effect on plasma cholesterol or
triglyceride levels in mice on normal chow or an atherogenic
high-cholesterol diet. However, aortas from smooth muscle Lrp- mice were
consistently distended and dilated. This difference increased over time
and was accompanied by thickening of the aortic wall, pronounced
atherosclerosis, and aneurysm formation. Boucher et al. (2003) showed
that Lrp1 forms a complex with the PDGF receptor (see PDGFR1, 173410).
Inactivation of Lrp1 in vascular smooth muscle cells of mice caused
PDGFR overexpression and abnormal activation of PDGFR signaling,
resulting in disruption of the elastic layer, smooth muscle cell
proliferation, aneurysm formation, and marked susceptibility to
cholesterol-induced atherosclerosis. The development of these
abnormalities was reduced by treatment with Gleevec, an inhibitor of
PDGF signaling. Thus, Boucher et al. (2003) concluded that LRP1 has a
pivotal role in protecting vascular wall integrity and preventing
atherosclerosis by controlling PDGFR activation.

May et al. (2004) found that mice with targeted disruption of the Lrp1
gene in differentiated postmitotic neurons demonstrated hyperactivity
and constant tremor, and later developed dystonic posturing with
increased thoracic kyphosis, waddling gait, and hindlimb weakness,
suggesting motoneuronal disinhibition or motor excitation. The
transgenic mice died prematurely at about 9 months of age. Brain
morphology was normal with no major neuronal loss, suggesting a
functional abnormality in neurotransmission. In vitro, LRP1
coimmunoprecipitated and colocalized with the postsynaptic protein PSD95
(602887) and the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor subunits NR2A
(138253) and NR2B (138252). Treatment of neurons with NMDA reduced the
interaction of Lrp1 and Psd95. May et al. (2004) concluded that LRP1
plays a role in behavior and motor function by regulating postsynaptic
signaling mechanisms through interaction with NMDA receptors.

Hofmann et al. (2007) generated mice with adipocyte-specific
inactivation of LRP1 and observed delayed postprandial lipid clearance,
reduced body weight, smaller fat stores, lipid-depleted brown
adipocytes, improved glucose tolerance, and elevated energy expenditure
due to enhanced muscle thermogenesis. In addition, the mutant mice were
resistant to dietary fat-induced obesity and glucose intolerance.
Hofmann et al. (2007) concluded that LRP1 is a critical regulator of
adipocyte energy homeostasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
LRP1, HIS3258GLN

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to intellectual disability has not been confirmed.

In a boy who developed seizures and developmental stagnation at age 22
months and ultimately had severe intellectual disability with an IQ of
34, stereotypic behavior, high pain threshold, and sleep disturbances
with a normal brain MRI and no dysmorphic features, de Ligt et al.
(2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 9774C-G transversion resulting
in a his3258-to-gln (H3258Q) substitution.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Beisiegel et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Basu, S.; Binder, R. J.; Ramalingam, T.; Srivastava, P. K.: CD91
is a common receptor for heat shock proteins gp96, hsp90, hsp70, and
calreticulin. Immunity 14: 303-313, 2001.

2. Baum, L.; Chen, L.; Ng, H.-K.; Chan, Y. S.; Mak, Y. T.; Woo, J.;
Chiu, H. F. K.; Pang, C. P.: Low density lipoprotein receptor related
protein gene exon 3 polymorphism association with Alzheimer's disease
in Chinese. Neurosci. Lett. 247: 33-36, 1998.

3. Beisiegel, U.; Weber, W.; Ihrke, G.; Herz, J.; Stanley, K. K.:
The LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP, is an apolipoprotein E-binding
protein. Nature 341: 162-164, 1989.

4. Bian, L.; Yang, J. D.; Guo, T. W.; Duan, Y.; Qin, W.; Sun, Y.;
Feng, G. Y.; He, L.: Association study of the A2M and LRP1 genes
with Alzheimer disease in the Han Chinese. Biol. Psychiat. 58: 731-737,
2005.

5. Binder, R. J.; Han, D. K.; Srivastava, P. K.: CD91: a receptor
for heat shock protein gp96. Nature Immun. 1: 151-155, 2000.

6. Boucher, P.; Gotthardt, M.; Li, W.-P.; Anderson, R. G. W.; Herz,
J.: LRP: role in vascular wall integrity and protection from atherosclerosis. Science 300:
329-332, 2003.

7. Cao, C.; Lawrence, D. A.; Li, Y.; Von Arnim, C. A.; Herz, J.; Su,
E. J.; Makarova, A.; Hyman, B. T.; Strickland, D. K.; Zhang, L.:
Endocytic receptor LRP together with tPA and PAI-1 coordinates Mac-1-dependent
macrophage migration. EMBO J. 25: 1860-1870, 2006.

8. Chen, D.; Xiao, H.; Zhang, K.; Wang, B.; Gao, Z.; Jian, Y.; Qi,
X.; Sun, J.; Miao, L.; Yang, C.: Retromer is required for apoptotic
cell clearance by phagocytic receptor recycling. Science 327: 1261-1264,
2010.

9. Deane, R.; Wu, Z.; Sagare, A.; Davis, J.; Yan, S. D.; Hamm, K.;
Xu, F.; Parisi, M.; LaRue, B.; Hu, H. W.; Spijkers, P.; Guo, H.; Song,
X.; Lenting, P. J.; Van Nostrand, W. E.; Zlokovic, B. V.: LRP/amyloid
beta-peptide interaction mediates differential brain efflux of A-beta
isoforms. Neuron 43: 333-344, 2004.

10. de Ligt, J.; Willemsen, M. H.; van Bon, B. W. M.; Kleefstra, T.;
Yntema, H. G.; Kroes, T.; Vulto-van Silfhout, A. T.; Koolen, D. A.;
de Vries, P.; Gilissen, C.; del Rosario, M.; Hoischen, A.; Scheffer,
H.; de Vries, B. B. A.; Brunner, H. G.; Veltman, J. A.; Vissers, L.
E. L. M.: Diagnostic exome sequencing in persons with severe intellectual
disability. New Eng. J. Med. 367: 1921-1929, 2012.

11. Forus, A.; Maelandsmo, G. M.; Fodstad, Y.; Myklebost, O.: The
genes for the alpha-2-macroglobulin receptor/LDL receptor-related
protein and GLI are located within a chromosomal segment of about
300 kilobases and are coamplified in a rhabdomyosarcoma cell line.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1977 only, 1991.

12. Forus, A.; Myklebost, O.: A physical map of a 1.3-Mb region on
the long arm of chromosome 12, spanning the GLI and LRP loci. Genomics 14:
117-120, 1992.

13. Gaultier, A.; Arandjelovic, S.; Li, X.; Janes, J.; Dragojlovic,
N.; Zhou, G. P.; Dolkas, J.; Myers, R. R.; Gonias, S. L.; Campana,
W. M.: A shed form of LDL receptor-related protein-1 regulates peripheral
nerve injury and neuropathic pain in rodents. J. Clin. Invest. 118:
161-172, 2008.

14. Herz, J.; Hamann, U.; Rogne, S.; Myklebost, O.; Gausepohl, H.;
Stanley, K. K.: Surface location and high affinity for calcium of
a 500 kd liver membrane protein closely related to the LDL-receptor
suggest a physiological role as lipoprotein receptor. EMBO J. 7:
4119-4127, 1988.

15. Hilliker, C.; Van Leuven, F.; Van Den Berghe, H.: Assignment
of the gene coding for the alpha(2)-macroglobulin receptor to mouse
chromosome 15 and to human chromosome 12q13-q14 by isotopic and nonisotopic
in situ hybridization. Genomics 13: 472-474, 1992.

16. Hofmann, S. M.; Zhou, L.; Perez-Tilve, D.; Greer, T.; Grant, E.;
Wancata, L.; Thomas, A.; Pfluger, P. T.; Basford, J. E.; Gilham, D.;
Herz, J.; Tschop, M. H.; Hui, D. Y.: Adipocyte LDL receptor-related
protein-1 expression modulates postprandial lipid transport and glucose
homeostasis in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 3271-3282, 2007.

17. Hollenbach, E.; Ackermann, S.; Hyman, B. T.; Rebeck, G. W.: Confirmation
of an association between a polymorphism in exon 3 of the low-density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein gene and Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 50:
1905-1907, 1998.

18. Kang, D. E.; Pietrzik, C. U.; Baum, L.; Chevallier, N.; Merriam,
D. E.; Kounnas, M. Z.; Wagner, S. L.; Troncoso, J. C.; Kawas, C. H.;
Katzman, R.; Koo, E. H.: Modulation of amyloid beta-protein clearance
and Alzheimer's disease susceptibility by the LDL receptor-related
protein pathway. J. Clin. Invest. 106: 1159-1166, 2000.

19. Kang, D. E.; Saitoh, T.; Chen, X.; Xia, Y.; Masliah, E.; Hansen,
L. A.; Thomas, R. G.; Thal, L. J.; Katzman, R.: Genetic association
of the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein gene (LRP),
an apolipoprotein E receptor, with late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 49:
56-61, 1997.

20. Kinchen, J. M.; Cabello, J.; Klingele, D.; Wong, K.; Feichtinger,
R.; Schnabel, H.; Schnabel, R.; Hengartner, M. O.: Two pathways converge
at CED-10 to mediate actin rearrangement and corpse removal in C.
elegans. Nature 434: 93-99, 2005.

21. Kounnas, M. Z.; Moir, R. D.; Rebeck, G. W.; Bush, A. I.; Argraves,
W. S.; Tanzi, R. E.; Hyman, B. T.; Strickland, D. K.: LDL receptor-related
protein, a multifunctional ApoE receptor, binds secreted beta-amyloid
precursor protein and mediates its degradation. Cell 82: 331-340,
1995.

22. Kristensen, T.; Moestrup, S. K.; Gliemann, J.; Bendtsen, L.; Sand,
O.; Sottrup-Jensen, L.: Evidence that the newly cloned low-density-lipoprotein
receptor related protein (LRP) is the alpha-2-macroglobulin receptor. FEBS
Lett. 276: 151-155, 1990.

23. Lendon, C. L.; Talbot, C. J.; Craddock, N. J.; Han, S. W.; Wragg,
M.; Morris, J. C.; Goate, A. M.: Genetic association studies between
dementia of the Alzheimer's type and three receptors for apolipoprotein
E in a Caucasian population. Neurosci. Lett. 222: 187-190, 1997.

24. Liu, Q.; Zerbinatti, C. V.; Zhang, J.; Hoe, H.-S.; Wang, B.; Cole,
S. L.; Herz, J.; Muglia, L.; Bu, G.: Amyloid precursor protein regulates
brain apolipoprotein E and cholesterol metabolism through lipoprotein
receptor LRP1. Neuron 56: 66-78, 2007.

25. May, P.; Rohlmann, A.; Bock, H. H.; Zurhove, K.; Marth, J. D.;
Schomburg, E. D.; Noebels, J. L.; Beffert, U.; Sweatt, J. D.; Weeber,
E. J.; Herz, J.: Neuronal LRP1 functionally associates with postsynaptic
proteins and is required for normal motor function in mice. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 8872-8883, 2004.

26. McIlroy, S. P.; Dynan, K. B.; Vahidassr, D. J.; Lawson, J. T.;
Patterson, C. C.; Passmore, P.: Common polymorphisms in LRP and A2M
do not affect genetic risk for Alzheimer disease in Northern Ireland. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 105: 502-506, 2001.

27. Myklebost, O.; Arheden, K.; Rogne, S.; Geurts van Kessel, A.;
Mandahl, N.; Herz, J.; Stanley, K.; Heim, S.; Mitelman, F.: The gene
for the human putative apoE receptor is on chromosome 12 in the segment
q13-14. Genomics 5: 65-69, 1989.

28. Narita, M.; Holtzman, D. M.; Schwartz, A. L.; Bu, G.: Alpha-2-macroglobulin
complexes with and mediates the endocytosis of beta-amyloid peptide
via cell surface low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein. J.
Neurochem. 69: 1904-1911, 1997.

29. Orr, A. W.; Pedraza, C. E.; Pallero, M. A.; Elzie, C. A.; Goicoechea,
S.; Strickland, D. K.; Murphy-Ullrich, J. E.: Low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein is a calreticulin coreceptor that signals
focal adhesion disassembly. J. Cell Biol. 161: 1179-1189, 2003.

30. Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Bass, M. P.; Yamaoka, L. H.; Gaskell, P.
C.; Scott, W. K.; Terwedow, H. A.; Menold, M. M.; Conneally, P. M.;
Small, G. W.; Vance, J. M.; Saunders, A. M.; Roses, A. D.; Haines,
J. L.: Complete genomic screen in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease:
evidence for a new locus on chromosome 12. JAMA 278: 1237-1241,
1997.

31. Ranganathan, S.; Cao, C.; Catania, J.; Migliorini, M.; Zhang,
L.; Strickland, D. K.: Molecular basis for the interaction of low
density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) with integrin
alpha-M/beta-2: identification of binding sites within alpha-M/beta-2
for LRP1. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 30535-30541, 2011.

32. Scott, W. K.; Yamaoka, L. H.; Bass, M. P.; Gaskell, P. C.; Conneally,
P. M.; Small, G. W.; Farrer, L. A.; Auerbach, S. A.; Saunders, A.
M.; Roses, A. D.; Haines, J. L.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.: No genetic
association between the LRP receptor and sporadic or late-onset familial
Alzheimer disease. Neurogenetics 1: 179-183, 1998.

33. Smeijers, L.; Willems, S.; Lauwers, A.; Thiry, E.; van Leuven,
F.; Roebroek, A. J. M.: Functional expression of murine LRP1 requires
correction of Lrp1 cDNA sequences. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1577:
155-158, 2002.

34. Strickland, D. K.; Ashcom, J. D.; Williams, S.; Burgess, W. H.;
Migliorini, M.; Argraves, W. S.: Sequence identity between the alpha-2-macroglobulin
receptor and low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein suggests
that this molecule is a multifunctional receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 265:
17401-17404, 1990.

35. von Arnim, C. A. F.; Kinoshita, A.; Peltan, I. D.; Tangredi, M.
M.; Herl, L.; Lee, B. M.; Spoelgen, R.; Hshieh, T. T.; Ranganathan,
S.; Battey, F. D.; Liu, C.-X.; Baeskai, B. J.; Sever, S.; Irizarry,
M. C.; Strickland, D. K.; Hyman, B. T.: The low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein (LRP) is a novel beta-secretase (BACE1) substrate. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 17777-17785, 2005.

36. Wang, X.; Lee, S.-R.; Arai, K.; Lee, S.-R.; Tsuji, K.; Rebeck,
G. W.; Lo, E. H.: Lipoprotein receptor-mediated induction of matrix
metalloproteinase by tissue plasminogen activator. Nature Med. 9:
1313-1317, 2003.

37. Yochem, J.; Greenwald, I.: A gene for a low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4572-4576, 1993.

38. Zilberberg, A.; Yaniv, A.; Gazit, A.: The low density lipoprotein
receptor-1, LRP1, interacts with the human frizzled-1 (HFz1) and down-regulates
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 1735-1752,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/19/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/13/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/17/2008
John Logan Black, III - updated: 7/12/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/9/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/15/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/23/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/29/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/23/1988

EDITED mgross: 06/12/2013
mgross: 6/11/2013
carol: 5/29/2013
carol: 2/13/2013
carol: 12/6/2011
terry: 12/2/2011
mgross: 6/3/2011
terry: 4/19/2011
alopez: 4/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 3/17/2008
terry: 3/13/2008
wwang: 2/18/2008
terry: 1/17/2008
carol: 7/12/2006
terry: 7/12/2006
alopez: 2/2/2006
terry: 2/1/2006
mgross: 12/2/2005
terry: 11/9/2005
tkritzer: 11/29/2004
ckniffin: 11/15/2004
alopez: 10/16/2003
alopez: 9/23/2003
terry: 7/31/2003
carol: 6/6/2003
ckniffin: 6/3/2003
alopez: 4/22/2003
terry: 4/22/2003
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
cwells: 10/29/2001
mgross: 9/15/2000
psherman: 10/14/1998
dholmes: 7/2/1998
carol: 5/14/1998
carol: 5/12/1998
terry: 5/5/1998
carol: 8/3/1994
warfield: 3/11/1994
carol: 6/17/1993
carol: 9/22/1992
carol: 6/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

610844	TITLE *610844 SPG11 GENE; SPG11
;;SPATACSIN;;
KIAA1840;;
FLJ21439
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned KIAA1840. The deduced protein
contains 1,437 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in
all tissues and specific brain regions examined, with highest expression
in liver, followed by brain and ovary.

Stevanin et al. (2007) demonstrated that the full-length 8-kb SPG11
transcript encodes a predicted protein of 2,443 amino acids, which they
termed spatacsin, after 'spasticity with thin or atrophied corpus
callosum syndrome protein.' Human SPG11 shares 85% identity with the
homologous protein in dog, 76% with mouse, and 73% with rat. The
spatacsin protein includes 4 putative transmembrane domains, suggesting
that the protein may be a receptor or transporter, as well as a leucine
zipper and coiled-coil domain. It was assigned to the aromatic compound
dioxygenase superfamily because of 22% identity with the consensus
sequence between residues 2104 and 2381. The SPG11 gene is expressed
ubiquitously in the nervous system but most prominently in the
cerebellum, cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and pineal gland.
Overexpression of a GFP fusion protein in COS-7 cells demonstrated a
diffuse and reticular cytosolic and perinuclear distribution, sometimes
also present in nuclei. At least 3 alternative transcripts were detected
in all structures of adult brain. mRNA in situ hybridization in rat
brain detected no expression in newborn rat, but found expression
throughout the brain in adult rat.

GENE STRUCTURE

Stevanin et al. (2007) determined that the SPG11 gene comprises 40 exons
and spans 101 kb.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the
KIAA1840 gene to chromosome 15 (TMAP SGC33828). Stevanin et al. (2007)
mapped the SPG11 gene to chromosome 15q21.1 by genomic sequence
analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation analysis of HeLa cells, Slabicki et al. (2010)
showed that KIAA0415 (613653) exists in a core protein complex
containing SPG11, SPG15 (270700), C20ORF29 (AP5S1; 614824), and
DKFZp761E198 (614367). Knockdown of KIAA0415, C20ORF29, or SPG15 in HeLa
cells reduced homologous recombination in a test substrate, whereas
knockdown of SPG11 or DKFZp761E198 had no effect.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 11 families with autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia
with thin corpus callosum (SPG11; 604360), Stevanin et al. (2007) found
10 different mutations in the spatacsin gene. The mutations were either
nonsense or insertions or deletions leading to a frameshift, suggesting
a loss-of-function mechanism.

Del Bo et al. (2007) identified a homozygous mutation in the SPG11 gene
(733delAT; 610844.0004) in 27-year-old Italian opposite-sex dizygotic
twins with autosomal recessive SPG11.

In 9 unrelated families with SPG11, Hehr et al. (2007) identified 11
different mutations, including 10 novel mutations, in the SPG11 gene
(see, e.g., 610844.0005-610844.0006) in the homozygous or compound
heterozygous state. Four of the families were consanguineous, including
3 Turkish families initially reported by Olmez et al. (2006). Mutations
were distributed throughout the entire spatacsin gene without obvious
clustering.

Bauer et al. (2009) used high-resolution comparative genomic
hybridization (HRCGH) to identify deletions in the SPG11 gene in 3
patients with SPG11 in whom only 1 mutant SPG11 allele had been
identified by gene sequencing. HRCGH analysis suggested heterozygous
genomic deletion in all 3 patients; however, quantitative PCR confirmed
an 8.23-kb deletion in only 1 patient. The 8.23-kb deletion resulted in
loss of exons 31 to 34 and was also found in the proband's affected
sister and their unaffected father. The clinical features in the brother
and sister did not differ from those of patients with point mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, ARG2034TER

In 3 consanguineous North African kindreds, Stevanin et al. (2007) found
that a homozygous 6100C-T transition in exon 32 of the SPG11 gene,
resulting in an arg2034-to-stop substitution (R2034X), segregated with
spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum (604360). If not rapidly
degraded, the predicted protein would be truncated by 27% of its normal
size.

Boukhris et al. (2008) identified a homozygous R2034X mutation in
affected members of 2 Tunisian families of Arab origin with SPG11.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, 5-BP DEL, 529ATATT

In 2 Portuguese families, Stevanin et al. (2007) found that a 5-bp
deletion in exon 3 of the SPG11 gene, 529_533delATATT, in homozygosity
segregated with spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum (604360).
The mutation was predicted to lead to a frameshift with early
termination at amino acid residue 179 (I177_I178delfsX).

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, 118C-T, GLN40TER

In a brother and sister from a consanguineous Israeli family, Stevanin
et al. (2007) found that spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum
(604360) was associated with a homozygous 118C-T transition in exon 1 of
the SPG11 gene that resulted in premature termination of the protein at
gln40 (Q40X).

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, 2-BP DEL, 733AT

In 27-year-old Italian opposite-sex dizygotic twins with autosomal
recessive SPG11 (604360), Del Bo et al. (2007) identified a homozygous
2-bp deletion (733delAT) in exon 4 of the SPG11 gene, resulting in a
frameshift and premature termination at codon 247. The sibs had onset of
ataxia and cognitive impairment at ages 12 and 15 years, respectively.
The disorder progressed rapidly, leading to spastic paraplegia,
dysarthria, and peripheral neuropathy. Both were wheelchair-bound in
their early twenties. Brain MRI showed thin corpus callosum and cortical
atrophy in both sibs. Both parents were healthy and came from the same
small town in Sicily but denied consanguinity.

In a Spanish patient with SPG11, Hehr et al. (2007) identified compound
heterozygosity for the 733delAT mutation and 1-bp insertion (2472insT;
610844.0005) of exon 14 of the SPG11 gene, resulting in frameshift and
premature termination.

Boukhris et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 733delAT mutation in
affected members of 3 Tunisian families of Arab origin with SPG11.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, 1-BP INS, 2472T

See 610844.0004 and Hehr et al. (2007).

.0006
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, IVS2DS, G-C, +1

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with SPG11
(604360), Hehr et al. (2007) identified a homozygous G-to-C transversion
in the donor splice site of intron 2 of the SPG11 gene. The family had
been previously reported by Olmez et al. (2006).

.0007
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, IVS39AS, G-C, -1

In a 48-year-old Swedish patient with SPG11 and central retinal
dystrophy (604360), Orlen et al. (2009) identified a homozygous G-to-C
transversion in intron 39 (7152-1G-C) of the SPG11 gene, resulting in
loss of the splice acceptor site and predicting a loss of function. An
unrelated 41-year-old Swedish patient with SPG11 had the splice site
mutation in compound heterozygosity with a 5623C-T transition in exon 30
of the SPG11 gene, resulting in a gln1875-to-ter (Q1875X; 610844.0008)
substitution. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect for
7152-1G-C mutation, which was found in 2 (1.8%) of 216 Swedish control
chromosomes. Both patients were wheelchair-bound due to lower limb
spasticity, had amyotrophy of the hands, sphincter disturbances, thin
corpus callosum, and late-onset progressive central retinal
degeneration.

.0008
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, GLN1875TER

See 610844.0007 and Orlen et al. (2009).

.0009
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 11, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
SPG11, 1-BP DUP, 3067A

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Iranian parents, with SPG11 (604360),
Orlen et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1-bp duplication (3067dupA)
in exon 17 of the SPG11 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. The patients were 14 and 29 years old, respectively, at the
time of the report. Both had onset at age 3 to 4 years, but the younger
brother had a milder phenotype. The older sister was wheelchair-bound
due to lower limb spasticity, had amyotrophy of the hands, learning
disability, thin corpus callosum, and central retinal degeneration.

REFERENCE 1. Bauer, P.; Winner, B.; Schule, R.; Bauer, C.; Hafele, V.; Hehr,
U.; Bonin, M.; Walter, M.; Karle, K.; Ringer, T. M.; Riess, O.; Winkler,
J.; Schols, L.: Identification of a heterozygous genomic deletion
in the spatacsin gene in SPG11 patients using high-resolution comparative
genomic hybridization. Neurogenetics 10: 43-48, 2009.

2. Boukhris, A.; Stevanin, G.; Feki, I.; Denis, E.; Elleuch, N.; Miladi,
M. I.; Truchetto, J.; Denora, P.; Belal, S.; Mhiri, C.; Brice, A.
: Hereditary spastic paraplegia with mental impairment and thin corpus
callosum in Tunisia. Arch. Neurol. 65: 393-402, 2008.

3. Del Bo, R.; Di Fonzo, A.; Ghezzi, S.; Locatelli, F.; Stevanin,
G.; Costa, A.; Corti, S.; Bresolin, N.; Comi, G. P.: SPG11: a consistent
clinical phenotype in a family with homozygous spatacsin truncating
mutation. Neurogenetics 8: 301-305, 2007.

4. Hehr, U.; Bauer, P.; Winner, B.; Schule, R.; Olmez, A.; Koehler,
W.; Uyanik, G.; Engel, A.; Lenz, D.; Seibel, A.; Hehr, A.; Ploetz,
S.; and 13 others: Long-term course and mutational spectrum of
spatacsin-linked spastic paraplegia. Ann. Neurol. 62: 656-665, 2007.

5. Nagase, T.; Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XX.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 8: 85-95, 2001.

6. Olmez, A.; Uyanik, G.; Ozgul. R. K.; Gross, C.; Cirak, S.; Elibol,
B.; Anlar, B.; Winner, B.; Hehr, U.; Topaloglu, H.; Winkler, J.:
Further clinical and genetic characterization of SPG11: hereditary
spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum. Neuropediatrics. 37:
59-66, 2006.

7. Orlen, H.; Melberg, A.; Raininko, R.; Kumlien, E.; Entesarian,
M.; Soderberg, P.; Pahlman, M.; Darin, N.; Kyllerman, M.; Holmberg,
E.; Engler, H.; Eriksson, U.; Dahl, N.: SPG11 mutations cause Kjellin
syndrome, a hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum
and central retinal degeneration. Am. J. Med. Genet. 150B: 984-992,
2009.

8. Slabicki, M.; Theis, M.; Krastev, D. B.; Samsonov, S.; Mundwiller,
E.; Junqueira, M.; Paszkowski-Rogacz, M.; Teyra, J.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Poser, I.; Prieur, F.; Truchetto, J.; and 9 others: A genome-scale
DNA repair RNAi screen identifies SPG48 as a novel gene associated
with hereditary spastic paraplegia. PLoS Biol. 8: e1000408, 2010.
Note: Electronic Article.

9. Stevanin, G.; Santorelli, F. M.; Azzedine, H.; Coutinho, P.; Chomilier,
J.; Denora, P. S.; Martin, E.; Ouvrard-Hernandez, A.-M.; Tessa, A.;
Bouslam, N; Lossos, A.; Charles, P.; and 13 others: Mutations in
SPG11, encoding spatacsin, are a major cause of spastic paraplegia
with thin corpus callosum. Nature Genet. 39: 366-372, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/25/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/25/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/31/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/12/2007

EDITED carol: 09/24/2013
mgross: 9/17/2012
mgross: 11/29/2011
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 11/22/2010
wwang: 1/27/2010
ckniffin: 1/25/2010
wwang: 4/10/2009
ckniffin: 3/25/2009
wwang: 1/13/2009
ckniffin: 1/6/2009
wwang: 4/7/2008
ckniffin: 3/31/2008
wwang: 12/4/2007
ckniffin: 11/27/2007
alopez: 4/5/2007
mgross: 3/12/2007

611569	TITLE *611569 CYTOSKELETON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; CKAP2
;;TUMOR- AND MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; TMAP;;
LB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CKAP2 is a cytoskeleton-associated protein involved in mitotic
progression (Seki and Fang, 2007).

CLONING

By differential screening of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, followed by
database analysis, RT-PCR, and screening a human Jurkat T-cell cDNA
library, Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) cloned CKAP2, which they called
LB1. The transcript contains 2 consensus polyadenylation signals and an
AU-rich mRNA-destabilizing motif. The deduced 683-amino acid protein has
a leucine- and isoleucine-rich domain and numerous potential
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected variable
expression of a major 3.6- to 3.9-kb transcript and a minor 2.2-kb
transcript in all human tissues and cell lines examined. In vitro
transcription/translation produced a protein with an apparent molecular
mass of 85 kD by SDS-PAGE. Immunofluorescence analysis of transfected
COS cells showed that epitope-tagged CKAP2 localized to cytoplasmic
cytoskeletal filaments.

By differential display-PCR of primary human gastric adenocarcinomas,
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Bae et al. (2003) cloned
full-length CKAP2 and a shorter variant, CKAP2S, resulting from
alternative splicing in exon 6. The full-length CKAP2 protein contains
682 amino acids, and the CKAP2S protein contains 494 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis showed that CKAP2 expression was higher in brain,
thymus, kidney, and placenta than in heart, skeletal muscle, lung,
leukocytes, and gastrointestinal tract. A second, smaller transcript was
detected in tissues with high CKAP2 expression. Endogenous CKAP2 and
fluorescence-tagged CKAP2 associated with the microtubule-organizing
center and with microtubules in HeLa cells, and this localization was
lost following treatment with a microtubule-destabilizing agent. Western
blot analysis detected endogenous CKAP2 at an apparent molecular mass of
75 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) found that expression of LB1 was
upregulated in a patient with an immunoblastic subtype of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma and in a patient with a multilobated centroblastic
subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. In contrast, expression was
low or undetectable in 4 patients with polymorphic centroblastic diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas.

Using ribonuclease protection assays and RT-PCR, Bae et al. (2003) found
that CKAP2 and CKAP2S expression was upregulated in gastric tumor
tissues compared with matched normal mucosa. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected no CKAP2 protein in normal gastric mucosa, but it was
detected in all gastric adenocarcinomas and tubular adenomas examined.

Jeon et al. (2006) found that CKAP2 was not expressed in G0/G1-arrested
human foreskin fibroblasts, but that it was expressed in actively
dividing cells, gradually increasing between late G1 and G2/M. Knockdown
of CKAP2 reduced RB1 (614041) phosphorylation and increased p27 (CDKN1B;
600778) expression, and consequently reduced cell proliferation, whereas
constitutive CKAP2 expression increased RB phosphorylation and enhanced
proliferation.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C; see 608473) is a
ubiquitin ligase that controls sister chromatid separation and exit from
mitosis. It recognizes 2 motifs in its substrates: the destruction (D)
box and the KEN box. Seki and Fang (2007) found that CKAP2 was degraded
by CDH1 (192090)-activated APC/C in Xenopus interphase extracts, but not
in mitotic extracts. CKAP2 contains 4 D boxes and a KEN box, and
mutation analysis showed that only the KEN box was required for
ubiquitination by APC/C-CDH1 and degradation in CDH1-activated
interphase extracts. Overexpression of CDH1 in HeLa cells reduced CKAP2
levels in a KEN box-dependent manner, whereas knockdown of CDH1
increased the half-life of CKAP2. CKAP2 associated with centrosomal
microtubules in late G2 in HeLa cells, but only after separation of
duplicated centrosomes. During mitosis, CKAP2 associated with spindle
poles and with spindle microtubules from prophase through anaphase and
disappeared from microtubules during cytokinesis. Knockdown of CKAP2 did
not alter the cell cycle distribution of cells or generate mitotic
effects. On the other hand, ectopic expression of either wildtype CKAP2
or a nondegradable CKAP2 mutant led to mitotic arrest with monopolar
spindles containing highly bundled microtubules. Seki and Fang (2007)
concluded that regulation of CKAP2 by APC/C is critical for normal
mitotic progression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) mapped the CKAP2 gene to
chromosome 13q14.

REFERENCE 1. Bae, C.-D.; Sung, Y.-S.; Jeon, S.-M.; Suh, Y.; Yang, H.-K.; Kim,
Y. I.; Park, K.-H.; Choi, J.; Ahn, G.; Park, J.: Up-regulation of
cytoskeletal-associated protein 2 in primary human gastric adenocarcinomas. J.
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 621-630, 2003.

2. Jeon, S.-M.; Choi, B.; Hong, K. U.; Kim, E.; Seong, Y.-S.; Bae,
C.-D.; Park, J.: A cytoskeleton-associated protein, TMAP/CKAP2, is
involved in the proliferation of human foreskin fibroblasts. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 348: 222-228, 2006. Note: Erratum: Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 354: 839 only, 2007.

3. Maouche-Chretien, L.; Deleu, N.; Badoual, C.; Fraissignes, P.;
Berger, R.; Gaulard, P.; Romeo, P. H.; Leroy-Viard, K.: Identification
of a novel cDNA, encoding a cytoskeletal associated protein, differentially
expressed in diffuse large B cell lymphomas. Oncogene 17: 1245-1251,
1998.

4. Seki, A.; Fang, G.: CKAP2 is a spindle-associated protein degraded
by APC/C-Cdh1 during mitotic exit. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15103-15113,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2007

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 3/1/2011
mgross: 10/31/2007

605434	TITLE *605434 CLASPIN, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF; CLSPN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kumagai and Dunphy (2000) identified a Xenopus protein, which they
designated claspin, that binds to Xenopus Chk1 (CHEK1; 603078). By
searching an EST database for sequences related to Xenopus claspin, they
identified the human homolog. The full-length cDNA sequence of human
claspin encodes a predicted 1,332-amino acid polypeptide that is 49%
identical to Xenopus claspin.

GENE FUNCTION

Kumagai and Dunphy (2000) found that binding of claspin to Xenopus Chk1
was highly elevated in the presence of DNA templates that triggered a
checkpoint arrest of the cell cycle in Xenopus egg extracts. Xenopus
Chk1 became phosphorylated during a checkpoint response, and this
phosphorylation resulted in the activation of Xenopus Chk1.
Immunodepletion of claspin from egg extracts abolished both the
phosphorylation and activation of Xenopus Chk1. Furthermore,
claspin-depleted extracts were unable to arrest the cell cycle in
response to DNA replication blocks. These findings indicated that
claspin is an essential upstream regulator of Chk1 in Xenopus.

Lee et al. (2003) showed that Xenopus claspin associates with chromatin
in a regulated manner during S phase. Binding of claspin to chromatin
depended on the prereplication complex and Cdc45 (603465), but not on
replication protein A (RPA; 179835). These dependencies suggested that
binding of claspin occurs around the time of initial DNA unwinding at
replication origins. By contrast, both Atr (601215) and Rad17 (603139)
required Rpa for association with DNA. Claspin, Atr, and Rad17 all bound
to chromatin independently. These findings suggested that claspin plays
a role in monitoring DNA replication during S phase.

Chini and Chen (2003) observed that human claspin is a cell
cycle-regulated protein that peaks at S/G2 phase. Claspin localized in
nuclei and associated with CHK1 following replication stress or other
types of DNA damage. Claspin was phosphorylated in response to
replication stress, and phosphorylation appeared to be required for the
association between claspin and CHK1. In addition, claspin interacted
with the checkpoint proteins ATR and RAD9 (603761). Since ATR and the
RAD9-RAD1 (603153)-HUS1 (603760) complex are involved in CHK1
activation, the authors hypothesized that claspin may be an adaptor that
brings these molecules together. Downregulation of claspin by small
interfering RNA inhibited CHK1 activation in response to replication
stress, augmented the premature chromatin condensation induced by
hydroxyurea, inhibited ultraviolet-induced reduction of DNA synthesis,
and decreased cell survival.

Yoo et al. (2004) showed that, during checkpoint response, Xenopus
claspin becomes phosphorylated on thr906, creating a docking site for
Plx1, the Xenopus homolog of PLK1 (602098). This interaction promotes
phosphorylation of claspin on ser934 by Plx1. Yoo et al. (2004) stated
that, after a prolonged interphase arrest, aphidicolin-treated egg
extracts typically undergo adaptation and enter into mitosis despite the
presence of incompletely replicated DNA. In this process, claspin
dissociates from chromatin, and Chk1 undergoes inactivation. By
contrast, aphidicolin-treated extracts containing mutants of claspin
with thr906-to-ala or ser934-to-ala substitutions were unable to undergo
adaptation. Under such adaptation-defective conditions, claspin
accumulated on chromatin at high levels, and Chk1 did not decrease in
activity. These results indicated that the Plx1-dependent inactivation
of claspin results in termination of a DNA replication checkpoint
response.

Wang et al. (2006) found that phosphorylated RAD17 interacted with
claspin and regulated its phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of RAD17 was
differentially required in response to different DNA-damaging agents and
was particularly important in stress due to hydroxyurea exposure.

Mailand et al. (2006) and Peschiaroli et al. (2006) found that claspin
became degraded at the onset of mitosis. Claspin degradation was
triggered by its interaction with and ubiquitylation by BTRC (603482).
The BTRC-claspin interaction was phosphorylation dependent and required
PLK1 activity and integrity of the BTRC degradation motif in the N
terminus of claspin. Mailand et al. (2006) found that uncoupling claspin
from BTRC by mutating the conserved serines in the degradation motif or
by BTRC knockdown stabilized claspin in mitosis, impaired CHK1
dephosphorylation, and delayed G2/M transition during recovery from cell
cycle arrest imposed by DNA damage or replication stress. The inability
to degrade claspin allowed partial reactivation of CHK1 in cells exposed
to DNA damage after passing the G2/M transition. Peschiaroli et al.
(2006) found that expression of a stable claspin mutant unable to bind
BTRC prolonged activation of CHK1, thereby attenuating recovery from the
DNA replication stress response and significantly delaying entry into
mitosis.

MAPPING

Kumagai and Dunphy (2000) mapped the human claspin gene to 1p34.3-p34.1
based on sequence similarity between the claspin sequence (GenBank
GENBANK AF297866) and the chromosome 1 clone RP4-555P23 (GenBank GENBANK
AL139143).

REFERENCE 1. Chini, C. C. S.; Chen, J.: Human Claspin is required for replication
checkpoint control. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30057-30062, 2003.

2. Kumagai, A.; Dunphy, W. G.: Claspin, a novel protein required
for the activation of Chk1 during a DNA replication checkpoint response
in Xenopus egg extracts. Molec. Cell 6: 839-849, 2000.

3. Lee, J.; Kumagai, A.; Dunphy, W. G.: Claspin, a Chk1-regulatory
protein, monitors DNA replication on chromatin independently of RPA,
ATR, and Rad17. Molec. Cell 11: 329-340, 2003.

4. Mailand, N.; Bekker-Jensen, S.; Bartek, J.; Lukas, J.: Destruction
of claspin by SCF-beta-TrCP restrains Chk1 activation and facilitates
recovery from genotoxic stress. Molec. Cell 23: 307-318, 2006.

5. Peschiaroli, A.; Dorrello, N. V.; Guardavaccaro, D.; Venere, M.;
Halazonetis, T.; Sherman, N. E.; Pagano, M.: SCF-beta-TrCP-mediated
degradation of claspin regulates recovery from the DNA replication
checkpoint response. Molec. Cell 23: 319-329, 2006.

6. Wang, X.; Zou, L.; Lu, T.; Bao, S.; Hurov, K. E.; Hittelman, W.
N.; Elledge, S. J.; Li, L.: Rad17 phosphorylation is required for
claspin recruitment and Chk1 activation in response to replication
stress. Molec. Cell 23: 331-341, 2006.

7. Yoo, H. Y.; Kumagai, A.; Shevchenko, A.; Shevchenko, A.; Dunphy,
W. G.: Adaptation of a DNA replication checkpoint response depends
upon inactivation of Claspin by the Polo-like kinase. Cell 117:
575-588, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/1/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/10/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/18/2003

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 11/29/2000

EDITED mgross: 09/07/2006
terry: 9/1/2006
mgross: 8/6/2004
mgross: 10/10/2003
mgross: 4/18/2003
mgross: 11/29/2000

613336	TITLE *613336 MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED RING-CH FINGER PROTEIN 9; MARCH9
;;MARCH IX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MARCH9 is a member of the MARCH family of membrane-bound E3 ubiquitin
ligases (EC 6.3.2.19). MARCH enzymes add ubiquitin (see 191339) to
target lysines in substrate proteins, thereby signaling their vesicular
transport between membrane compartments. MARCH9 induces internalization
of several membrane glycoproteins and directs them to the endosomal
compartment (Bartee et al., 2004; Hoer et al., 2007).

CLONING

Poxviruses and gamma-2 herpesviruses express ubiquitin ligases called K3
proteins that inhibit the surface expression of glycoproteins, including
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules (see 142800).
By searching a database for sequences similar to the functional domains
of viral K3 proteins, Bartee et al. (2004) identified 9 human MARCH
proteins, including MARCH9. The deduced full-length MARCH9 protein
contains a short N terminus, followed by a RING-CH domain and 2
transmembrane domains. It shares 90% identity with MARCH4 (608208) in
the RING-CH and transmembrane domains. Bartee et al. (2004) also
identified a MARCH9 variant that encodes a protein lacking the RING-CH
domain. Real-time PCR analysis showed that both MARCH9 variants were
expressed in all human tissues examined at variable levels.

Hoer et al. (2007) determined that the short MARCH9 variant, which they
called MARCH9 RINGless, uses a transcription initiation site within
intron 2 of the MARCH9 gene. The deduced protein contains the same 2
C-terminal transmembrane domains as full-length MARCH9, but it has a
unique 57-amino acid N terminus that replaces the RING-CH domain.
Epitope-tagged full-length MARCH9 colocalized with a lysosomal marker.
When overexpressed, it also colocalized with the trans-Golgi network
(TGN).

Using RT-PCR, De Gassart et al. (2008) detected robust MARCH9 expression
in all human cells and cell lines examined, including immature and
mature dendritic cells, HeLa and B-cell lines, and monocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using an in vitro ubiquitination assay, Bartee et al. (2004) found that
the isolated RING-CH domain of MARCH9 could not function as an E3
ubiquitin ligase with any E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes tested,
including UBCH2 (UBE2H; 601082), UBCH3 (CDC34; 116948), UBCH5A (UBE2D1;
602961), UBCH6 (UBE2E1; 602916), and UBCH7 (UBE2L3; 603721). Following
transfection into HeLa cells, full-length MARCH9 downregulated the
surface expression of cotransfected CD4 (186940) and endogenous MHC I.
Mutation analysis showed that the RING-CH domain of MARCH9 was essential
for MHC I downregulation, and the MARCH9 isoform lacking the RING-CH
domain did not downregulate MHC I surface expression. MHC I was
internalized to lysosomes via multivesicular bodies, and inhibition of
endosome acidification or expression of a dominant-negative VPS4 (see
609982) mutant abrogated MARCH9-induced MHC I internalization. Deletion
of lysines in the tails of HLA-A2.1 (600642) and CD4 made these proteins
resistant to MARCH9-induced degradation, suggesting that ubiquitination
of these lysines is required for their uptake and degradation.

Hoer et al. (2007) found that overexpression of full-length MARCH9
downregulated the surface expression of ICAM1 (147840), a critical cell
adhesion molecule, and MHC I in transfected HeLa and 293T cells.
Downregulation of ICAM1 involved monoubiquitination of ICAM1 on a
cytoplasmic lysine. Mutation analysis revealed that a critical aspartate
within the transmembrane region of MARCH9 was required for recognition
of MHC I molecules, but not ICAM1. The MARCH9 RINGless isoform
stabilized full-length MARCH9 via heterodimerization, resulting in
enhanced MARCH9-mediated MHC I and ICAM1 downregulation. Full-length
MARCH9 was also able to homodimerize.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hoer et al. (2007) determined that the MARCH9 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the MARCH9 gene to chromosome 12q14.1 based on an
alignment of the MARCH9 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC009489) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bartee, E.; Mansouri, M.; Nerenberg, B. T. H.; Gouveia, K.; Fruh,
K.: Downregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I by
human ubiquitin ligases related to viral immune evasion proteins. J.
Virology 78: 1109-1120, 2004.

2. De Gassart, A.; Camosseto, V.; Thibodeau, J.; Ceppi, M.; Catalan,
N.; Pierre, P.; Gatti, E.: MHC class II stabilization at the surface
of human dendritic cells is the result of maturation-dependent MARCH
I down-regulation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3491-3496, 2008.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/29/2010.

4. Hoer, S.; Smith, L.; Lehner, P. J.: MARCH-IX mediates ubiquitination
and downregulation of ICAM-1. FEBS Lett. 581: 45-51, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/30/2010

EDITED mgross: 03/31/2010

606116	TITLE *606116 RIBONUCLEASE P/MRP, 38-KD SUBUNIT; RPP38
;;RIBONUCLEASE P, 38-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) removes the 5-prime leader sequences from
precursor tRNA molecules. RNase P consists of an RNA species (H1 RNA),
the POP1 protein (602486), and at least 7 proteins called RPPs. The RPPs
have apparent molecular masses of 14 kD (RPP14; 606112), 20 kD (RPP20;
606113), 25 kD (RPP25), 29 kD (RPP29; 606114), 30 kD (RPP30; 606115), 38
kD (RPP38), and 40 kD (RPP40; 606117). Patients with scleroderma
(181750) have serum reactive with RNase P, the Th antigen, which is also
referred to as the To antigen, and RPP30 and RPP38 (summary by Jarrous
et al., 1998, 1999).

CLONING

By biochemical purification of RNase P, micropeptide sequence analysis,
PCR on a fetal liver cDNA library, and EST database searching, Eder et
al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding RPP38. The deduced 283-amino acid
protein has a leucine zipper RNA-binding motif and a predicted molecular
mass of nearly 32 kD, less than the 38 kD observed in SDS-PAGE analysis.

Jarrous et al. (1998) determined that RPP38 is a major target for
antisera from systemic sclerosis patients and that the antigen is likely
to be localized in both the nucleoplasm and nucleolus.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that polyclonal antibodies raised
against RPP20, RPP30, RPP38, or RPP40 interact with RNase P from HeLa
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Following depletion of RNase P from HeLa cell extracts, Reiner et al.
(2006) found a severe deficiency in RNA polymerase (Pol) III (see
606007)-mediated transcription of tRNA and other small noncoding RNA
genes. Targeted cleavage of the H1RNA (RPPH1; 608513) moiety of RNase P
altered enzyme specificity and diminished Pol III transcription.
Similarly, inactivation of RNase P protein subunits, such as RPP38, by
small interfering RNA inhibited Pol III function and Pol III-directed
promoter activity in the cell. RNase P exerted its role in transcription
through association with Pol III and chromatin of active tRNA and 5S
rRNA (180420) genes. Reiner et al. (2006) concluded that RNase P has a
role in Pol III transcription and that transcription and early tRNA
processing may be coordinated.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the RPP38 gene to chromosome 10p13 based on an
alignment of the RPP38 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC029494) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Eder, P. S.; Kekuda, R.; Stolc, V.; Altman, S.: Characterization
of two scleroderma autoimmune antigens that copurify with human ribonuclease
P. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 1101-1106, 1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/9/2013.

3. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Guerrier-Takada, C.; Hoog, C.; Altman,
S.: Autoantigenic properties of some protein subunits of catalytically
active complexes of human ribonuclease P. RNA 4: 407-417, 1998.

4. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Wesolowski, D.; Altman, S.: Rpp14 and
Rpp29, two protein subunits of human ribonuclease P. RNA 5: 153-157,
1999.

5. Reiner, R.; Ben-Asouli, Y.; Krilovetzky, I.; Jarrous, N.: A role
for the catalytic ribonucleoprotein RNase P in RNA polymerase III
transcription. Genes Dev. 20: 1621-1635, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/9/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/19/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/16/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/09/2013
mgross: 9/9/2013
mgross: 7/19/2006
alopez: 11/8/2005
mgross: 7/16/2001

602023	TITLE *602023 CHLORIDE CHANNEL, KIDNEY, B; CLCNKB
;;CLCKB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CLCNKA and CLCNKB channels are members of the ClC family, which
comprises at least 9 mammalian chloride channels. Each is believed to
have 12 transmembrane domains and intracellular N and C termini. The
prototype of the family in Torpedo is gated by both voltage and chloride
(Jentsch and Gunther, 1997).

CLONING

Kieferle et al. (1994) cloned rat and human homologs of 2 closely
related chloride channels found specifically in mammalian kidney, which
they called ClCK1 and ClCK2. In the rat, ClCK1 and ClCK2 appear to be
expressed along the nephron from the thin ascending limb of the Henle
loop onwards. The human homologs of these 2 genes, CLCNKA (602024) and
CLCNKB, encode proteins of 687 amino acids (Saito-Ohara et al., 1996).

GENE STRUCTURE

Simon et al. (1997) demonstrated that the intron-exon organization of
the CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes was identical, with each channel encoded by
19 exons. Overall, the genes show 94% DNA sequence identity in exons.
The 2 genes are transcribed from the same DNA strand, with CLCNKA
5-prime of CLCNKB. The 2 genes are separated by 11 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

Saito-Ohara et al. (1996) mapped the CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes to
chromosome 1p36.

Considering CLCNKA and CLCNKB as candidate genes in families with
Bartter syndrome (607364), Simon et al. (1997) isolated PAC and cosmid
genomic clones encoding these genes. They found that both genes were
present in all 6 PAC clones, indicating that they are closely linked to
one another, as previously suggested by in situ hybridization using CLCK
cDNA (Saito-Ohara et al., 1996). Using a marker polymorphism in exon 13
of the CLCNKA gene, Simon et al. (1997) showed that in CEPH kindreds the
gene is linked to chromosome 1; a multipoint lod score of 15.8 at a
recombination fraction of 0.0 was obtained with D1S436.

GENE FUNCTION

Estevez et al. (2001) demonstrated that barttin (BSND; 606412) acts as
an essential beta subunit for CLCNKA and CLCNKB chloride channels, with
which it colocalizes in basolateral membranes of renal tubules and of
potassium-secreting epithelia of the inner ear. Disease-causing
mutations in either CLCNKB or barttin compromise currents through
heteromeric channels. Currents can be stimulated further by mutating a
proline-tyrosine (PY) motif on barttin. Estevez et al. (2001) concluded
that their work described the first known beta subunit for CLC chloride
channels and revealed that heteromers formed by chloride channels and
barttin are crucial for renal salt reabsorption and potassium recycling
in the inner ear.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Bartter Syndrome Type 3

In affected members of 10 kindreds with Bartter syndrome type 3
(607364), Simon et al. (1997) found homozygous deletion of the CLCNKB
gene. Two kindreds showed homozygous loss of part of CLCNKB. The tight
linkage and topology of CLCNKA and CLCNKB raised the question of unequal
crossing over between these genes or blocks of homologous flanking
sequences as a mechanism for deletion of CLCNKB sequences. Simon et al.
(1997) found reciprocal loss of CLCNKA and CLCNKB sequences consistent
with this mechanism. They also demonstrated 7 mutations altering the
CLCNKB gene and cosegregating with the disease (e.g., 602023.0001). In 4
kindreds, affected persons were homozygous for identified mutations, 2
index cases were compound heterozygotes, and a single mutation was
identified in 1 kindred.

Jeck et al. (2000) described 3 unrelated patients presenting with the
typical laboratory findings of Gitelman syndrome (263800). Mutation
analysis in these 3 patients revealed no abnormality in the SLC12A3
(600968) gene. Instead, all patients were found to carry previously
described mutations in the CLCNKB gene: 2 were homozygous for complete
deletion of the gene (602023.0006) and 1 was homozygous for an A-G
substitution at the splice acceptor site of intron 7 (602023.0007)
(Konrad et al., 2000). Further clinical investigation revealed features
more typical of Bartter syndrome than of Gitelman syndrome. Jeck et al.
(2000) suggested that the phenotypic overlap may indicate a physiologic
cooperation of the apical thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter
(SLC12A3) and the basolateral chloride channel (CLCNKB) for salt
reabsorption in the distal convoluted tubule.

Schurman et al. (2001) studied 5 African American children with Bartter
syndrome. Like the African American children reported by Simon et al.
(1997), these children demonstrated homozygous deletion of the CLCNKB
gene (602023.0006). They had partial correction of hypokalemia, normal
calciotropic activity, suboptimal growth despite therapy, and abnormal
renal ultrasounds but no nephrocalcinosis.

Fukuyama et al. (2004) reported 2 Japanese patients who suffered from
clinically diagnosed classic Bartter syndrome but who had hypocalciuria.
Hypocalciuria is believed to be a pathognomic finding of Na-Cl
cotransporter malfunction. They identified mutations in the CLCNKB gene,
including a premature termination mutation (602023.0009) and a splice
site mutation (602023.0010). The authors concluded that some CLCNKB
mutations may affect calcium handling in renal tubular cells.

- Bartter Syndrome Type 4B

In a child with renal salt wasting and deafness (Bartter syndrome type
4B; 613090) who had no mutation in the BSND gene (606412), Schlingmann
et al. (2004) identified both a homozygous deletion of the CLCNKB gene
(602023.0008) and a homozygous trp80-to-cys mutation in the CLCNKA gene
(W80C; 602024.0001). Because this combined impairment of the CLCNKA and
CLCNKB genes resulted in a phenotype mimicking the form of infantile
Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness caused by mutation in the
BSND gene (Bartter syndrome type 4A; 602522), Schlingmann et al. (2004)
concluded that this case with digenic inheritance supported the notion
that the CLCNK-type channels are regulated by barttin and offered strong
evidence of genetic heterogeneity in patients who have both severe renal
salt wasting and deafness.

Nozu et al. (2008) reported a 2-year-old Japanese girl with a severe
form of Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness who was born of
nonconsanguineous parents. Genetic analysis showed 2 heterozygous
mutations in the CLCNKA (602024.0002) and CLCNKB (602023.0011) genes on
the paternal allele, and a 12-kb deletion involving portions of the
CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes on the maternal allele. Neither parent was
clinically affected. The findings indicated clear digenic inheritance in
this patient and confirmed that loss of function of all 4 alleles of the
CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes can result in Bartter syndrome type 4B.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, PRO124LEU

In 2 apparently unrelated Turkish kindreds, Simon et al. (1997) found
that children with Bartter syndrome type 3 (607364) were homozygous for
the identical mutation, a substitution of leucine for proline at codon
124 of the CLCNKB gene. This proline residue is conserved among all
mammalian members of the CLC family.

.0002
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, ALA204THR

In 2 Spanish kindreds, Simon et al. (1997) found that individuals with
Bartter syndrome type 3 (607364) were homozygous for substitution of
threonine for alanine at codon 204 in the fifth transmembrane domain of
the CLCNKB gene. All CLC channel members, including the CLC-related
channel of yeast, have alanine or glycine at this position, within a
highly conserved hydrophobic segment (amino acids AAAA or AGAA).

.0003
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, ARG438CYS

One of the missense mutations in the CLCNKB gene identified by Simon et
al. (1997) in Bartter syndrome type 3 (607364) patients was arg438 to
cys (R438C), where R438 is conserved among all members of the CLC
family.

.0004
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, ALA349ASP

One of the missense mutations identified by Simon et al. (1997) in the
CLCNKB gene in patients with Bartter syndrome type 3 (607364) was ala349
to asp (A349D), which introduces a charged residue in the predicted
eighth transmembrane domain of the channel.

.0005
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, TYR432HIS

One of the mutations identified by Simon et al. (1997) in the CLCNKB
gene in Bartter syndrome type 3 (607364) patients was a tyr432-to-his
(Y432H) substitution.

.0006
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, DEL

In 3 patients, the offspring of consanguineous parents, presenting with
biochemical findings consistent with the diagnosis of Gitelman syndrome
(263800), Jeck et al. (2000) detected 2 mutations previously described
by Konrad et al. (2000): homozygous deletion of the CLCNKB gene was
present in 2 patients, and homozygous exchange of guanine for adenine at
the consensus acceptor site of intron 7 (602023.0007) was present in the
third. Review of medical history revealed early onset of the disease,
within the first year of life. Clinical presentation included episodes
of dehydration, weakness, and failure to thrive, much more suggestive of
classic Bartter syndrome (607364) than of Gitelman syndrome. The
coexistence of hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria was not present from the
beginning. In the follow-up, a drop of both parameters below normal
range was a consistent finding reflecting a transition from classic
Bartter syndrome to Gitelman syndrome phenotype. Jeck et al. (2000)
suggested that the phenotypic overlap may indicate a physiologic
cooperation of the apical thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter and the
basolateral chloride channel for salt reabsorption in the distal
convoluted tubule.

.0007
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3
CLCNKB, IVS7, A-G, -2

See 602023.0006 and Jeck et al. (2000).

.0008
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 4B
CLCNKB, DEL

In a child with renal salt wasting and deafness (Bartter syndrome type
4B; 613090) who had no mutation in the BSND gene (606412), Schlingmann
et al. (2004) identified both a homozygous deletion of the CLCNKB gene
and a homozygous cys80-to-trp (C80W) mutation in the CLCNKA gene (C80W;
602024.0001). The patient was born prematurely to consanguineous
parents, and the pregnancy was complicated by severe maternal
polyhydramnios during the last 6 weeks of gestation.

.0009
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3, WITH HYPOCALCIURIA
CLCNKB, TRP610TER

In 2 Japanese patients who had been diagnosed with classic Bartter
syndrome (607364) but who presented with hypocalciuria, Fukuyama et al.
(2004) found a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1830 in exon 16 of the
CLCNKB gene that resulted in premature termination (trp610 to ter;
W610X).

.0010
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 3, WITH HYPOCALCIURIA
CLCNKB, IVS2AS, G-C, -1

In a Japanese patient who had been diagnosed with classic Bartter
syndrome (607364) but who presented with hypocalciuria, Fukuyama et al.
(2004) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the CLCNKB
gene. One was a G-to-C transversion at the 3-prime splice site of intron
2; the other was a premature termination mutation (W610X; 602023.0009).

.0011
BARTTER SYNDROME, TYPE 4B
CLCNKB, IVS17DS, G-A, +1

In a 2-year-old Japanese girl with a severe form of Bartter syndrome
with sensorineural deafness (613090), Nozu et al. (2008) identified a
heterozygous G-to-A transition in intron 7 of the CLCNKB gene, resulting
in a splice site mutation, and a heterozygous mutation in the CLCNKA
gene (Q260X; 602024.0002), both inherited from the father. The maternal
allele had a 12-kb deletion including portions of both CLCNKA and
CLCNKB. Neither parent was clinically affected. The findings indicated
clear digenic inheritance in this patient and confirmed that loss of
function of all 4 alleles of the CLCNKA and CLCNKB genes can result in
Bartter syndrome type 4B.

REFERENCE 1. Estevez, R.; Boettger, T.; Stein, V.; Birkenhager, R.; Otto, E.;
Hildebrandt, F.; Jentsch, T. J.: Barttin is a Cl- channel beta-subunit
crucial for renal Cl- reabsorption and inner ear K+ secretion. Nature 414:
558-561, 2001.

2. Fukuyama, S.; Hiramatsu, M.; Akagi, M.; Higa, M.; Ohta, T.: Novel
mutations of the chloride channel Kb gene in two Japanese patients
clinically diagnosed as Bartter syndrome with hypocalciuria. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 89: 5847-5850, 2004.

3. Jeck, N.; Konrad, M.; Peters, M.; Weber, S.; Bonzel, K. E.; Seyberth,
H. W.: Mutations in the chloride channel gene, CLCNKB, leading to
a mixed Bartter-Gitelman phenotype. Pediat. Res. 48: 754-758, 2000.

4. Jentsch, T. J.; Gunther, W.: Chloride channels: an emerging molecular
picture. Bioessays 19: 117-126, 1997.

5. Kieferle, S.; Fong, P.; Bens, M.; Vandewalle, A.; Jentsch, T. J.
: Two highly homologous members of the ClC chloride channel family
in both rat and human kidney. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 6943-6947,
1994.

6. Konrad, M.; Vollmer, M.; Lemmink, H. H.; van den Heuvel, L. P.
W. J.; Jeck, N.; Vargas-Poussou, R.; Lakings, A.; Ruf, R.; Deschenes,
G.; Antignac, C.; Guay-Woodford, L.; Knoers, N. V. A. M.; Seyberth,
H. W.; Feldmann, D.; Hildebrandt, F.: Mutations in the chloride channel
gene CLCNKB as a cause of classic Bartter syndrome. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 11:
1449-1459, 2000.

7. Nozu, K.; Inagaki, T.; Fu, X. J.; Nozu, Y.; Kaito, H.; Kanda, K.;
Sekine, T.; Igarashi, T.; Nakanishi, K.; Yoshikawa, N.; Iijima, K.;
Matsuo, M.: Molecular analysis of digenic inheritance in Bartter
syndrome with sensorineural deafness. J. Med. Genet. 45: 182-186,
2008.

8. Saito-Ohara, F.; Uchida, S.; Takeuchi, Y.; Sasaki. S.; Hayashi,
A.; Maraumo, F.; Ikeuchi, T.: Assignment of the genes encoding the
human chloride channels, CLCNKA and CLCNKB, to 1p36 and of CLCN3 to
4q32-q33 by in situ hybridization. Genomics 36: 372-374, 1996.

9. Schlingmann, K. P.; Konrad, M.; Jeck, N.; Waldegger, P.; Reinalter,
S. C.; Holder, M.; Seyberth, H. W.; Waldegger, S.: Salt wasting and
deafness resulting from mutations in two chloride channels. New Eng.
J. Med. 350: 1314-1319, 2004.

10. Schurman, S. J.; Perlman, S. A.; Sutphen, R.; Campos, A.; Garin,
E. H.; Cruz, D. N.; Shoemaker, L. R.: Genotype/phenotype observations
in African Americans with Bartter syndrome. J. Pediat. 139: 105-110,
2001.

11. Simon, D. B.; Bindra, R. S.; Mansfield, T. A.; Nelson-Williams,
C.; Mendonca, E.; Stone, R.; Schurman, S.; Nayir, A.; Alpay, H.; Bakkaloglu,
A.; Rodriguez-Soriano, J.; Morales, J. M.; Sanjad, S. A.; Taylor,
C. M.; Pilz, D.; Brem, A.; Trachtman, H.; Griswold, W.; Richard, G.
A.; John, E.; Lifton, R. P.: Mutations in the chloride channel gene,
CLCNKB, cause Bartter's syndrome type III. Nature Genet. 17: 171-178,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/18/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/5/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/31/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/18/2001
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 10/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/7/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/29/1997

EDITED mgross: 10/16/2009
mgross: 10/15/2009
wwang: 5/8/2008
ckniffin: 3/18/2008
alopez: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 4/6/2004
tkritzer: 4/2/2004
terry: 3/31/2004
terry: 7/28/2003
tkritzer: 12/3/2002
carol: 12/2/2002
ckniffin: 11/21/2002
alopez: 1/2/2002
terry: 12/18/2001
carol: 10/3/2001
alopez: 2/27/2001
cwells: 2/20/2001
cwells: 2/14/2001
dkim: 7/24/1998
mark: 10/8/1997
terry: 10/7/1997
mark: 10/6/1997
dholmes: 10/3/1997
mark: 9/30/1997
terry: 9/29/1997

120140	TITLE +120140 COLLAGEN, TYPE II, ALPHA-1; COL2A1
;;COLLAGEN, TYPE II;;
COLLAGEN OF CARTILAGE
CHONDROCALCIN, INCLUDED;;
VITREORETINOPATHY WITH PHALANGEAL EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Collagens are major structural components of the extracellular matrix.
Type II collagen, also called cartilage collagen, is the major collagen
synthesized by chondrocytes. The same type of collagen occurs in the
vitreous. Type II collagen is comprised of 3 alpha-1(II) chains. These
are synthesized as larger procollagen chains, which contain N- and
C-terminal amino acid sequences called propeptides. After secretion into
the extracellular matrix, the propeptides are cleaved, forming the
mature type II collagen molecule (summary by Strom and Upholt, 1984 and
Cheah et al., 1985).

CLONING

Strom and Upholt (1984) isolated overlapping genomic DNA clones
containing most of the coding sequences for chicken type II procollagen.
They found that the chicken type II gene is 2 to 3 times more compact
than the chicken type I alpha-2 gene (COL1A2; 120160) due to smaller
introns. The coding sequence shows about 75% homology with type I
alpha-1 (COL1A1; 120150) and 63 to 67% homology with type I alpha-2 and
type III (COL3A1; 120180) sequences. Base composition and codon usage of
type II are very similar to alpha-1(I) and different from alpha-2(I) and
type III. The chicken type II gene appears to be present in single copy
per haploid genome. Using probes corresponding to the chicken COL2A1
procollagen gene to screen a recombinant human DNA library, Strom and
Upholt (1984) isolated a portion of the human COL2A1 gene.

Sangiorgi et al. (1984) isolated from a cartilage cDNA library a bovine
clone encoding the pro-alpha-1(II) collagen chain. Because of the close
homology of bovine and human collagens, the bovine clone could be used
to isolate the corresponding gene from a human genomic library.

By comparison of amino acid sequences, van der Rest et al. (1986) showed
that chondrocalcin is the C-propeptide of type II procollagen.
Chondrocalcin is a calcium-binding protein found in developing fetal
cartilage matrix and in growth plate cartilage when and where
mineralization occurs in the lower hypertrophic zone. It appears to play
a role in enchondral ossification. The new evidence on its identity to
C-propeptide indicates that it is also important in assembly of the
triple helix of type II collagen. See 156550 for evidence of abnormal
processing of the C-propeptide of type II collagen resulting in
imperfect fibril assembly and the clinical disorder called Kniest
dysplasia.

Studying the gerbil, Slepecky et al. (1992) demonstrated that types II
and IX (120210) collagen show colocalization in the inner ear.

Wu and Eyre (1995) provided evidence that what was formerly termed the
alpha-3 chain of type XI collagen (COL11A3) is actually transcribed from
the COL2A1 gene.

MAPPING

By analysis of DNA from human-mouse cell hybrids, Sangiorgi et al.
(1984) localized the COL2A1 gene to chromosome 12. The results were
confirmed by similar experiments with the bovine cDNA probe. Using a
cloned gene as a probe on Southern blots of DNA from a panel of
interspecies somatic cell hybrids, Solomon et al. (1985) also assigned
the COL2A1 locus to chromosome 12.

By somatic cell hybrid studies and in situ hybridization,
Huerre-Jeanpierre et al. (1986) assigned COL2A1 to 12q13.1-q13.2 and
COL3A1 to 2q31-q32.3. Law et al. (1986) used a cosmid clone of the
entire COL2A1 gene in Southern analysis of DNA from somatic cell hybrids
containing segments of chromosome 12. Two hybrids contained a similar
terminal deletion of 12q14.3-qter but 1 was positive for the gene and 1
negative. This led Law et al. (1986) to conclude that the gene is
located in 12q14.3.

Takahashi et al. (1990) described a 'new' nonisotopic method of in situ
hybridization. It involved replication of R-bands by incorporation of
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) into cells synchronized with thymidine.
Fluorescent signals could be detected on R-banded prometaphases stained
with propidium iodide. They illustrated the strength of the system by
refining the localization of the COL2A1 gene to 12q13.11-q13.12. By
nonisotopic in situ hybridization, Takahashi et al. (1990) showed that
the COL2A1 gene is immediately proximal to the fragile site
fra(12)(q13.1).

GENE FUNCTION

Lovell-Badge et al. (1987) introduced a cosmid containing the human type
II collagen gene, including 4.5 kb of 5-prime and 2.2 kb of 3-prime
flanking DNA, into mouse embryonic cells in vitro. Human type II
collagen mRNA was found only in tissues that showed transcription from
the endogenous (mouse) gene, and human type II collagen was found in
cartilage. The findings indicated that the cis-acting requirements for
correct temporal and spatial regulation of the gene were fulfilled by
the introduced DNA.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Several skeletal and ocular disorders have been found to be caused by
mutation in the COL2A1 gene. These are sometimes referred to as type II
collagenopathies.

- Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita

The first evidence for a defect in COL2A1 in SED congenita (183900) and
in Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis (200610) was the finding of abnormal
patterns of digestion of type II collagen by cyanogen bromide, as
demonstrated by Horton (1987). Confirmation of the defect in SED
congenita was provided by demonstration of mutation in COL2A1
(120140.0001 and 120140.0002).

- Achondrogenesis Type II

Godfrey and Hollister (1988) presented evidence that the patient they
studied with a lethal perinatal form of short-limbed dwarfism (200610)
was heterozygous for an abnormal pro-alpha-1(II) chain which impaired
the assembly and/or folding of type II collagen. Vissing et al. (1989)
demonstrated that the mutation in the type II procollagen gene was a
single base change that converted the codon for glycine (GGC) at amino
acid 943 to a codon for serine (AGC) (120140.0002).

- Stickler Syndrome, Type I

Francomano et al. (1987, 1987) demonstrated absolute linkage of COL2A1
and Stickler syndrome (108300); a total lod score of 3.96 at theta = 0.0
was obtained. In a family with Stickler syndrome, Ahmad et al. (1990,
1991) identified a mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0005).

Mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0014) has also been found in a
nonsyndromic ocular form of type I Stickler syndrome (609508).

- Osteoarthritis Associated with Chondrodysplasia

Knowlton et al. (1989) found tight linkage (no recombination) of the
COL2A1 gene with a precocious form of familial primary generalized
osteoarthritis (OA) associated with chondrodysplasia (604864). In the
full report of this family, Knowlton et al. (1990) stated that a
16-year-old male had osteoarthritis of the middle metacarpophalangeal
joints and hips as well as bilateral osteochondritis dissecans of the
capitellum. A 38-year-old female also had osteoarthritis of the spine,
wrists, proximal interphalangeal joints, and distal interphalangeal
joints. Vertebral bodies were flattened with Schmorl nodes. Linkage
analysis suggested that the mutation is in the COL2A1 locus with a
maximum lod score of 2.39 in multipoint analysis. Morphometrics
demonstrated a short trunk producing abnormally low upper segment to
lower segment ratio. A mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0003) in
affected members of the kindred described by Knowlton et al. (1990) was
identified by Ala-Kokko et al. (1990).

Nelson et al. (1998) presented further evidence that the synthesis of
type II collagen is increased in osteoarthritis. Using an immunoassay,
they showed that the content of the C-propeptide of type II procollagen,
released extracellularly from the newly synthesized molecule, is
directly related to the synthesis of this molecule in healthy and
osteoarthritic articular cartilage. In OA cartilage, the content of the
type II procollagen is often markedly elevated (mean 7.6-fold). The
increase in type II procollagen in OA cartilage was not reflected in
serum, where a significant reduction was observed.

- Kniest Dysplasia

Wilkin et al. (1999) noted that 10 of 12 previously described dominant
mutations in the COL2A1 gene in patients with Kniest dysplasia caused
small deletions in the type II collagen molecule. They added 4 new
mutations, bringing the total to 16. All 4 new mutations were also small
deletions; a fifth patient was found to have a previously reported 28-bp
deletion (120140.0012).

COL2A1 has 10 in-frame CGA codons that can mutate to TGA stop codons by
a methylation-deamination mechanism. Wilkin et al. (2000) analyzed these
10 codons using restriction endonuclease analysis or allele-specific
amplification. Mutations at 5 COL2A1 CGA codons were identified in 8 of
40 patients with Stickler syndrome, suggesting that these are common
sites of mutation in this disorder.

Korkko et al. (2000) performed COL2A1 mutation analysis on 12 patients
with achondrogenesis type II/hypochondrogenesis, using conformation
sensitive gel electrophoresis, followed by sequencing. Mutations were
identified in all patients. Ten had single base substitutions, 1 had a
change in a consensus RNA splice site, and 1 was an 18-bp deletion of
coding sequences. Mutations were widely distributed across the gene.

In 2 sporadic cases of the Torrance type of platyspondylic skeletal
dysplasia (151210), Nishimura et al. (2004) identified de novo mutations
in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0039-120140.0040).

- Avascular Necrosis of the Femoral Head and Legg-Calve-Perthes
Disease

Avascular necrosis of the femoral head (ANFH; 608805) causes disability
that often requires surgical intervention. Most cases of ANFH are
sporadic, but Liu et al. (2005) identified 3 families in which there was
autosomal dominant inheritance of the disease with mapping of the
phenotype to 12q13. Liu et al. (2005) carried out haplotype analysis in
the families, selected candidate genes from the critical interval for an
ANFH on 12q13, and sequenced the promoter and exonic regions of the
COL2A1 gene from persons with inherited and sporadic forms of ANFH. In 2
of the families they identified the same gly1170-to-ser mutation
(120140.0043), on different haplotype backgrounds. The gly717-to-ser
mutation was detected in the third family (120140.0044).

Miyamoto et al. (2007) identified the gly1170-to-ser mutation
(120140.0043) in affected members of a Japanese family with an autosomal
dominant disorder manifesting as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (LCPD;
150600), a form of ANFH in growing children.

In a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed with avascular necrosis of the
femoral head at 18 years of age and underwent bilateral hip replacement
at 33 years of age, Kannu et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
missense mutation in the C-propeptide region of the COL2A1 gene
(120140.0054). The authors noted that mutations in the C-propeptide
region typically cause significant skeletal findings unlike those found
in this patient.

- Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150) is a skeletal
dysplasia characterized by severe sensorineural hearing loss, enlarged
epiphyses, and early onset of osteoarthritis. Miyamoto et al. (2005)
identified a novel COL2A1 mutation at a splice acceptor site within
intron 10 (709-2A-G; 120140.0048) in a patient with OSMED. This mutation
caused a skipping of exon 11, and of exons 11 and 13. These
exon-skipping events were presumed to cause an in-frame deletion of the
triple helical region of the COL2A1 product. Mutations in the COL11A2
gene (120290) had been reported as a cause for OSMED. The report
confirmed the overlap between type II and type XI collagenopathies.

- Other Disorders Caused by COL2A1 Mutations

Other disorders caused by mutation in the COL2A1 gene include
spondylometaphyseal dysplasia (SMD; 184252; see 120140.0013); Strudwick
type of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (184250; see 120140.0017);
multiple epiphyseal dysplasia with myopia and conductive deafness
(132450; see 120140.0029); spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700; see
120140.0030); platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type (151210;
see 120140.0039); Czech dysplasia (609162; see 120140.0018);
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (see 609508; see 120140.0045); and
vitreoretinopathy with phalangeal epiphyseal dysplasia (120140.0037).

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Helfgott et al. (1991) suggested that collagen type II may not only be
involved in the sensorineural deafness that accompanies hereditary
disorders such as spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita and Stickler
syndrome but may also be the target of an autoimmune process in some
cases of acquired bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing loss.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the COL2A1
gene and myopia, see MYP3 (603221).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Liberfarb et al. (2003) performed genotype/phenotype correlations in 47
affected members from 10 families with 7 defined mutations in the COL2A1
gene based on review of medical records and clinical evaluation of 25
additional family members from 6 of the 10 families. The ages ranged
from 2 to 73 years with a mean age of 34.7 years. The classic Stickler
phenotype was expressed clinically in all 10 Stickler families with
COL2A1 mutations and all had evidence of vitreous degeneration type 1.
Myopia was present in 41 of 47 family members. There was considerable
interfamilial and intrafamilial variability in clinical expression. The
prevalence of certain clinical features was a function of age. Liberfarb
et al. (2003) concluded that it is difficult to predict the severity of
the phenotype based on the genotype of COL2A1 mutation.

Nishimura et al. (2005) searched for COL2A1 mutations in 56 families
suspected of having type II collagenopathies and found 38 mutations in
41 families. There were no radiologic differences between the cases with
and those without mutations. Phenotypes for all 22 missense mutations
and 1 in-frame deletion in the triple helical region fell along the SED
spectrum. Glycine-to-serine substitutions resulted in alternating zones
that produced more severe and milder phenotypes; glycine-to-nonserine
residue substitutions exclusively created more severe phenotypes. The
gradient of the SED spectrum did not necessarily correlate with the
occurrence of extraskeletal manifestations. All 9 truncation or splice
site mutations in the triple helical or N-propeptide region caused
either Stickler syndrome type I or Kniest dysplasia (156550), and
extraskeletal changes were consistently present in both phenotypes. All
6 C-propeptide mutations produced a range of atypical skeletal
phenotypes and created ocular, but not otolaryngologic, changes.

Hoornaert et al. (2006) noted that the majority of COL2A1 mutations are
substitutions of obligatory glycine residues in the triple helical
domain; of the few nonglycine missense mutations that have been
reported, arginine-to-cysteine substitutions predominate. Hoornaert et
al. (2006) investigated the clinical and radiologic phenotype in 11
patients in whom they had identified arg-to-cys mutations in the COL2A1
gene. Each mutation resulted in a rather constant and site-specific
phenotype, but a perinatally lethal disorder was never observed.
Spondyloarthropathy with normal stature and no ocular involvement were
features of patients with the R75C (120140.0018), R519C (120140.0003),
or R1076C mutation. Short third and fourth toes were a distinguishing
feature of the R75C mutation, and brachydactyly with enlarged finger
joints was a key feature of the R1076C substitution. Stickler dysplasia
with brachydactyly was observed in patients with the R704C (120140.0029)
mutation. The R365C (120140.0033) and R789C (120140.0016) mutations
resulted in classic Stickler dysplasia and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita, respectively.

- Reviews

Kuivaniemi et al. (1997) tabulated all reported disease-producing
mutations in the COL2A1 gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Vandenberg et al. (1991) found that transgenic mice carrying a partially
deleted human COL2A1 gene developed the phenotype of a chondrodysplasia
with dwarfism, short and thick limbs, short snout, cranial bulge, cleft
palate, and delayed mineralization of bone. In cultured chondrocytes
from transgenic mice, the minigene was expressed as shortened
pro-alpha-1(II) chains that were disulfide-linked to normal mouse type
II collagen chains. Therefore, the phenotype was probably explained by
depletion of endogenous mouse type II procollagen through the phenomenon
of procollagen suicide. Garofalo et al. (1991) generated transgenic mice
harboring a glycine-to-cysteine mutation at residue 85 of the triple
helical domain of mouse type II collagen. Offspring displayed severe
chondrodysplasia with short limbs and trunk, craniofacial deformities,
and cleft palate. Affected pups died of acute respiratory distress
caused by inability to inflate the lungs at birth. Electron microscopic
analysis showed a pronounced decrease in the number of typical thin
cartilage collagen fibrils, distention of the rough endoplasmic
reticulum of chondrocytes, and the presence of abnormally large banded
collagen fibril bundles. Garofalo et al. (1991) postulated that the
abnormally thick collagen bundles were related to a defect in
crosslinking. They pointed out similarities to the chondrodysplasias of
the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia group.

Li et al. (1995) used homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells
to prepare transgenic mice with an inactivated COL2A1 gene. Heterozygous
mice had minimal phenotypic changes. Homozygous mice were delivered
vaginally but died either just before or shortly after birth. In these
mice the cartilage consisted of highly disorganized chondrocytes with a
complete lack of extracellular fibrils discernible by electron
microscopy. There was no endochondral bone or epiphyseal growth plate in
long bones; however, many skeletal structures such as the cranium and
ribs were normally developed and mineralized. Li et al. (1995) concluded
that a well-organized cartilage matrix is required as a primary tissue
for development of some components of the skeleton but is not essential
for others.

Gaiser et al. (2002) constructed a transgenic mouse model of SED
congenita using a type II collagen transgene with an arg789-to-cys
change (R789C; 120140.0016) in combination with a murine Col2a1 promoter
directing the gene expression to cartilage. Mice carrying the transgene
were shorter overall, had shorter limbs with disorganized growth plates,
a short nose, cleft palate, and died at birth. Using cell culture
experiments and molecular modeling, Gaiser et al. (2002) suggested that
this Y-position mutation acts in a dominant-negative way, resulting in
destabilization of collagen molecules during assembly, reduction in the
number of fibrils formed, and abnormal cartilage template function.
Donahue et al. (2003) identified a naturally occurring arg1147-to-cys
mutation in the Col2a1 gene in the mouse which resulted in recessive SED
congenita with a less severe phenotype, as indicated by the fact that
the mice survived to adulthood and reproduced normally.

HISTORY

The following is an account of a temporarily confusing aspect of the
collagen II gene. Weiss et al. (1982) described a collagen gene isolated
in a 40-kb cosmid clone, cosHco11, which has some sequence homology to
the alpha-1(I) gene, but which is clearly a different gene. Using this
collagen alpha-1(I)-like probe on Southern blots of DNA from somatic
cell hybrids, Solomon et al. (1984) found that the gene segregated with
chromosome 12 and is not syntenic with the alpha-2(I) gene assigned to
chromosome 7 (120160) or the alpha-1(I) gene assigned to chromosome 17
(120150). This gene contains an RFLP with HindIII. A 300-basepair
deletion in the alpha-1(I)-like gene mapped by Solomon et al. (1984) was
demonstrated by Pope et al. (1984) in a father and son with one form of
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome II (EDS II; 130010). The deletion was found at or
near the 3-prime end of the gene and was not identified in other cases
of EDS II or in 400 normal controls. It was found, however, in 4 babies
with lethal osteogenesis imperfecta congenita. The father and son with
EDS II and the deletion showed altered collagen fibril size and shape.
Subsequently, the 'alpha-1(I)-like' gene was shown to encode the alpha
subunit of cartilage collagen and it was further shown that there is a
polymorphism in this gene that is frequent in Asiatic Indians (Sykes et
al., 1985). Of the 4 cases of Pope et al. (1984), 3 originated from
India or Sri Lanka. This experience illustrates the hazards of confusing
polymorphism with pathology.

Meulenbelt et al. (1996) determined the allele frequencies and pairwise
linkage disequilibria of RFLPs distributed over the COL2A1 gene in a
population of unrelated Dutch Caucasians. Their data indicated that
disease-related population studies should include a minimum of 4 RFLPs.

Strom (1984) purported to find abnormality of the type II collagen gene
in achondroplasia. If such a defect were present, one would expect
ocular abnormality in achondroplasia inasmuch as type II collagen is
present in vitreous. SED congenita is a more plausible candidate for a
structural defect of type II collagen because it is a dominant disorder
that combines skeletal dysplasia with vitreous degeneration and deafness
(experimental studies with antibodies to type II collagen indicate that
this collagen type is represented in the inner ear; Yoo et al., 1983).
The work of Strom (1984) may be technically flawed.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, 390-BP DEL

In a patient with autosomal dominant spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita (183900), Lee et al. (1989) demonstrated a heterozygous
in-frame deletion of exon 48 of the COL2A1 gene, which encodes amino
acid residues 964-999 of the triple helical of domain of the protein.

.0002
HYPOCHONDROGENESIS
COL2A1, GLY943SER

In a patient described by Godfrey and Hollister (1988) with 'a
relatively mild case of type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis' (see
200610), Vissing et al. (1989) demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-A
transition in exon 46 of the COL2A1 gene that converted glycine-943 to
serine (G943S). The substitution disrupted the invariant Gly-X-Y
structural motif necessary for perfect helix formation and led to an
excessive overmodification, intracellular retention, and reduced
secretion of type II collagen.

.0003
OSTEOARTHRITIS WITH MILD CHONDRODYSPLASIA
OSTEOARTHRITIS WITH MILD SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, INCLUDED
COL2A1, ARG519CYS

In the kindred described by Knowlton et al. (1990) with osteoarthritis
associated with mild chondrodysplasia (604864), Ala-Kokko et al. (1990)
found a change from arginine to cysteine at position 519 of the
alpha-1(II) chain. In an affected family member who underwent hip
surgery, Eyre et al. (1991) demonstrated that approximately one-fourth
of the alpha-1(II) chains present in the polymeric extracellular
collagen of the patient's cartilage contained the arg519-to-cys
substitution. The protein exhibited other abnormal properties including
disulfide-bonded alpha-1(II) dimers and signs of posttranslational
overmodification. Holderbaum et al. (1993) referred to 2 further
families with the arg519-to-cys mutation. They reported studies
suggesting that the mutation arose independently in at least 2 of the 3
known affected families. Williams et al. (1995) found the same mutation
in a fourth family with early-onset osteoarthritis and late-onset
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.

Bleasel et al. (1998) reported that the arg519-to-cys mutation in COL2A1
had been identified in 5 families with mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
(see 183900) and precocious osteoarthritis. Haplotype analysis
identified 3 distinct mutation-bearing haplotypes, with 3 families
sharing a common haplotype. For the 3 distinct haplotypes to have
derived from a single founder, 3 independent recombination events were
required. Thus, the arg519 codon appears to represent a possible site of
recurrent mutations in COL2A1, an uncommon phenomenon in collagen genes.

.0004
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, 45-BP DUP, EX48

In a sporadic case of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (183900), Tiller et
al. (1990) found an internal tandem duplication of 45 basepairs within
exon 48 of COL2A1, resulting in the addition of 15 amino acids to the
triple-helical domain of the protein. The abnormal molecule showed
excessive posttranslational modification. The mutation was not carried
by either parent, indicating a new dominant mutation. DNA sequence
homology in the area of the duplication suggested that the mutation may
have arisen by unequal crossover between related sequences.

.0005
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, ARG732TER

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300), Ahmad et al. (1990, 1991)
found a single base mutation altering the arginine at amino acid 732 of
the triple helical domain of COL2A1 to a stop codon. The mutation
altered a CG dinucleotide and converted the codon CGA to TGA. This
mutation was located in exon 40. Ahmad et al. (1991) noted that the
mutation produced marked changes in the eye, which contains only small
amounts of type II collagen, but had relatively mild effects on the many
cartilaginous structures of the body that are rich in the same protein.

.0006
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, NAMAQUALAND TYPE
COL2A1

Beighton et al. (1984) concluded that the skeletal disorder they
identified in 45 persons in 5 generations of a kindred of mixed ancestry
in Namaqualand, South Africa, represented a distinct entity. Discomfort
in the hips develops in childhood and the course is progressive, with
handicap in middle age. General health is good, height is not
significantly reduced, and no extraskeletal involvement has been
identified. The major changes are in the femoral capital epiphyses,
which are flattened and fragmented; secondary degenerative arthropathy
develops at a later stage. Platyspondyly of variable but mild degree is
present in about 60% of affected persons. Other minor changes, including
iliac exostoses, are present in some. The pedigree findings indicate
autosomal dominant inheritance. Learmonth et al. (1987) pointed out that
the maximal changes in the femoral capital epiphyses lead to severe
progressive degenerative osteoarthropathy of the hip joint that
frequently necessitates prosthetic joint replacement in adulthood. Sher
et al. (1991) showed by linkage studies that NSED and the COL2A1 gene
are closely linked with no recombination (lod = 7.98).

.0007
HYPOCHONDROGENESIS
COL2A1, GLY574SER

In a case of hypochondrogenesis (see 200610), Horton et al. (1992)
detected a subtle mutation in the COL2A1 gene by use of a chondrocyte
culture system and PCR-cDNA scanning analysis. Chondrocytes obtained
from cartilage biopsies were dedifferentiated and expanded in monolayer
culture and then redifferentiated by culture over agarose. Single-strand
conformation polymorphism and direct sequencing analysis identified a
G-to-A transition, resulting in substitution of glycine by serine at
amino acid 574 in the triple-helical domain of type II procollagen. The
morphologic assessment of cartilage-like structures produced in culture
and electrophoretic analysis of collagens synthesized by the cultured
chondrocytes suggested that the glycine substitution interfered with
conversion of type II procollagen to collagen, impaired intracellular
transport and secretion of the molecule, and disrupted collagen fibril
assembly.

.0008
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, EX40

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300), Brown et al. (1992) found
that 4 affected members had deletion of a single basepair resulting in a
translational frameshift in exon 40 of the COL2A1 gene. The mutation was
not found in any of 5 clinically unaffected family members or in any of
15 unrelated control patients. All affected members had abnormal
vitreous syneresis and all had retinal perivascular pigmentation.
Retinal detachments occurred in 3 of the 4 affected patients. Three of
the 4 had peripheral cortical 'wedge' cataracts, and the fourth had
extensive nuclear sclerosis. In all 4 affected patients, there were
abnormalities of the palate: bilateral torus palatini, linea alba with
submucous cleft palate, bifid uvula, and 'notched' hard palate. All
patients reported severe joint pains, and radiologic changes suggesting
epiphyseal dysplasia were found in all 4. One patient had had left total
hip replacement at a relatively young age. Palatal and ocular changes
were illustrated by photographs, and radiographs of the skeletal changes
were presented. The deletion was reported to involve a thymidine
nucleotide at position 18 of exon 40. This resulted in a translational
frameshift, with formation of a nonsense codon, TGA, downstream in exon
42, leading to premature termination of translation at that point. The
deletion also created a new MspI restriction site.

.0009
HYPOCHONDROGENESIS
COL2A1, GLY853GLU

In an infant with a severe form of skeletal dysplasia who required
continuous respiratory support until his death at 3 months of age,
Bogaert et al. (1992) demonstrated a gly853-to-glu mutation resulting
from a GGA-to-GAA transition in the COL2A1 gene. The patient was
heterozygous. The radiologic features were thought to be those of
hypochondrogenesis (see 200610). Unilateral polydactyly had been noted
at birth.

.0010
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, ARG9TER

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300), Ahmad et al. (1993) found a
single-base mutation that converted codon 9 of the COL2A1 gene. (The
amino acids of the alpha-1 chain were numbered with the standard
convention in which the first amino acid in the triple-helical domain is
numbered as +1 (Baldwin et al., 1989).) The mutation changed a CGA codon
(arginine) to TGA (stop) codon. This mutation was located in exon 7. The
PCR products contained both C and T, indicating that the patient was
heterozygous for the mutation. The proband had been identified in a
cleft palate clinic at the age of 1 year. He had severe myopia and was
at the eighth percentile for height. Pelvic x-rays demonstrated small
femoral heads with dumbbell-shaped enlargements of both ends of the
femurs. Members in 3 generations and 4 sibships had severe myopia, often
with other ocular manifestations.

.0011
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, GLY997SER

Cole et al. (1993) found that a child with SED congenita (183900) was
heterozygous for a G-to-A transition in exon 48 of the COL2A1 gene that
resulted in the substitution of glycine-997 by serine in the triple
helical domain of the type II collagen chain.

.0012
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 28-BP DEL

Winterpacht et al. (1993) demonstrated a 28-bp deletion spanning the
3-prime exon/intron boundary of exon 12 in a 2-year-old girl with Kniest
dysplasia (156550). The mother presented with a milder phenotype
consistent with the Stickler syndrome. She was shown to have mosaicism
for the same deletion.

Wilkin et al. (1999) found this same mutation occurring at the junction
between exon 12 and intron 12 of the COL2A1 gene in a patient with
Kniest syndrome. The mutation deleted the splice donor site and was
predicted to result in exon skipping in the mRNA encoded from the mutant
allele. The female patient reported by Wilkin et al. (1999), their
patient 4, had previously been reported by Siggers (1974) and Siggers et
al. (1974), and by Maumenee and Traboulsi (1985). The diagnosis of
Kniest dysplasia had been made at the age of 10.5 years. At that time,
her height was 110.5 cm (height age 4 10/12 years). She had a flat and
round face, prominent eyes with high myopia, flat bridge of the nose,
with broad and prominent forehead, and a cleft uvula. Radiographs
demonstrated severe platyspondyly, with greatest involvement of the
dorsal spine. The superior and inferior endplates of the vertebral
bodies were quite irregular, with spotted mineralization. There was
considerable middorsal kyphosis and lumbar lordosis, as well as moderate
scoliosis. The anterior-posterior diameters of the vertebral bodies
appeared relatively wide, as did the interpedicular spaces. The limbs
and hands had short bones, with shafts of normal to slightly diminished
diameter, and greatly flared metaphyses and epiphyses. Ossification of
the epiphyses was irregular and spotty, with some of the cartilaginous
epiphyseal plates relatively wide, particularly at the distal radius and
ulna. Wilkin et al. (1999) pointed out that the deletion in this case
began with 7 nucleotides in exon 12 that duplicated 7 nucleotides (+3
through +9) of intron 12, creating the basis for homologous
recombination with unequal crossing-over leading to deletion.

.0013
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY154ARG

In a 16-year-old Finnish boy with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia
(184250), Vikkula et al. (1993) demonstrated a 1063G-A transition in
exon 14 of the COL1A2 gene, which resulted in the conversion of gly154
to arg (G154R). This was a heterozygous de novo mutation which was not
found in any other skeletal dysplasia patient studied in Finland.

Kaitila et al. (1996) found the same de novo heterozygous G154R mutation
in an unrelated 26-year-old Finnish woman with spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia and provided follow-up on the patient reported by Vikkula et
al. (1993). Both patients had been followed since the newborn period at
Helsinki University Children's Hospital. The clinical phenotype was
disproportionate short stature with varus/valgus deformities of the
lower limbs requiring corrective osteotomies, and lumbar lordosis. The
skeletal radiographs showed an evolution from short tubular bones,
delayed epiphyseal development, and mild vertebral involvement to severe
metaphyseal dysplasia with dappling irregularities, and hip 'dysplasia.'
The metaphyseal abnormalities disappeared by adulthood.

.0014
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, GLY67ASP

Korkko et al. (1993) identified a substitution of aspartate for glycine
at position 67 in the alpha-1 chain of type II collagen in a family in
which affected members had early-onset cataracts, lattice degeneration
of the retina, and retinal detachment without involvement of nonocular
tissues. Comparison with previously reported mutations suggested to
Korkko et al. (1993) that premature termination codons in the COL2A1
gene are a frequent cause of Stickler syndrome, but mutations in the
COL2A1 gene that replace glycine codons with codons for a bulkier amino
acid can produce a broad spectrum of disorders ranging from lethal
chondrodysplasia to a syndrome involving only ocular tissues. Korkko et
al. (1993) noted phenotypic similarity to the family described by Wagner
(1938) (see 143200). Richards et al. (2006) suggested that the disorder
in this family was more likely to be a predominantly ocular form of
Stickler syndrome type I (see 609508).

.0015
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, PRO846TER

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300) in members of 4 successive
generations, Ritvaniemi et al. (1993) found a deletion of a T in the
third base position of the codon CCT for proline at position 846 of the
collagen II alpha-1 chain. The deletion of the T shifted the reading
frame and generated premature termination. Ritvaniemi et al. (1993)
stated that this was the fourth example of a premature termination codon
causing Stickler syndrome.

.0016
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, ARG789CYS

In a 4-year-old girl with clinical and radiographic features typical of
SED congenita (183900), Chan et al. (1993) found heterozygosity for a
2913C-T transition in exon 14, resulting in an arg789-to-cys (R789C)
substitution. The mutation resulted in the loss of an MaeII cleavage
site that was used to confirm the fact that the proband was heterozygous
and that neither parent had the mutation. Type II collagen extracted
from cartilage and from cultured chondrocytes was approximately
one-third of the mutant type and secretion of molecules containing
mutant chains was impaired. The thermal stability of the collagen
extracted from cartilage was normal, however.

In a patient with SED congenita, Chan et al. (1995) identified the R789C
mutation. The substitution of a cysteine for an arginine in the Y
position of the gly-X-Y triplet is noteworthy because cysteine is not
normally found in the triple-helical domain of type II collagen in any
species (Kuivaniemi et al., 1997). A cysteine at this position provides
the opportunity for disulfide bonds to form, thus disrupting the
formation of collagen fibrils. Two other arg-to-cys mutations have been
described in the COL2A1 gene: R519C (120140.0003), resulting in
osteoarthritis with mild chondrodysplasia (604864), and R75C
(120140.0018), resulting in spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with precocious
osteoarthritis (609162).

.0017
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY709CYS

Tiller et al. (1993, 1995) demonstrated that cartilage from 3 patients
with SEMD Strudwick (184250) contained both normal alpha-1(II) collagen
chains and chains that were posttranslationally overmodified. Cyanogen
bromide peptide analysis and protein microsequencing of type II collagen
from 1 patient demonstrated an amino acid substitution, gly709-to-cys,
in the abnormal alpha chains. Direct DNA sequencing showed
heterozygosity for a GGC-to-TGC transversion at the last glycine codon
of exon 39.

.0018
CZECH DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, ARG75CYS

This mutation has also been designated arg275-to-cys (R275C) based on a
different numbering system.

In a family living in the Chiloe Islands, Chile, Williams et al. (1993)
demonstrated a heterozygous arg75-to-cys (R75C) mutation in the COL2A1
gene as the basis of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with shortened
metacarpals and metatarsals, precocious osteoarthritis, and
periarticular apatite-like calcific deposits. Seven individuals were
involved in 3 generations of the family. Complete physical examination,
anthropometric measurements, and radiographic studies of the spine and
peripheral joints in 16 family members revealed that 7 had
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda, brachydactyly, precocious
osteoarthritis, and periarticular calcification, while 2 others had the
same syndrome without brachydactyly (Reginato et al., 1994). The
relationship of this type of SEDT to familial calcium pyrophosphate
dihydrate deposition disease (118600) and idiopathic hip dysplasia, both
endemic in Chiloe Islanders, required further investigation.

Hoornaert et al. (2007) performed targeted sequencing of exon 13 of the
COL2A1 gene in patients with Czech dysplasia (609162) because of
phenotypic similarities between individuals with this dysplasia and
patients with the R75C mutation. They identified heterozygosity for the
R75C mutation in 5 patients with Czech dysplasia, including 2 of the 4
original patients described with this disorder. All affected individuals
had normal height, spondyloarthropathy, and short postaxial toes.

In an affected father, daughter, and son from a Japanese family with
Czech dysplasia, Matsui et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for the
R275C mutation in the COL2A1 gene. The mutation was not found in the
unaffected mother. The authors stated that this was the first reported
family with Czech dysplasia that was not of European ancestry, and
family history was consistent with de novo occurrence of the disease in
the father.

.0019
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, IVS20, A-G, -2

Winterpacht et al. (1994) investigated the molecular defect in a girl
with Kniest dysplasia (156550) whose father had a very mild form of
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) with premature
osteoarthrosis. The father was found to be a mosaic for a mutation that
was present in nonmosaic state in the child: an A-to-G transition at the
3-prime end of intron 20 affecting the highly conserved AG dinucleotide
of the acceptor splice site. The result was the utilization of a cryptic
AG splice site located 18-bp downstream and a resulting in-frame
deletion of 18 bp from the mRNA. This situation has similarities to that
described in 120140.0012.

.0020
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, GLY103ASP

Wilkin et al. (1994) used SSCP to analyze an amplified genomic DNA
fragment containing exon 12, under suspicion because of its deletion in
a previously reported patient (120140.0012), from 7 individuals with
Kniest dysplasia (156550). An abnormality was identified in 1 patient
who was found on DNA sequence analysis to be heterozygous for a G-to-A
transition that implied substitution of glycine-103 of the triple
helical domain by aspartate. The mutation was not observed in DNA from
either of the clinically unaffected parents. Protein microsequencing
demonstrated expression of the abnormal allele in cartilage.

.0021
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY769SER

In a fetus with type II achondrogenesis (200610), Chan et al. (1995)
described heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2853 in
exon 441 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a gly769-to-ser substitution
within the triple helical domain of the type II collagen chain. The
result was complete absence of type II collagen in cartilage, which had
a gelatinous composition. Types I and III collagens were the main
species found in cartilage and synthesized by cultured chondrocytes
along with cartilage type XI collagen (120280). Cultured chondrocytes
produced a trace amount of type II collagen that was retained within the
cells and not secreted. In situ hybridization of cartilage sections
showed that the chondrocytes produced both type I and type II collagen
mRNA. Chan et al. (1995) noted that the gly769 substitution is situated
close to the mammalian collagenase cleavage site at gly775/leu776. The
abnormality was detected by ultrasonography at 19 weeks of gestation
when severe shortening of the limbs and trunk and marked edema around
the neck was noted. The pregnancy was terminated at 20 weeks of
gestation. External examination showed very short limbs, large head,
short trunk, bulging abdomen, and edema of the head and neck.
Radiographs, which were presented by Chan et al. (1995), showed very
short tubular bones with metaphyseal expansion and cupping, absent
ossification of the vertebrae and sacrum, small iliac wings with absent
ossification of the pubis and ischium, and short ribs, but relatively
normal ossification of the calvarium.

.0022
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY691ARG

Mortier et al. (1995) examined a male fetus by ultrasound during the
third trimester and observed polyhydramnios and severe short-limb
dwarfism. The parents elected to induce delivery at 31 weeks of
gestation and the neonate, who had achondrogenesis type II (200610) died
soon after birth. There was severe shortening of the limbs and chest
with distention of the abdomen. The head was relatively large and the
neck appeared short. Radiographs showed absence of ossification of all
the vertebral bodies. The chest appeared bell-shaped with mild
shortening of the ribs. Anterior and posterior ends of the ribs were
flared and cupped. The width of the iliac wings was increased and the
greater sciatic notch was wide. The ischium and pubis were not ossified.
All the long bones were markedly shortened with flared and cupped
metaphyses. Electron microscopy showed inclusion bodies of dilated rough
endoplasmic reticulum in chondrocytes and the presence of sparse
collagen fibers in the cartilage matrix. Protein analysis of collagen
from cartilage indicated posttranslational overmodification of the major
cyanogen bromide peptides and suggested a mutation near the carboxyl
terminus of the type II collagen molecule. Mortier et al. (1995)
referred to reports of 3 other dominant mutations in the COL2A1 gene
resulting in substitutions for triple helical glycine residues near the
carboxy-terminal end of the alpha-1(II) chain and causing
hypochondrogenesis. Mortier et al. (1995) demonstrated a single base
change (G-to-C) that resulted in the substitution of glycine-691 by
arginine in the type II collagen triple helical domain.

.0023
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, EX50

By direct sequencing of the COL2A1 gene, Ahmad et al. (1995)
demonstrated that affected members of a family with Stickler syndrome
(108300) had a single base deletion in exon 50, resulting in a premature
stop codon in exon 51 in the globular C-propeptide of the COL2A1 gene.
The deletion involved a cytosine at position 92 in exon 50. Three
generations were affected in the family. The proband was referred for
cataract and total retinal detachment in 1 eye at the age of 3 years.
Marked genu valgum, hyperextensibility of joints, cleft palate, and
flattened facies were noted. Mild hearing loss was also documented. The
father's left eye had been blind since the age of 8 years secondary to a
detached retina. Retinal detachment on the right occurred at the age of
39 years. He also showed hyperextensibility of joints and some spinal
changes. The proband's paternal uncle suffered detached left retina
after diving into a swimming pool at age 15 years. Hyperextensibility of
joints and loss of hearing in the left ear were noted at the age of 35
years. Hyperextensible joints were present in other relatives and Pierre
Robin syndrome was noted in some.

.0024
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, IVS17, A-G, -2

In the original Minnesota kindred on the basis of which Stickler et al.
(1965) defined the Stickler syndrome (108300), Williams et al. (1996)
identified a splice site mutation in the COL2A1 gene. They used
conformational sensitive gel electrophoresis (SSGE) to screen for
mutations in the entire gene. They noted a prominent heteroduplex in the
PCR product from a region of the gene including exons 17 to 20. Direct
sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic DNA identified an A-to-G transition
at the -2 position at the 3-prime acceptor splice site of IVS17.
Sequencing of DNA from affected and unaffected family members confirmed
that the mutation segregated with the disease phenotype. RT-PCR analysis
of poly(A)+ RNA demonstrated that the mutant allele utilized a cryptic
splice site in exon 18 of the gene, eliminating 16 bp at the start of
exon 18. This frameshift eventually resulted in a premature termination
codon. Williams et al. (1996) stated that this was the first report of a
splice site mutation in classical Stickler syndrome. They provided a
satisfying historical context in which to view COL2A1 mutations in this
disorder.

.0025
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, IVS18, G, +1

Spranger et al. (1997) demonstrated that the original patient reported
by Kniest (1952) had a single base (G) deletion involving the GT
dinucleotide of the start of intron 18 of the COL2A1 gene. From a review
of the molecular defect found in other cases of this disorder, Spranger
et al. (1997) concluded that the condition is caused by small in-frame
deletions often due to exon skipping as a result of COL2A1 splice site
mutations. Spranger et al. (1997) provided a useful follow-up on the
original patient, then 50 years of age. She was severely handicapped
with short stature, restricted joint mobility, and blindness, but was
mentally alert and led an active life. Radiologic findings at the age of
4.5 years and 29 years were presented.

.0026
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, IVS24, G-A, +5

In a neonatal lethal form of Kniest dysplasia (156500), Weis et al.
(1998) found deletion of 18 residues corresponding to exon 24 of the
COL2A1 sequence. Sequence analysis of an amplified genomic DNA fragment
identified a G-to-A transition in the +5 position of the splice donor
consensus sequence of intron 24 in 1 allele. Cartilage matrix analysis
showed that the abnormally short alpha-1(II) chain was present in
collagen molecules that had become cross-linked into fibrils. It
appeared that the normal and the short alpha-chains had combined to form
heterotrimeric molecules in which the chains were in register in both
directions from the deletion site, accommodated effectively by a loop
out of the normal chain exon 24 domain. Such an accommodation, with
potential overall shortening of the helical domain and hence
misalignment of intermolecular relationships within fibrils, offers a
common molecular mechanism by which a group of different mutations might
act to produce the Kniest phenotype. The patient, an infant girl, was
the product of a 37-week gestation and died of respiratory distress at
10 days of age. She had short limbs, clubfeet, cleft palate, midface
hypoplasia, and narrow chest. X-rays showed flattened vertebral bodies
with coronal clefts, slight shortening of the ribs, and dumbbell-shaped
femurs.

.0027
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY304CYS

See 120140.0017. In 2 unrelated patients with SEMD Strudwick (184250),
Tiller et al. (1995) found a gly304-to-cys mutation and a gly292-to-val
mutation in the COL2A1 gene.

.0028
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY292VAL

See 120140.0027 and Tiller et al. (1995).

.0029
EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, WITH MYOPIA AND CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS
COL2A1, ARG704CYS

In an Afrikaner South African family with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
with myopia and conductive deafness (132450), Ballo et al. (1998)
detected a heterozygous C-to-T transversion at nucleotide 2503 in exon
39 of the COL2A1 gene. This resulted in an arg-to-cys substitution at
residue number 704, occurring at the X position of the Gly-X-Y motif of
the collagen triple helix. Myopia and deafness characteristic of
Stickler syndrome (108300) were present, with radiologic findings
consistent with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED). COL2A1 mutations
causing Stickler syndrome have resulted in premature termination codons,
while mutations causing spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia were glycine
alterations or arg-to-cys substitutions at the Y position of the Gly-X-Y
unit. Ballo et al. (1998) stated that this mutation could represent the
first report of a nontermination COL2A1 mutation in Stickler syndrome
type 1, or the first report of a COL2A1 defect in an MED phenotype.

.0030
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 5-BP DUP

Zabel et al. (1996) described a 5-bp duplication in exon 51 of the
COL2A1 gene, leading to a stop codon, in a patient with a distinct
phenotype labeled spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700). The mutation
was present in heterozygous state and the patient was sporadic (new
mutation). The patient, a girl, was born to healthy, nonconsanguineous
parents and was 45 cm at birth. A skeletal dysplasia was suspected
because of rhizomelic shortening of the arms and legs. X-ray findings at
7 months of age suggested SED congenita. At the age of 14 years the
patient was 127.4 cm tall with short, broad fingers and very short toes
II-V. Additional findings were a slightly hypoplastic midface with
depressed nasal bridge, severe myopia, short neck and trunk, accentuated
lumbar lordosis, and limited extension of the elbow joints. Short
metacarpals were impressive in the hand x-rays, and very short toes II-V
were impressive in the photograph of the feet. The 5-bp duplication was
the first to be located at the C-terminal outside the helical domain of
COL2A1. It seemed to affect helix formation and produced changes of
chondrocyte morphology, collagen type II fibril structure, and cartilage
matrix composition.

.0031
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, GLY973ARG

Sobetzko et al. (2000) described a newborn infant with an unusual
combination of syndactylies, macrocephaly, and severe skeletal
dysplasia. A history of digital anomalies in the father and grandfather
led to the diagnosis of dominantly inherited Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
syndrome (GCPS; 175700). Having explained the digital findings and
macrocephaly, the skeletal changes were thought to fit best congenital
SED (183900). Molecular analysis confirmed the presence of 2 dominant
mutations in the infant: a GLI3 mutation (E543X; 165240.0010), which was
present also in the father and grandfather, and a de novo COL2A1
mutation leading to an gly973-to-arg amino acid substitution. Thus, this
boy combined the Greig syndrome with a severe form of SED. The
diagnostic difficulties posed by the combination of 2 genetic disorders
and the usefulness of molecular diagnostics were well illustrated.

.0032
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, IVS25DS, G-A, +1

Freddi et al. (2000) described a novel strategy for screening families
with type I Stickler syndrome (108300) due to nonsense mutations in the
COL2A1 gene, using a modified RNA-based protein truncation test. To
overcome the problem of the unavailability of collagen II-producing
cartilage cells, they performed RT-PCR on the illegitimate transcripts
of accessible cells (lymphoblasts and fibroblasts), which were
preincubated with cycloheximide to prevent nonsense mutation-induced
mRNA decay. The 5 overlapping RT-PCR fragments covering the COL2A1
coding region were then transcribed and translated in vitro to identify
smaller truncated protein products resulting from a premature stop
codon. Using this method, Freddi et al. (2000) screened a 4-generation
family with Stickler syndrome and identified a protein-truncating
mutation that was present in all affected individuals. Targeted
sequencing identified the mutation as a G-to-A transition at the +1
position of the 5-prime splice donor site of intron 25. The mutation led
to the activation of a cryptic splice site 8 bp upstream, causing
aberrant mRNA splicing and a translational frameshift that introduced a
premature stop codon. Mutant mRNA was undetectable without cycloheximide
protection, demonstrating that the mutant mRNA was subjected to
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.

.0033
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, ARG365CYS

Richards et al. (2000) observed a recurrent arg365-to-cys (R365C)
mutation of the COL2A1 gene in 2 unrelated sporadic cases of Stickler
syndrome (108300). The mutation was located in the X position of the
Gly-X-Y triple helical region and resulted in the membranous vitreous
anomaly associated with haploinsufficiency.

.0034
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, LEU467PHE

Richards et al. (2000) observed a leu467-to-phe (L467F) mutation of the
COL2A1 gene in a family with Stickler syndrome (108300) which produced
an unusual 'afibrillar' vitreous gel devoid of all normal lamellar
structure. Systemic involvement was mild, with many family members
lacking joint laxity or radiologic abnormality, hearing loss, midface
hypoplasia, abnormal nasal development, and midline clefting. Richards
et al. (2005) referred to the phenotype in this family as an atypical
form of Stickler syndrome/dominant rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
(609508). They noted that the amino acid substitution arose from a
20996C-T transition.

.0035
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, THR1370MET

Unger et al. (2001) reported a child with double heterozygosity for
pseudoachondroplasia (177170), resulting from a mutation in the COMP
gene (600310.0014) and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (183900),
resulting from a thr1370-to-met mutation in the COL2A1 gene. The child
inherited pseudoachondroplasia from his mother and spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia congenita from his father. He had clinical and radiographic
findings that were more severe than those in either disorder alone.

.0036
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, 2-BP DEL, 4274GT

Gupta et al. (2002) examined a large French-Canadian kindred originally
described by Alexander and Shea (1965) as representing Wagner disease
(143200). In affected individuals, they found a novel frameshift
mutation (4274del2bp) in exon 2 leading to early truncation of the
COL2A1 protein (cys57 to stop; C57X). The mutation arose in an exon that
is selectively present in vitreous collagen mRNAs, but absent in
cartilage mRNAs through tissue-specific alternate splicing. The authors
concluded that the selective absence of exon 2 in cartilage explained
why this family did not manifest the progressive spondyloarthropathy of
Stickler syndrome (108300) that is a more common result of mutations in
COL2A1.

Richards et al. (2006) suggested that the disorder in this family was
more likely to be a predominantly ocular form of Stickler syndrome type
I (see 609508).

.0037
VITREORETINOPATHY WITH PHALANGEAL EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, GLY1105ASP

Richards et al. (2002) described a large family with dominantly
inherited rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, premature arthropathy, and
phalangeal epiphyseal dysplasia resulting in brachydactyly. Linkage to
the COL2A1 gene was demonstrated, and mutation analysis identified a
change at codon 1105 in exon 52 from GGC (gly) to GAC (asp) (G1105D) in
the C-propeptide region of the molecule. The gly-to-asp change occurred
in a region that is highly conserved in all fibrillar collagen
molecules. The resulting phenotype did not fit easily with preexisting
subgroups of the type II collagenopathies.

.0038
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY316ASP

In 2 successive pregnancies of a healthy, nonconsanguineous young
couple, Faivre et al. (2004) observed lethal achondrogenesis type II
(200610). Heterozygosity for a 1340G-A transition in exon 22 of the
COL2A1 gene resulting in a gly316-to-asp (G316D) amino acid substitution
was identified in the second fetus. The mutation was not found in the
parents. Faivre et al. (2004) hypothesized germline mosaicism in 1 of
the parents as the explanation for the recurrence of this autosomal
dominant disorder.

.0039
PLATYSPONDYLIC SKELETAL DYSPLASIA, TORRANCE TYPE
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA, INCLUDED
COL2A1, TYR1391CYS

In a sporadic case of the Torrance type of platyspondylic skeletal
dysplasia (151210) delivered stillborn at 34 weeks' gestation, Nishimura
et al. (2004) identified a de novo heterozygous 4172A-G transition in
exon 53 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a tyr1391-to-cys (Y1391C)
mutation affecting the C-propeptide region of the protein.

Hoornaert et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 4172A-G transition of
the COL2A1 gene in a girl originally diagnosed with Czech dysplasia
(case III of Kozlowski et al., 2004). The patient had significant
disproportionate short stature (-4.55 standard deviation at age 14) and
short toes. Hoornaert et al. (2007) suggested that this patient has
spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700).

.0040
PLATYSPONDYLIC SKELETAL DYSPLASIA, TORRANCE TYPE
COL2A1, 4-BP DEL, 4413AGGG

In a sporadic case of the Torrance type of platyspondylic skeletal
dysplasia (151210), Nishimura et al. (2004) identified a de novo 4-bp
deletion in exon 54 of the COL2A1 gene, 4413delAGGG, resulting in a
frameshift with a premature stop at codon 1480. The phenotype, as
indicated by radiologic manifestations during the neonatal period,
evolved into that of Kniest-like dysplasia (see 156550) in childhood;
the patient, 5 years of age at the time of report, survived respiratory
problems in infancy.

.0041
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, 4337G

In 2 patients with spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700), Zankl et al.
(2004) identified mutations in the COL2A1 gene. The first patient had a
heterozygous 1-bp deletion at nucleotide 4337 in exon 52, resulting in a
frameshift at codon 1446 and a premature stop codon 25 amino acids
downstream. The second patient had a truncating mutation in exon 51 (see
120140.0042). Neither mutation was present in the patients' parents or
in 100 control chromosomes. Both patients had clubfeet, midface
hypoplasia, early-onset high grade myopia, platyspondyly, epiphyseal
dysplasia, and brachydactyly E-like changes developing in childhood. The
authors noted that the phenotype was remarkably similar to that
described by Zabel et al. (1996) (see 120140.0030).

.0042
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, CYS1438TER

In a patient with spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700), Zankl et al.
(2004) identified a heterozygous 4314C-A transversion in exon 51 of the
COL2A1 gene, resulting in a cys1438-to-ter (C1438X) substitution. See
120140.0041.

.0043
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD, PRIMARY
LEGG-CALVE-PERTHES DISEASE, INCLUDED
COL2A1, GLY1170SER

In 2 families with autosomal dominant avascular necrosis of the femoral
head (608805), Liu et al. (2005) identified a G-to-A transition in exon
50 of the COL2A1 gene, predicted to lead to the replacement of glycine
with serine at codon 1170 (G1170S) in a Gly-X-Y repeat of type II
collagen. The mutant allele occurred on a different haplotype background
in each of the 2 families.

Miyamoto et al. (2007) identified the same heterozygous 3508G-A mutation
in affected members of a Japanese family with an autosomal dominant
disorder manifesting as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (150600).

.0044
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD, PRIMARY
COL2A1, GLY717SER

In a family with autosomal dominant avascular necrosis of the femoral
head (608805), Liu et al. (2005) identified a G-to-A transition in exon
33 of the COL2A1 gene, causing a glycine-to-serine change at codon 717
(G717S).

.0045
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
RHEGMATOGENOUS RETINAL DETACHMENT, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
COL2A1, ARG453TER

In a patient with sporadic Stickler syndrome (108300), Wilkin et al.
(2000) identified a C-to-T transition in the COL2A1 gene, resulting in
an arg453-to-ter (R453X) substitution. The patient had cleft palate,
sensorineural hearing loss, joint laxity, high myopia, vitreoretinal
degeneration, and retinal breaks and detachments.

In affected members of a family with no systemic characteristics of
Stickler syndrome but dominantly inherited rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment or retinal tears (609508), Go et al. (2003) identified the
R453X mutation, which they noted was in exon 30 (Wilkin et al. (2000)
had placed the mutation in exon 28). They noted that previously reported
predominantly ocular Stickler syndrome cases had been associated with
protein-truncating mutations in exon 2, an exon subject to alternative
splicing.

.0046
RHEGMATOGENOUS RETINAL DETACHMENT, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL2A1, GLY118ARG

In affected members of a family with dominantly inherited rhegmatogenous
retinal detachment (609508) and no systemic clinical signs (skeletal,
orofacial, or auditory) usually associated with Stickler syndrome
(108300), Richards et al. (2005) identified a 10838G-A transition in
exon 15 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a gly118-to-arg (G118R)
substitution.

.0047
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, ARG792GLY

In monozygotic twin girls with SEMD Strudwick (184250), Sulko et al.
(2005) identified heterozygosity for a 79A-G transition in exon 41 of
the COL2A1 gene, resulting in an arg792-to-gly (R792G) substitution. The
mutation was not detected in the unaffected parents or in 90 controls.

.0048
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, IVS10AS, A-G, -2

In a 22-year-old Japanese female with otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED; 215150), Miyamoto et al. (2005) identified a novel
COL2A1 mutation at a splice acceptor site within intron 10 (709-2A-G).
This mutation caused a skipping of exon 11, and of exons 11 and 13.
These exon-skipping events were presumed to cause an in-frame deletion
of the triple helical region of the COL2A1 product. Mutations in the
COL11A2 gene (120290) had been reported as a cause for OSMED. The report
confirmed the overlap between type II and type XI collagenopathies.

.0049
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, IVS51DS, T-C, +2

In a family with the predominantly ocular form of type I Stickler
syndrome (609508), Richards et al. (2006) found that the donor splice
site of intron 51 showed a change from GT to GC. Using splicing reporter
constructs, they demonstrated that normal transcripts could be produced
from this mutant allele. Some GC donor splice sites exist naturally in
the human genome (Thanaraj and Clark, 2001). Whether there is a
difference in the efficiency of normal splicing from the mutant GC
allele between cartilage and ocular tissue was unknown. However,
Richards et al. (2006) observed that not all cells transfected with the
mutant minigene were capable of normal processing of the mutant mRNA, so
tissue-specific missplicing may be one explanation for the predominantly
ocular phenotype in this family. An alternative explanation is that
vitreous development (which is rapid, with the secondary vitreous
complete by 12 weeks' gestation) is more susceptible to a reduction in
the level of type II collagen than is cartilage development, in which
the extracellular matrix has longer to develop.

.0050
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, TRP47TER

In a family with the predominantly ocular form of Stickler syndrome type
I (609508), Richards et al. (2006) found a nonsense mutation, trp47 to
ter (W47X), resulting from a 141G-A transition in exon 2 of the COL2A1
gene. They observed 2 other examples of predominantly ocular Stickler
syndrome due to mutations in the alternatively spliced exon 2. One other
mutation causing this phenotype was located at the donor splice site of
IVS51 (120140.0049).

.0051
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, CYS64TER

In 2 unrelated patients with nonsyndromic ocular Stickler syndrome
(609508), McAlinden et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 192C-A
transversion in exon 2 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a cys64-to-ter
(C64X) substitution. In vitro studies using a minigene construct
indicated that the C64X, C57Y (120140.0052), and W47X (120140.0050)
mutations resulted in a splicing pattern change and a decreased ratio of
IIA:IIB mRNA. The findings suggested that the mutations were present in
functional cis regulatory elements in exon 2 that are important in
regulating the mechanism of alternative splicing of this exon. McAlinden
et al. (2008) postulated that the mutations did not result in
nonsense-mediated decay and haploinsufficiency, but rather an altered
mRNA splice ratio with effects limited to the eye. Absence of an
extraocular phenotype in Stickler syndrome patients with mutations in
exon 2 of COL2A1 may be due to sufficient production of isoform IIB by
nonsense-mediated altered splicing. Since isoform IIA is expressed in
adult ocular vitreous, the ocular phenotype may be due to inadequate
amounts of isoform IIA in the mature eye.

.0052
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, CYS57TYR

In a patient with nonsyndromic ocular Stickler syndrome (609508),
McAlinden et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 170G-A transition in
exon 2 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a cys57-to-tyr (C57Y)
substitution.

.0053
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY346VAL

In 3 fetuses with lethal achondrogenesis type II (200610) born to a
healthy, nonconsanguineous young couple, Forzano et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a 1037G-T transversion in exon 3 of the
COL2A1 gene resulting in a gly346-to-val (G346V) substitution. An
earlier born fetus had also had achondrogenesis type II. The father's
blood DNA harbored a low mutation signal consistent with mosaicism.
Additional DNA analyses of the father's fibroblasts, hair roots, buccal
smear, and urine revealed weak mosaicism in all tissues. Forzano et al.
(2007) stated that this was the first case of proven somatic mosaicism
for a COL2A1 mutation that led to a lethal skeletal dysplasia in 4
offspring.

.0054
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD, PRIMARY
COL2A1, THR1383MET

In a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed with avascular necrosis of the
femoral head (608805) at 18 years of age, Kannu et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a 4148C-T transition in exon 51 of the COL2A1 gene,
resulting in a thr1383-to-met (T1383M) substitution within the highly
conserved C-propeptide region. The mutation was not found in unaffected
family members or 150 age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched controls. The
patient had a normal skeletal survey, other than bilateral hip
degeneration; he had no facial dysmorphism, and ophthalmologic and
audiologic examinations were normal.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Eng and Strom (1985); Huerre-Jeanpierre et al. (1985); Kelly et al.
(1977); Law et al. (1985); Nunez et al. (1985); Sangiorgi et al. (1985);
Sorge et al. (1995); Stoker et al. (1985); Strom et al. (1984); Sybert
et al. (1979); Sykes et al. (1985); Takahashi et al. (1990); Vanek
(1983); Yoo et al. (1983); Young et al. (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Ahmad, N. N.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Knowlton, R. G.; Jimenez, S. A.; Weaver,
E. J.; Maguire, J. I.; Tasman, W.; Prockop, D. J.: Stop codon in
the procollagen II gene (COL2A1) in a family with the Stickler syndrome
(arthro-ophthalmopathy). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 6624-6627, 1991.

2. Ahmad, N. N.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Knowlton, R. G.; Weaver, E. J.; Maguire,
J. I.; Tasman, W.; Prockop, D. J.: A stop codon in the gene for type
II procollagen (COL2A1) causes one variant of arthro-ophthalmopathy
(the Stickler syndrome). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47 (suppl.):
A206 only, 1990.

3. Ahmad, N. N.; Dimascio, J.; Knowlton, R. G.; Tasman, W. S.: Stickler
syndrome: a mutation in the nonhelical 3-prime end of type II procollagen
gene. Arch. Ophthal. 113: 1454-1457, 1995.

4. Ahmad, N. N.; McDonald-McGinn, D. M.; Zackai, E. H.; Knowlton,
R. G.; LaRossa, D.; DiMascio, J.; Prockop, D. J.: A second mutation
in the type II procollagen gene (COL2A1) causing Stickler syndrome
(arthro-ophthalmopathy) is also a premature termination codon. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 52: 39-45, 1993.

5. Ala-Kokko, L.; Baldwin, C. T.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Prockop, D. J.
: Single base mutation in the type II procollagen gene (COL2A1) as
a cause of primary osteoarthritis associated with a mild chondrodysplasia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 6565-6568, 1990.

6. Alexander, R. L.; Shea, M.: Wagner's disease. Arch. Ophthal. 74:
310-318, 1965.

7. Baldwin, C. T.; Reginato, A. M.; Smith, C.; Jimenez, S. A.; Prockop,
D. J.: Structure of cDNA clones coding for human type II procollagen:
the alpha-1(II) chain is more similar to the alpha-1(I) chain than
two other alpha chains of fibrillar collagens. Biochem. J. 262:
521-528, 1989.

8. Ballo, R.; Beighton, P. H.; Ramesar, R. S.: Stickler-like syndrome
due to a dominant negative mutation in the COL2A1 gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 80: 6-11, 1998.

9. Beighton, P.; Christy, G.; Learmonth, I. D.: Namaqualand hip dysplasia:
an autosomal dominant entity. Am. J. Med. Genet. 19: 161-169, 1984.

10. Bleasel, J. F.; Holderbaum, D.; Brancolini, V.; Moskowitz, R.
W.; Considine, E. L.; Prockop, D. J.; Devoto, M.; Williams, C. J.
: Five families with arginine-519-to-cysteine mutation in COL2A1:
evidence for three distinct founders. Hum. Mutat. 12: 172-176, 1998.

11. Bogaert, R.; Tiller, G. E.; Weis, M. A.; Gruber, H. E.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Cohn, D. H.; Eyre, D. R.: An amino acid substitution (gly853-to-glu)
in the collagen alpha-1(II) chain produces hypochondrogenesis. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 22522-22526, 1992.

12. Brown, D. M.; Nichols, B. E.; Weingeist, T. A.; Sheffield, V.
C.; Kimura, A. E.; Stone, E. M.: Procollagen II gene mutation in
Stickler syndrome. Arch. Ophthal. 110: 1589-1593, 1992.

13. Chan, D.; Cole, W. G.; Chow, C. W.; Mundlos, S.; Bateman, J. F.
: A COL2A1 mutation in achondrogenesis type II results in the replacement
of type II collagen by type I and III collagens in cartilage. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 1747-1753, 1995.

14. Chan, D.; Rogers, J. F.; Bateman, J. F.; Cole, W. G.: Recurrent
substitutions of arginine 789 by cysteine in pro-alpha 1 (II) collagen
chains produce spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. J. Rheum. 43
(Suppl.): 37-38, 1995.

15. Chan, D.; Taylor, T. K. F.; Cole, W. G.: Characterization of
an arginine 789 to cysteine substitution in alpha-1(II) collagen chains
of a patient with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
15238-15245, 1993.

16. Cheah, K. S. E.; Stoker, N. G.; Griffin, J. R.; Grosveld, F. G.;
Solomon, E.: Identification and characterization of the human type
II collagen gene (COL2A1). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 2555-2559,
1985.

17. Cole, W. G.; Hall, R. K.; Rogers, J. G.: The clinical features
of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita resulting from the substitution
of glycine 997 by serine in the alpha-1(II) chain of type II collagen. J.
Med. Genet. 30: 27-35, 1993.

18. Donahue, L. R.; Chang, B.; Mohan, S.; Miyakoshi, N.; Wergedal,
J. E.; Baylink, D. J.; Hawes, N. L.; Rosen, C. J.; Ward-Bailey, P.;
Zheng, Q. Y.; Bronson, R. T.; Johnson, K. R.; Davisson, M. T.: A
missense mutation in the mouse Col2a1 gene causes spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia congenita, hearing loss, and retinoschisis. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 18: 1612-1621, 2003. Note: Erratum: J. Bone Miner. Res. 22:
2011 only, 2007.

19. Eng, C. E. L.; Strom, C. M.: Analysis of three restriction fragment
length polymorphisms in the human type II procollagen gene. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 37: 719-732, 1985.

20. Eyre, D. R.; Weis, M. A.; Moskowitz, R. W.: Cartilage expression
of a type II collagen mutation in an inherited form of osteoarthritis
associated with a mild chondrodysplasia. J. Clin. Invest. 87: 357-361,
1991.

21. Faivre, L.; Le Merrer, M.; Douvier, S.; Laurent, N.; Thauvin-Robinet,
C.; Rousseau, T.; Vereecke, I.; Sagot, P.; Delezoide, A.-L.; Coucke,
P.; Mortier, G.: Recurrence of achondrogenesis type II within the
same family: evidence for germline mosaicism. Am. J. Med. Genet. 126A:
308-312, 2004.

22. Forzano, F.; Lituania, M.; Viassolo, V.; Superti-Furga, A.; Wildhardt,
G.; Zabel, B.; Faravelli, F.: A familial case of achondrogenesis
type II caused by a dominant COL2A1 mutation and 'patchy' expression
in the mosaic father. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143: 2815-2820, 2007.

23. Francomano, C. A.; Liberfarb, R. M.; Hirose, T.; Maumenee, I.
H.; Streeten, E. A.; Meyers, D. A.; Pyeritz, R. E.: The Stickler
syndrome: evidence for close linkage to the structural gene for type
II collagen. Genomics 1: 293-296, 1987.

24. Francomano, C. A.; Maumenee, I.; Liberfarb, R.; Pyeritz, R. E.
: Cosegregation of Stickler syndrome and type II collagen gene alleles.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 615 only, 1987.

25. Freddi, S.; Savarirayan, R.; Bateman, J. F.: Molecular diagnosis
of Stickler syndrome: A COL2A1 stop codon mutation screening strategy
that is not compromised by mutant mRNA instability. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90:
398-406, 2000.

26. Gaiser, K. G.; Maddox, B. K.; Bann, J. G.; Boswell, B. A.; Keene,
D. R.; Garofalo, S.; Horton, W. A.: Y-position collagen II mutation
disrupts cartilage formation and skeletal development in a transgenic
mouse model of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. J. Bone Miner. Res. 17:
39-47, 2002.

27. Garofalo, S.; Vuorio, E.; Metsaranta, M.; Rosati, R.; Toman, D.;
Vaughan, J.; Lozano, G.; Mayne, R.; Ellard, J.; Horton, W.; de Crombrugghe,
B.: Reduced amounts of cartilage collagen fibrils and growth plate
anomalies in transgenic mice harboring a glycine-to-cysteine mutation
in the mouse type II procollagen alpha-1-chain gene. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 88: 9648-9652, 1991.

28. Go, S. L.; Maugeri, A.; Mulder, J. J. S.; van Driel, M. A.; Cremers,
F. P. M.; Hoyng, C. B.: Autosomal dominant rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment associated with an arg453ter mutation in the COL2A1 gene. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44: 4035-4043, 2003.

29. Godfrey, M.; Hollister, D. W.: Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis:
identification of abnormal type II collagen. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
904-913, 1988.

30. Gupta, S. K.; Leonard, B. C.; Damji, K. F.; Bulman, D. E.: A
frame shift mutation in a tissue-specific alternatively spliced exon
of collagen 2A1 in Wagner's vitreoretinal degeneration. Am. J. Ophthal. 133:
203-210, 2002.

31. Helfgott, S. M.; Mosciscki, R. A.; San Martin, J.; Lorenzo, C.;
Kieval, R.; McKenna, M.; Nadol, J.; Trentham, D. E.: Correlation
between antibodies to type II collagen and treatment outcome in bilateral
progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Lancet 337: 387-389, 1991.

32. Holderbaum, D.; Malemud, C. J.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Haqqi, T. M.
: Human cartilage from late stage familial osteoarthritis transcribes
type II collagen mRNA encoding a cysteine in position 519. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 192: 1169-1174, 1993.

33. Hoornaert, K. P.; Dewinter, C.; Vereecke, I.; Beemer, F. A.; Courtens,
W.; Fryer, A.; Fryssira, H.; Lees, M.; Mullner-Eidenbock, A.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Siderius, L.; Superti-Furga, A.; Temple, K.; Willems, P. J.;
Zankl, A.; Zweier, C.; De Paepe, A.; Coucke, P.; Mortier, G. R.:
The phenotypic spectrum in patients with arginine to cysteine mutations
in the COL2A1 gene. J. Med. Genet. 43: 406-413, 2006.

34. Hoornaert, K. P.; Marik, I.; Kozlowski, K.; Cole, T.; Le Merrer,
M.; Leroy, J. G.; Coucke, P. J.; Sillence, D.; Mortier, G. R.: Czech
dysplasia metatarsal type: another type II collagen disorder. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 15: 1269-1275, 2007.

35. Horton, W. A.: Personal Communication. Houston, Texas  1987.

36. Horton, W. A.; Machado, M. A.; Ellard, J.; Campbell, D.; Bartley,
J.; Ramirez, F.; Vitale, E.; Lee, B.: Characterization of a type
II collagen gene (COL2A1) mutation identified in cultured chondrocytes
from human hypochondrogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4583-4587,
1992.

37. Huerre-Jeanpierre, C.; Mattei, M.-G.; Weil, D.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; Chu, M.-L.; Sangiorgi, F. O.; Sobel, M. E.; Ramirez, F.; Junien,
C.: Further evidence for the dispersion of the human fibrillar collagen
genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38: 26-37, 1986.

38. Huerre-Jeanpierre, C.; Mattei, M. G.; Weil, D.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; Sangiorgi, F. O.; Ramirez, F.; Junien, C.: The gene for human
alpha-1 type II collagen (COL2A1) maps to band 12q131. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 657-658, 1985.

39. Kaitila, I.; Korokko, J.; Marttinen, E.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Phenotypic
expressions of a gly154-to-arg mutation in type II collagen in two
unrelated patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD). Am.
J. Med. Genet. 63: 111-122, 1996.

40. Kannu, P.; O'Reilly, D. D.; Hyland, J. C.; Ala Kokko, L.: Avascular
necrosis of the femoral head due to a novel C propeptide mutation
in COL2A1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 1759-1762, 2011.

41. Kelly, T. E.; Lichtenstein, J. R.; Dorst, J. P.: An unusual familial
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia: 'spondyloperipheral dysplasia'. Birth
Defects Orig. Art. Ser. 13: 149-165, 1977.

42. Kniest, W.: Zur Abgrenzung der Dysostosis enchondralis von der
Chondrodystrophie. Z. Kinderheilk. 43: 633-640, 1952.

43. Knowlton, R. G.; Katzenstein, P.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Weaver, E.
J.; Jimenez, S. A.; Pathria, M. N.; Malemud, C. J.; Prockop, D. J.
: Genetic linkage of the type II procollagen gene to primary generalized
osteoarthritis with chondrodysplasia. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 51: 1024 only, 1989.

44. Knowlton, R. G.; Katzenstein, P. L.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Weaver,
E. J.; Malemud, C. J.; Pathria, M. N.; Jimenez, S. A.; Prockop, D.
J.: Genetic linkage of a polymorphism in the type II procollagen
gene (COL2A1) to primary osteoarthritis associated with mild chondrodysplasia. New
Eng. J. Med. 322: 526-530, 1990.

45. Korkko, J.; Cohn, D. H.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Krakow, D.; Prockop, D.
J.: Widely distributed mutations in the COL2A1 gene produce achondrogenesis
type II/hypochondrogenesis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 92: 95-100, 2000.

46. Korkko, J.; Ritvaniemi, P.; Haataja, L.; Kaariainen, H.; Kivirikko,
K. I.; Prockop, D. J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Mutation in type II procollagen
(COL2A1) that substitutes aspartate for glycine alpha-I-67 and that
causes cataracts and retinal detachment: evidence for molecular heterogeneity
in the Wagner syndrome and the Stickler syndrome (arthro-ophthalmopathy). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53: 55-61, 1993.

47. Kozlowski, K.; Marik, I.; Marikova, O.; Zemkova, D.; Kuklik, M.
: Czech dysplasia metatarsal type. Am. J. Med. Genet. 129A: 87-91,
2004.

48. Kuivaniemi, H.; Tromp, G.; Prockop, D. J.: Mutations in fibrillar
collagens (types I, II, III, and XI), fibril-associated collagen (type
IX), and network-forming collagen (type X) cause a spectrum of diseases
of bone, cartilage, and blood vessels. Hum. Mutat. 9: 300-315, 1997.

49. Law, M. L.; Tung, L.; Morse, H. G.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Solomon, E.: The human type II collagen gene (COL2A1) assigned
to 12q14.3. Ann. Hum. Genet. 50: 131-137, 1986.

50. Law, M. L.; Tung, L.; Morse, H. G.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Stoker, N. G.; Solomon, E.: Regional assignment of the
human type II collagen gene (COL2A1) on chromosome 12. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 678 only, 1985.

51. Learmonth, I. D.; Christy, G.; Beighton, P.: Namaqualand hip
dysplasia: orthopaedic implications. Clin. Orthop. 218: 142-147,
1987.

52. Lee, B.; Vissing, H.; Ramirez, F.; Rogers, D.; Rimoin, D.: Identification
of the molecular defect in a family with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Science 244:
978-980, 1989.

53. Li, S. W.; Prockop, D. J.; Helminen, H.; Fassler, R.; Lapvetelainen,
T.; Kiraly, K.; Peltarri, A.; Arokoski, J.; Lui, H.; Arita, M.; Khillan,
J. S.: Transgenic mice with targeted inactivation of the Col2a1 gene
for collagen II develop a skeleton with membranous and periosteal
bone but no endochondral bone. Genes Dev. 9: 2821-2830, 1995.

54. Liberfarb, R. M.; Levy, H. P.; Peter, S. R.; Wilkin, D. J.; Davis,
J.; Balog, J. Z.; Griffith, A. J.; Szymko-Bennett, Y. M.; Johnston,
J. J.; Rubin, B. I.; Francomano, C. A.: The Stickler syndrome: genotype/phenotype
correlation in 10 families with Stickler syndrome resulting from 7
mutations in the type II collagen gene locus COL2A1. Genet. Med. 5:
21-27, 2003. Note: Erratum: Genet. Med. 5: 478 only, 2003.

55. Liu, Y.-F.; Chen, W.-M.; Lin, Y.-F.; Yang, R.-C.; Lin, M.-W.;
Li, L.-H.; Chang, Y.-H.; Jou, Y.-S.; Lin, P.-Y.; Su, J.-S.; Huang,
S.-F.; Hsaio, K.-J.; Fann, C. S. J.; Hwang, H.-W.; Chen, Y.-T.; Tsai,
S.-F.: Type II collagen variants and inherited osteonecrosis of the
femoral head. New Eng. J. Med. 352: 2294-2301, 2005.

56. Lovell-Badge, R. H.; Bygrave, A.; Bradley, A.; Robertson, E.;
Tilly, R.; Cheah, K. S. E.: Tissue-specific expression of the human
type II collagen gene in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 2803-2807,
1987.

57. Matsui, Y.; Michigami, T.; Tachikawa, K.; Yamazaki, M.; Kawabata,
H.; Nishimura, G.: Czech dysplasia occurring in a Japanese family. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2285-2289, 2009.

58. Maumenee, I. H.; Traboulsi, E. I.: The ocular findings in Kniest
dysplasia. Am. J. Ophthal. 100: 155-160, 1985.

59. McAlinden, A.; Majava, M.; Bishop, P. N.; Perveen, R.; Black,
G. C. M.; Pierpont, M. E.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Mannikko, M.: Missense
and nonsense mutations in the alternatively-spliced exon 2 of COL2A1
cause the ocular variant of Stickler syndrome. Hum. Mutat. 29: 83-90,
2008.

60. Meulenbelt, I.; Williams, C. J.; te Koppele, J. M.; van de Giessen,
G. C.; Slagboom, P. E.: Population haplotype analysis and evolutionary
relations of the COL2A1 gene. Ann. Hum. Genet. 60: 189-199, 1996.

61. Miyamoto, Y.; Matsuda, T.; Kitoh, H.; Haga, N.; Ohashi, H.; Nishimura,
G.; Ikegawa, S.: A recurrent mutation in type II collagen gene causes
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease in a Japanese family. Hum. Genet. 121:
625-629, 2007.

62. Miyamoto, Y.; Nakashima, E.; Hiraoka, H.; Ohashi, H.; Ikegawa,
S.: A type II collagen mutation also results in oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal
dysplasia. Hum. Genet. 118: 175-178, 2005.

63. Mortier, G. R.; Wilkin, D. J.; Wilcox, W. R.; Rimoin, D. L.; Lachman,
R. S.; Eyre, D. R.; Cohn, D. H.: A radiographic, morphologic, biochemical
and molecular analysis of a case of achondrogenesis type II resulting
from substitution for a glycine residue (gly691-to-arg) in the type
II collagen trimer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 285-288, 1995.

64. Nelson, F.; Dahlberg, L.; Laverty, S.; Reiner, A.; Pidoux, I.;
Ionescu, M.; Fraser, G. L.; Brooks, E.; Tanzer, M.; Rosenberg, L.
C.; Dieppe, P.; Poole, A. R.: Evidence for altered synthesis of type
II collagen in patients with osteoarthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
2115-2125, 1998.

65. Nishimura, G.; Haga, N.; Kitoh, H.; Tanaka, Y.; Sonoda, T.; Kitamura,
M.; Shirahama, S.; Itoh, T.; Nakashima, E.; Ohashi, H.; Ikegawa, S.
: The phenotypic spectrum of COL2A1 mutations. Hum. Mutat. 26: 36-43,
2005.

66. Nishimura, G.; Nakashima, E.; Mabuchi, A.; Shimamoto, K.; Shimamoto,
T.; Shimao, Y.; Nagai, T.; Yamaguchi, T.; Kosaki, R.; Ohashi, H.;
Makita, Y.; Ikegawa, S.: Identification of COL2A1 mutations in platyspondylic
skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type. J. Med. Genet. 41: 75-79, 2004.

67. Nunez, A. M.; Francomano, C.; Young, M. F.; Martin, G. R.; Yamada,
Y.: Isolation and partial characterization of genomic clones coding
for a human pro-alpha-1(II) collagen chain and demonstration of restriction
fragment length polymorphism at the 3-prime end of the gene. Biochemistry 24:
6343-6348, 1985.

68. Pope, F. M.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Nicholls, A. C.; Price, A. B.; Grosveld,
F. G.: Lethal osteogenesis imperfecta congenita and a 300 base pair
gene deletion for alpha-1-like collagen. Brit. Med. J. 288: 431-434,
1984.

69. Reginato, A. J.; Passano, G. M.; Neumann, G.; Falasca, G. F.;
Diaz-Valdez, M.; Jimenez, S. A.; Williams, C. J.: Familial spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia tarda, brachydactyly, and precocious osteoarthritis associated
with an arginine75-to-cysteine mutation in the procollagen type II
gene in a kindred of Chiloe Islanders. I. Clinical, radiographic,
and pathologic findings. Arthritis Rheum. 37: 1078-1086, 1994.

70. Richards, A. J.; Baguley, D. M.; Yates, J. R. W.; Lane, C.; Nicol,
M.; Harper, P. S.; Scott, J. D.; Snead, M. P.: Variation in the vitreous
phenotype of Stickler syndrome can be caused by different amino acid
substitutions in the X position of the type II collagen gly-X-Y triple
helix. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1083-1094, 2000.

71. Richards, A. J.; Laidlaw, M.; Whittaker, J.; Breacy, B.; Rai,
H.; Bearcroft, P.; Baguley, D. M.; Poulson, A.; Ang, A.; Scott, J.
D.; Snead, M. P.: High efficiency of mutation detection in type 1
Stickler syndrome using a two-stage approach: vitreoretinal assessment
coupled with exon sequencing for screening COL2A1. Hum. Mutat. 27:
696-704, 2006. Note: Erratum: Hum. Mutat. 27: 1156 only, 2006.

72. Richards, A. J.; Meredith, S.; Poulson, A.; Bearcroft, P.; Crossland,
G.; Baguley, D. M.; Scott, J. D.; Snead, M. P.: A novel mutation
of COL2A1 resulting in dominantly inherited rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 663-668, 2005.

73. Richards, A. J.; Morgan, J.; Bearcroft, P. W. P.; Pickering, E.;
Owen, M. J.; Holmans, P.; Williams, N.; Tysoe, C.; Pope, F. M.; Snead,
M. P.; Hughes, H.: Vitreoretinopathy with phalangeal epiphyseal dysplasia,
a type II collagenopathy resulting from a novel mutation in the C-propeptide
region of the molecule. J. Med. Genet. 39: 661-665, 2002.

74. Ritvaniemi, P.; Hyland, J.; Ignatius, J.; Kivirikko, K. I.; Prockop,
D. J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: A fourth example suggests that premature termination
codons in the COL2A1 gene are a common cause of the Stickler syndrome:
analysis of the COL2A1 gene by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 17:
218-221, 1993.

75. Sangiorgi, F.; Huerre-Jeanpierre, C.; Weil, D.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; Junien, C.; Sobel, M.; Ramirez, F.: Chromosomal assignment of
the human type II collagen gene. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 36:
208S only, 1984.

76. Sangiorgi, F. O.; Benson-Chanda, V.; de Wet, W. J.; Sobel, M.
E.; Tsipouras, P.; Ramirez, F.: Isolation and partial characterization
of the entire human pro-alpha-1(II) collagen gene. Nucleic Acids
Res. 13: 2207-2225, 1985.

77. Sher, C.; Ramesar, R.; Martell, R.; Learmonth, I.; Tsipouras,
P.; Beighton, P.: Mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (Namaqualand
type): genetic linkage to the type II collagen gene (COL2A1). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 48: 518-524, 1991.

78. Siggers, D. C.: U. Kniest disease.:In: Bergsma, D. (ed.): Skeletal
Dysplasias.  New York: American Elsevier  1974. Pg. 432-442.

79. Siggers, D. C.; Rimoin, D. L.; Dorst, J. P.; Doty, S. B.; Williams,
B. R.; Hollister, D. W.; Silberberg, R.; Granley, R. E.; Kaufman,
R. L.; McKusick, V. A.: The Kniest syndrome. Birth Defects Orig.
Art. Ser. 10(9): 193-208, 1974.

80. Slepecky, N. B.; Savage, J. E.; Yoo, T. J.: Localization of type
II, IX and V collagen in the inner ear. Acta Otolaryng. 112: 611-617,
1992.

81. Sobetzko, D.; Eich, G.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Superti-Furga,
A.: Boy with syndactylies, macrocephaly, and severe skeletal dysplasia:
not a new syndrome, but two dominant mutations (GLI3 E543X and COL2A1
G973R) in the same individual. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90: 239-242, 2000.

82. Solomon, E.; Hiorns, L. R.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Parkar, M.; Weiss,
E.; Flavell, R. A.: Assignment of a human alpha-1(I)-like collagen
gene to chromosome 12, by molecular hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 588-589, 1984.

83. Solomon, E.; Hiorns, L. R.; Spurr, N.; Kurkinen, M.; Barlow, D.;
Hogan, B. L. M.; Dalgleish, R.: Chromosomal assignments of the genes
coding for human types II, III and IV collagen: a dispersed gene family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 3330-3334, 1985.

84. Sorge, G.; Ruggieri, M.; Lachman, R. S.: Spondyloperipheral dysplasia. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 59: 139-142, 1995.

85. Spranger, J.; Winterpacht, A.; Zabel, B.: Kniest dysplasia: Dr.
W. Kniest, his patient, the molecular defect. Am. J. Med. Genet. 69:
79-84, 1997.

86. Stickler, G. B.; Belau, P. G.; Farrell, F. J.; Jones, J. D.; Pugh,
D. G.; Steinberg, A. G.; Ward, L. E.: Hereditary progressive arthro-ophthalmopathy. Mayo
Clin. Proc. 40: 433-455, 1965.

87. Stoker, N. G.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Griffin, J. R.; Pope, F. M.; Solomon,
E.: A highly polymorphic region 3-prime to the human type II collagen
gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 13: 4613-4622, 1985.

88. Strom, C. M.: Achondroplasia due to DNA insertion into the type
II collagen gene. (Abstract) Pediat. Res. 18: 226A only, 1984.

89. Strom, C. M.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.: Localization of human
type II procollagen gene (COL2A1) to chromosome 12. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 10: 651-655, 1984.

90. Strom, C. M.; Upholt, W. B.: Isolation and characterization of
genomic clones corresponding to the human type II procollagen gene. Nucleic
Acids Res. 12: 1025-1038, 1984.

91. Sulko, J.; Czarny-Ratajczak, M.; Wozniak, A.; Latos-Bielenska,
A.; Kozlowski, K.: Novel amino acid substitution in the Y-position
of collagen type II causes spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia congenita. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 137A: 292-297, 2005.

92. Sybert, V. P.; Byers, P. H.; Hall, J. G.: Variable expression
in a dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasia with similarities to
brachydactyly E and spondyloepiphyseal-spondyloperipheral dysplasia. Clin.
Genet. 15: 160-166, 1979.

93. Sykes, B.; Smith, R.; Vipond, S.; Paterson, C.; Cheah, K.; Solomon,
E.: Exclusion of the alpha-1(II) cartilage collagen gene as the mutant
locus in type IA osteogenesis imperfecta. J. Med. Genet. 22: 187-191,
1985.

94. Sykes, B. C.; Ogilvie, D. J.; Wordsworth, B. P.: Lethal osteogenesis
imperfecta and a collagen gene deletion: length polymorphism provides
an alternative explanation. Hum. Genet. 70: 35-37, 1985.

95. Takahashi, E.; Hori, T.; O'Connell, P.; Leppert, M.; White, R.
: R-banding and nonisotopic in situ hybridization: precise localization
of the human type II collagen gene (COL2A1). Hum. Genet. 86: 14-16,
1990.

96. Takahashi, E.; Hori, T.; Sutherland, G. R.: Mapping of the human
type II collagen gene (COL2A1) proximal to fra(12)(q13.1) by nonisotopic
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 54: 84-85, 1990.

97. Thanaraj, T. A.; Clark, F.: Human GC-AG alternative intron isoforms
with weak donor sites show enhanced consensus at acceptor exon positions. Nucleic
Acids Res. 29: 2581-2593, 2001.

98. Tiller, G. E.; Polumbo, P. A.; Weis, M. A.; Bogaert, R.; Lachman,
R. S.; Cohn, D. H.; Rimoin, D. L.; Eyre, D. R.: Dominant mutations
in the type II collagen gene, COL2A1, produce spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia, Strudwick type. Nature Genet. 11: 87-89, 1995.

99. Tiller, G. E.; Rimoin, D. L.; Murray, L. W.; Cohn, D. H.: Tandem
duplication within a type II collagen gene (COL2A1) exon in an individual
with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 3889-3893,
1990.

100. Tiller, G. E.; Weis, M. A.; Lachman, R. S.; Cohn, D. H.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Eyre, D. R.: A dominant mutation in the type II collagen gene
(COL2A1) produces spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD), Strudwick
type. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 53 (suppl.): A209 only, 1993.

101. Unger, S.; Korkko, J.; Krakow, D.; Lachman, R. S.; Rimoin, D.
L.; Cohn, D. H.: Double heterozygosity for pseudoachondroplasia and
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. Am. J. Med. Genet. 104:
140-146, 2001.

102. Vandenberg, P.; Khillan, J. S.; Prockop, D. J.; Helminen, H.;
Kontusaari, S.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Expression of a partially deleted
gene of a human type II procollagen (COL2A1) in transgenic mice produces
a chondrodysplasia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 7640-7644, 1991.

103. van der Rest, M.; Rosenberg, L. C.; Olsen, B. R.; Poole, A. R.
: Chondrocalcin is identical with the C-propeptide of type II procollagen. Biochem.
J. 237: 923-925, 1986.

104. Vanek, J.: Spondyloperipheral dysplasia. J. Med. Genet. 20:
117-121, 1983.

105. Vikkula, M.; Ritvaniemi, P.; Vuorio, A. F.; Kaitila, I.; Ala-Kokko,
L.; Peltonen, L.: A mutation in the amino-terminal end of the triple
helix of type II collagen causing severe osteochondrodysplasia. Genomics 16:
282-285, 1993.

106. Vissing, H.; D'Alessio, M.; Lee, B.; Ramirez, F.; Godfrey, M.;
Hollister, D. W.: Glycine to serine substitution in the triple helical
domain of pro-alpha-1(II) collagen results in a lethal perinatal form
of short-limbed dwarfism. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 18265-18267, 1989.

107. Wagner, H.: Ein bisher unbeknantes Erbleiden des Auges (degeneratio
hyaloideo-retinalis hereditaria), beobachtet im Kanton, Zurich. Klin.
Monatsbl. Augenheilkd. 100: 840-857, 1938.

108. Weis, M. A.; Wilkin, D. J.; Kim, H. J.; Wilcox, W. R.; Lachman,
R. S.; Rimoin, D. L.; Cohn, D. H.; Eyre, D. R.: Structurally abnormal
type II collagen in a severe form of Kniest dysplasia caused by an
exon 24 skipping mutation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 4761-4768, 1998.

109. Weiss, E. H.; Cheah, S. E.; Grosveld, F. G.; Dahl, H. H. M.;
Solomon, E.; Flavell, R. A.: Isolation and characterization of a
human collagen alpha1(I)-like gene from a cosmid library. Nucleic
Acids Res. 10: 1981-1992, 1982.

110. Wilkin, D. J.; Artz, A. S.; South, S.; Lachman, R. S.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Wilcox, W. R.; McKusick, V. A.; Stratakis, C. A.; Francomano,
C. A.; Cohn, D. H.: Small deletions in the type II collagen triple
helix produce Kniest dysplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 85: 105-112,
1999.

111. Wilkin, D. J.; Bogaert, R.; Lachman, R. S.; Rimoin, D. L.; Eyre,
D. R.; Cohn, D. H.: A single amino acid substitution (G103D) in the
type II collagen triple helix produces Kniest dysplasia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 1999-2003, 1994.

112. Wilkin, D. J.; Liberfarb, R.; Davis, J.; Levy, H. P.; Cole, W.
G.; Francomano, C. A.; Cohn, D. H.: Rapid determination of COL2A1
mutations in individuals with Stickler syndrome: analysis of potential
premature termination codons. Am. J. Med. Genet. 94: 141-148, 2000.

113. Williams, C. J.; Considine, E. L.; Knowlton, R. G.; Reginato,
A.; Neumann, G.; Harrison, D.; Buxton, P.; Jimenez, S.; Prockop, D.
J.: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and precocious osteoarthritis in
a family with an arg75-to-cys mutation in the procollagen type II
gene (COL2A1). Hum. Genet. 92: 499-505, 1993.

114. Williams, C. J.; Ganguly, A.; Considine, E.; McCarron, S.; Prockop,
D. J.; Walsh-Vockley, C.; Michels, V. V.: A(-2)-to-G transition at
the 3-prime acceptor splice site of IVS17 characterizes the COL2A1
gene mutation in the original Stickler syndrome kindred. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 63: 461-467, 1996.

115. Williams, C. J.; Rock, M.; Considine, E.; McCarron, S.; Gow,
P.; Ladda, R.; McLain, D.; Michels, V. M.; Murphy, W.; Prockop, D.
J.; Ganguly, A.: Three new point mutations in type II procollagen
(COL2A1) and identification of a fourth family with the COL2A1 arg519-to-cys
base substitution using conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 309-312, 1995.

116. Winterpacht, A.; Hilbert, M.; Schwarze, U.; Mundlos, S.; Spranger,
J.; Zabel, B. U.: Kniest and Stickler dysplasia phenotypes caused
by collagen type II gene (COL2A1) defect. Nature Genet. 3: 323-326,
1993.

117. Winterpacht, A.; Schwarze, U.; Mundlos, S.; Menger, H.; Spranger,
J.; Zabel, B.: Alternative splicing as the result of a type II procollagen
gene (COL2A1) mutation in a patient with Kniest dysplasia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 1891-1893, 1994.

118. Wu, J.-J.; Eyre, D. R.: Structural analysis of cross-linking
domains in cartilage type XI collagen: insights on polymeric assembly. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 18865-18870, 1995.

119. Yoo, T. J.; Tomoda, K.; Stuart, J. M.; Cremer, M. A.; Townes,
A. S.; Kang, A. H.: Type II collagen-induced autoimmune sensorineural
hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction in rats. Ann. Otol. Rhinol.
Laryng. 92: 267-271, 1983.

120. Yoo, T. J.; Tomoda, K.; Stuart, J. M.; Kang, A. H.; Townes, A.
S.: Type II collagen-induced autoimmune otospongiosis: a preliminary
report. Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryng. 92: 103-108, 1983.

121. Young, M. F.; Vogeli, G.; Nunez, A. M.; Fernandez, M. P.; Sullivan,
M.; Sobel, M. E.: Isolation of cDNA and genomic DNA clones encoding
type II collagen. Nucleic Acids Res. 12: 4207-4228, 1984.

122. Zabel, B.; Hilbert, K.; Stoss, H.; Superti-Furga, A.; Spranger,
J.; Winterpacht, A.: A specific collagen type II gene (COL2A1) mutation
presenting as spondyloperipheral dysplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 63:
123-128, 1996.

123. Zankl, A.; Zabel, B.; Hilbert, K.; Wildhardt, G.; Cuenot, S.;
Xavier, B.; Ha-Vinh, R.; Bonafe, L.; Spranger, J.; Superti-Furga,
A.: Spondyloperipheral dysplasia is caused by truncating mutations
in the C-propeptide of COL2A1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 129A: 144-148,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/17/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/15/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/15/2011
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 4/17/2008
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 4/11/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/4/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/14/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/3/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/20/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/7/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/4/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 9/10/2002
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 7/10/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/21/2000
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 10/11/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 9/25/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/17/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/13/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/12/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/14/1996
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 10/6/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 02/05/2013
joanna: 2/1/2013
terry: 10/3/2012
carol: 9/24/2012
carol: 9/6/2012
terry: 8/22/2012
carol: 8/9/2012
carol: 10/18/2011
terry: 10/17/2011
carol: 9/14/2011
carol: 8/22/2011
carol: 8/5/2011
terry: 7/21/2011
carol: 7/20/2011
wwang: 6/16/2011
terry: 6/15/2011
terry: 3/16/2011
carol: 3/15/2011
terry: 3/15/2011
terry: 3/10/2011
terry: 3/9/2011
carol: 3/7/2011
carol: 3/4/2011
terry: 11/16/2010
terry: 4/17/2008
carol: 4/11/2008
wwang: 3/19/2008
carol: 3/7/2008
ckniffin: 3/4/2008
carol: 6/15/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
alopez: 10/16/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
wwang: 9/7/2006
wwang: 6/21/2006
terry: 6/20/2006
terry: 3/23/2006
alopez: 2/27/2006
terry: 2/14/2006
wwang: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/3/2005
wwang: 9/26/2005
terry: 9/20/2005
alopez: 7/29/2005
alopez: 6/22/2005
terry: 6/17/2005
carol: 11/18/2004
carol: 10/11/2004
carol: 10/8/2004
terry: 10/7/2004
tkritzer: 6/23/2004
terry: 5/3/2004
alopez: 4/19/2004
terry: 4/14/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 12/23/2003
terry: 12/22/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2003
cwells: 3/4/2003
carol: 11/15/2002
alopez: 9/10/2002
carol: 7/10/2002
carol: 2/6/2002
alopez: 6/13/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
carol: 12/21/2000
carol: 12/13/2000
terry: 11/21/2000
mcapotos: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 10/11/2000
carol: 9/25/2000
carol: 6/16/2000
carol: 4/21/2000
alopez: 4/12/2000
mgross: 3/17/2000
alopez: 2/25/2000
terry: 2/23/2000
terry: 12/1/1999
jlewis: 8/2/1999
terry: 7/20/1999
carol: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/26/1999
carol: 1/13/1999
terry: 1/5/1999
dkim: 12/9/1998
alopez: 11/18/1998
alopez: 11/17/1998
alopez: 9/29/1998
carol: 8/27/1998
carol: 8/14/1998
terry: 8/13/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
alopez: 3/24/1998
alopez: 3/16/1998
terry: 3/3/1998
mark: 7/16/1997
mark: 7/15/1997
terry: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/20/1997
mark: 5/13/1997
terry: 5/12/1997
terry: 1/17/1997
terry: 12/17/1996
jamie: 11/13/1996
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
jamie: 10/14/1996
mark: 10/6/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/14/1996
mark: 3/15/1996
mark: 3/3/1996
terry: 2/23/1996
mark: 3/31/1995
davew: 6/27/1994
jason: 6/24/1994
terry: 5/13/1994
mimadm: 4/13/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994

142600	TITLE *142600 HEXOKINASE 1; HK1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Hexokinase (EC 2.7.1.1) catalyzes the first step in glucose metabolism,
using ATP for the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose-6-phosphate.
Four different forms of hexokinase, designated type HK1, HK2 (601125),
HK3 (142570), and HK4 (138079), encoded by different genes, are present
in mammalian tissues. Among these, HK1 is the predominant glucose
phosphorylating activity in those tissues that share a strict dependence
on glucose utilization for their physiologic functions, such as brain,
erythrocytes, platelets, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts (summary by
Bianchi et al., 1997). Different isoforms of HK1 are either cytoplasmic
or associated with the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) through a
5-prime porin (VDAC1; 604492)-binding domain (Murakami and Piomelli,
1997).

CLONING

Nishi et al. (1988) analyzed cDNA clones encoding human hexokinase
isolated from an adult kidney library. Analysis of this 917-amino acid
protein showed that the sequences of the N- and C-terminal halves,
corresponding to the regulatory and catalytic domains, respectively, are
homologous. Eukaryotic hexokinases evolved from duplication of a gene
encoding a protein of about 450 amino acids. Griffin et al. (1991)
thought that comparisons of sequences in many species supported the
theory of Ureta (1982) that the mammalian hexokinases arose from the
duplication and fusion of an ancestral protoenzyme and that the yeast
and mammalian glucokinases arose twice in evolution. Sequence analysis
demonstrated that a 15-amino acid porin-binding domain in the N terminus
of HK1 is absolutely conserved and mediates the binding of HK1 to the
mitochondria. In the course of their work, Griffin et al. (1991)
developed a method for cloning the cDNA for a low abundance protein
using knowledge of the evolutionary conservation of amino acid and
nucleotide sequence.

By liquid chromatography, Murakami et al. (1990) identified 2 distinct
major isozymes of human red blood cell (RBC) hexokinase. One had a
molecular mass similar to that of HK1 identified in liver, and the
other, designated HKR, was larger than HK1 by several kilodaltons. RBC
from normal blood contained HK1 and HKR at an equal activity, but in
reticulocyte-rich RBC, HKR dominated. Murakami and Piomelli (1997)
isolated a cDNA clone for the red cell-specific HK isozyme HKR. Its
nucleotide sequence was identical to HK1 cDNA except for the 5-prime
end. It lacks the first 62 nucleotides of the HK1 coding region;
instead, it contains a unique sequence of 60 nucleotides at the
beginning of the coding sequence as well as another unique sequence
upstream of the putative translation initiation site. It lacks the
porin-binding domain that facilitates binding to mitochondria, thus
explaining the exclusive cytoplasmic localization of red blood cell HK.
Northern blot analysis showed that it was expressed in reticulocytes and
in an erythroleukemic cell line, but not in a lymphocytic cell line.

Mori et al. (1996) reported the cloning of cDNAs representing 3 unique
human type 1 hexokinase mRNAs expressed in testis, which were not
detected by Northern blot analysis in other human tissues. These mRNAs
contained unique sequences in the 5-prime terminus and lacked the
porin-binding domain (PBD), a conserved sequence that mediates the
binding of hexokinase to the mitochondria. The sequences were similar to
those identified by Mori et al. (1993) in mouse testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ruzzo et al. (1998) determined that the HK1 gene contains 18 exons and
spans about 75 kb. Analysis of the 5-prime flanking region revealed
binding sites for AP1 and CRE as well as several binding sites for SP1.
Ruzzo et al. (1998) identified an exon 1 specific to HK1 expressed in
somatic cells; an alternative exon (exon 1R) transcribed in red blood
cells replaced the somatic exon 1 by alternative splicing. Exon 1R lacks
the porin-binding domain.

Andreoni et al. (2000) found that multiple testis-specific HK1
transcripts are encoded by 6 different exons; 5 of the exons are located
upstream from the somatic exon 1, and one is located within intron 1.
With identification of these additional exons, they determined that the
gene spans at least 100 kb.

MAPPING

Shows (1974) presented evidence from somatic cell hybrid experiments
that hexokinase and cytoplasmic glutamate oxaloacetic transaminase are
syntenic on chromosome 10. By gene dosage studies of fibroblasts,
Gitelman and Simpson (1982) mapped HK1 to 10p11-q23. By dosage effect,
Dallapiccola et al. (1981) narrowed the HK1 assignment to 10pter-p13.
Dallapiccola et al. (1984) determined HK1 activity in the red cells of 5
patients with various partial duplications of 10p and concluded that the
most likely regional assignment for HK1 is 10p11.2. By in situ
hybridization, Shows et al. (1989) regionalized the HK1 gene to 10q22.
Daniele et al. (1992) used an HK1 cDNA as a probe for the study of a
panel of human-hamster somatic cell hybrids to assign the gene to the
long arm of chromosome 10 in the region q11.2-qter. This result agrees
with those reported by Gitelman and Simpson (1982) and Shows et al.
(1989) but conflicts with that reported by Dallapiccola et al. (1984).
Daniele et al. (1992) acknowledged the possibility that the HK1 probe
they used recognized more than a single locus but concluded that if 2 or
more HK loci exist they are all located on chromosome 10. Gelb et al.
(1992) demonstrated that most of the coding region of the HK1 gene is
located in a 120-kb YAC, which mapped entirely to chromosome 10.

The genes for 3 separate hexokinases have been assigned to specific
sites as of 1997: HK1, a red-cell isoform, to chromosome 10; HK2
(601125), the major hexokinase expressed in skeletal muscle, to
chromosome 2; and HK3 (142570), an isoform in white blood cells, to
chromosome 5. Hexokinase-4 (HK4) is glucokinase (GCK; 138079), which
maps to chromosome 7.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Nonspherocytic Hemolytic Anemia Due to Hexokinase Deficiency

Bianchi and Magnani (1995) reported the molecular characterization of
the defect in HK1 in a patient with hemolytic anemia due to hexokinase
deficiency (235700). PCR amplification and sequence of the cDNA revealed
compound heterozygosity for a deletion and a single nucleotide
substitution. The 96-bp deletion (142600.0001) involved nucleotides 577
to 672 of their cDNA sequence and was found in the cDNA of none of 14
unrelated normal subjects. The sequence of the HK1 allele without
deletion showed a T-to-C transition of nucleotide 1677, which caused the
amino acid change leu529-to-ser (142600.0002). The substitution was not
found in 10 normal controls. Bianchi and Magnani (1995) stated that to
their knowledge only 14 cases had been described, 2 of which had been
studied in their laboratory: HK-Melzo and HK-Napoli. It was in HK-Melzo
that the molecular defect was demonstrated. They showed that in the
HK-Melzo variant, the HK deficiency was expressed not only in
erythrocytes but also in platelets, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts. All
these types of cells contain HK type I as the predominant glucose
phosphorylating enzyme and, in particular, platelets and erythrocytes
share a strict dependence upon glucose utilization for their physiologic
functions.

In a girl, born of consanguineous parents, with severe nonspherocytic
hemolytic anemia due to hexokinase deficiency previously reported by
Rijksen et al. (1983), van Wijk et al. (2003) identified a homozygous
mutation in the HK1 gene (T680S; 142600.0004). The mutation, which
segregated with the disorder in the family and was not found in 50
controls, was designated 'Utrecht.' In vitro studies of the mutant
enzyme showed that it had a 2-fold decrease in affinity for Mg-ATP2 and
a markedly decreased affinity for the inhibitor glucose-1,6-diphosphate.
Patient red cells and platelets had about 25% residual activity.

- Russe Type of Hereditary Motor and Sensory Neuropathy

In all 34 European Gypsy individuals with the Russe type of hereditary
motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSNR; 605285) who were studied, Hantke et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous sequence change in the HK1 gene
(142600.0003) that mapped within the candidate disease interval on
chromosome 10q. The mutation was located at a highly conserved
nucleotide in the putative AltT2 exon located in the 5-prime region
upstream of HK1. The variant was found in heterozygous state in 5 of 790
control individuals representing a cross-section of the Gypsy
population, but not in 233 Bulgarian controls. AltT2-containing
transcripts in the mouse peripheral nerve were rare compared to the
coding region of HK1. However, 6 of 8 testis AltT2-containing isoforms
were found, with expression patterns differing between the peripheral
nerve and the brain and between newborn and adult tissues in mice. There
was no difference in HK1 mRNA in Schwann cells derived from patients or
controls, and patient cells showed no evidence of HK1 enzyme activity
compared to controls. Bioinformatic tools did not suggest an effect of
the variant on HK1 gene splicing or binding sites for interacting
proteins. However, there was evidence that the variant may cause a
ter-to-tyr substitution in 1 upstream open reading frame that had a
non-AUG start codon, which could potentially disrupt HK1 translation
regulation. Hantke et al. (2009) speculated that non-OMM-binding HK1 may
play a role in the pathogenesis of HMSNR.

Sevilla et al. (2013) found that 11 patients from 9 Roma Gypsy families
were homozygous for the HK1 variant (g.9712G-C; 142600.0003) identified
by Hantke et al. (2009), and haplotype analysis confirmed a founder
effect in this population.

HISTORY

Schimke and Grossbard (1968) reviewed studies of hexokinase isozymes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA, NONSPHEROCYTIC, DUE TO HEXOKINASE DEFICIENCY
HK1, 96-BP DEL

In the so-called HK-Melzo variant of hexokinase deficiency (235700),
Bianchi and Magnani (1995) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for
deletion of nucleotides 577 to 672 in the HK cDNA sequence and a
leu529-to-ser missense mutation (142600.0002).

.0002
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA, NONSPHEROCYTIC, DUE TO HEXOKINASE DEFICIENCY
HK1, LEU529SER

See 142600.0001 and Bianchi and Magnani (1995).

.0003
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY MOTOR AND SENSORY, RUSSE TYPE
HK1, -3818-195G-C, AltT2 EXON

In all 34 individuals with the Russe type of hereditary motor and
sensory neuropathy (HMSNR; 605285) who were studied, Hantke et al.
(2009) identified 2 homozygous sequence changes in the HK1 gene, which
maps within the candidate disease interval on chromosome 10q. One was a
G-to-C transversion at a highly conserved nucleotide in the putative
AltT2 exon located in the 5-prime region upstream of HK1 (-3818-195G-C,
NM_033497; Chandler, 2013), and the other was an intronic G-to-A
transition downstream of the AltT2 change; the G-to-A transition was not
highly conserved, and thus not thought to be pathogenic. These 2
variants were found in heterozygous state in 5 of 790 control
individuals representing a cross-section of the Gypsy population, but
not in 233 Bulgarian controls. AltT2-containing transcripts in the mouse
peripheral nerve were rare compared to the coding region of HK1.
However, 6 of 8 testis AltT2-containing isoforms were found, with
expression patterns differing between the peripheral nerve and the brain
and between newborn and adult tissues in mice. There was no difference
in HK1 mRNA in Schwann cells derived from patients or controls, and
patient cells showed no evidence of HK1 enzyme activity compared to
controls. Bioinformatic tools did not suggest an effect of the G-C
change on HK1 gene splicing or binding sites for interacting proteins.
However, there was evidence that the G-C change may cause a ter-to-tyr
substitution in 1 upstream open reading frame that had a non-AUG start
codon, which could potentially disrupt HK1 translation regulation.
Hantke et al. (2009) speculated that non-OMM-binding HK1 may play a role
in the pathogenesis of HMSNR.

Sevilla et al. (2013) found that 11 patients from 9 Roma Gypsy families
with progressive hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy were homozygous
for the HK1 variant (g.9712G-C) identified by Hantke et al. (2009), and
haplotype analysis confirmed a founder effect in this population. The
founding ancestor was estimated to have lived at the end of the 18th
century, when a population split occurred from a tribal group and the
Gypsy population in Spain increased under the rule of Charles III.

.0004
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA, NONSPHEROCYTIC, DUE TO HEXOKINASE DEFICIENCY
HK1, THR680SER

In a girl, born of consanguineous parents, with severe nonspherocytic
hemolytic anemia due to hexokinase deficiency (235700) previously
reported by Rijksen et al. (1983), van Wijk et al. (2003) identified a
homozygous c.2039C-G transversion in exon 15 of the HK1 gene, resulting
in a thr680-to-ser (T680S) substitution at a highly conserved residue in
the active site. The mutation, which segregated with the disorder in the
family and was not found in 50 controls, was designated 'Utrecht.' In
vitro studies of the mutant enzyme showed that it had a 2-fold decrease
in affinity for Mg-ATP2 and a markedly decreased affinity for the
inhibitor glucose-1,6-diphosphate.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Chern  (1976); Gitelman et al. (1980); Ritter et al. (1974); Rogers
et al. (1975); Snyder et al. (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Andreoni, F.; Ruzzo, A.; Magnani, M.: Structure of the 5-prime
region of the human hexokinase type I (HKI) gene and identification
of an additional testis-specific HKI mRNA. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1493:
19-26, 2000.

2. Bianchi, M.; Crinelli, R.; Serafini, G. Giammarini, C.; Magnani,
M.: Molecular bases of hexokinase deficiency. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1360: 211-221, 1997.

3. Bianchi, M.; Magnani, M.: Hexokinase mutations that produce nonspherocytic
hemolytic anemia. Blood Cells Mol. Dis. 21: 2-8, 1995.

4. Chandler, D.: Personal Communication. Perth, Australia  3/16/2013.

5. Chern, C. J.: Localization of the structural genes for hexokinase-1
and inorganic pyrophosphatase on region (pter-q24) of human chromosome
10. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 17: 338-342, 1976.

6. Dallapiccola, B.; Lungarotti, M. S.; Magnani, M.; Dacha, M.: Evidence
of gene dosage effect for HK1 in the red cells of a patient with trisomy
10pter leads to p13. Ann. Genet. 24: 45-47, 1981.

7. Dallapiccola, B.; Novelli, G.; Micara, G.; Delaroche, I.; Moric-Petrovic,
S.; Magnani, M.: Regional mapping of hexokinase-1 within the short
arm of chromosome 10. Hum. Hered. 34: 156-160, 1984.

8. Daniele, A.; Altruda, F.; Ferrone, M.; Silengo, L.; Romeo, G.;
Archidiacono, N.; Rocchi, M.: Mapping of human hexokinase 1 gene
to 10q11-qter. Hum. Hered. 42: 107-110, 1992.

9. Gelb, B. D.; Worley, K. C.; Griffin, L. D.; Adams, V.; Chinault,
A. C.; McCabe, E. R. B.: Characterization of human genomic artificial
chromosome inserts containing hexokinase 1 coding information on chromosome
10. Biochem. Med. Metab. Biol. 47: 267-269, 1992.

10. Gitelman, B. J.; Simpson, N. E.: Regional mapping of the locus
for hexokinase-1 (HK1) to 10p11-q23 by gene dosage in human fibroblasts. Hum.
Genet. 60: 227-229, 1982.

11. Gitelman, B. J.; Tomkins, D. J.; Partington, M. W.; Roberts, M.
H.; Simpson, N. E.: Gene dosage studies of glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase
(GOT) and hexokinase (HK) in two patients with possible partial trisomy
10q. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 32: 41A only, 1980.

12. Griffin, L. D.; Gelb, B. D.; Wheeler, D. A.; Davison, D.; Adams,
V.; McCabe, E. R. B.: Mammalian hexokinase 1: evolutionary conservation
and structure to function analysis. Genomics 11: 1014-1024, 1991.

13. Hantke, J.; Chandler, D.; King, R.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Angelicheva,
D.; Tournev, I.; McNamara, E.; Kwa, M.; Guergueltcheva, V.; Kaneva,
R.; Baas, F.; Kalaydjieva, L.: A mutation in an alternative untranslated
exon of hexokinase 1 associated with hereditary motor and sensory
neuropathy--Russe (HMSNR). Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 1606-1614,
2009.

14. Mori, C.; Nakamura, N.; Welch, J. E.; Shiota, K.; Eddy, E. M.
: Testis-specific expression of mRNAs for a unique human type 1 hexokinase
lacking the porin-binding domain. Molec. Reprod. Dev. 44: 14-22,
1996.

15. Mori, C.; Welch, J. E.; Fulcher, K. D.; O'Brien, D. A.; Eddy,
E. M.: Unique hexokinase messenger ribonucleic acids lacking the
porin-binding domain are developmentally expressed in mouse spermatogenic
cells. Biol. Reprod. 49: 191-203, 1993.

16. Murakami, K.; Blei, F.; Tilton, W.; Seaman, C.; Piomelli, S.:
An isozyme of hexokinase specific for the human red blood cell (HK-R). Blood 75:
770-775, 1990.

17. Murakami, K.; Piomelli, S.: Identification of the cDNA for human
red blood cell-specific hexokinase isozyme. Blood 89: 762-766, 1997.

18. Nishi, S.; Seino, S.; Bell, G. I.: Human hexokinase: sequences
of amino- and carboxyl-terminal halves are homologous. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 157: 937-943, 1988.

19. Rijksen, G.; Akkerman, J. W. N.; van den Wall Bake, A. W. L.;
Hofstede, D. P.; Staal, G. E. J.: Generalized hexokinase deficiency
in the blood cells of a patient with nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. Blood 61:
12-18, 1983.

20. Ritter, H.; Friedrichson, U.; Schmitt, J.: Genetic polymorphism
of hexokinase in primates. Humangenetik 22: 265-266, 1974.

21. Rogers, P. A.; Fisher, R. A.; Harris, H.: An electrophoretic
study of the distribution and properties of human hexokinases. Biochem.
Genet. 13: 857-866, 1975.

22. Ruzzo, A.; Andreoni, F.; Magnani, M.: Structure of the human
hexokinase type I gene and nucleotide sequence of the 5-prime flanking
region. Biochem. J. 331: 607-613, 1998.

23. Schimke, R. T.; Grossbard, L.: Studies on isozymes of hexokinase
in animal tissues. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 151: 332-350, 1968.

24. Sevilla, T.; Martinez-Rubio, D.; Marquez, C.; Paradas, C.; Colomer,
J.; Jaijo, T.; Millan, J. M.; Palau, F.; Espinos, C.: Genetics of
the Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in the Spanish Gypsy population: the
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy-Russe in depth. Clin. Genet. 83:
565-570, 2013.

25. Shows, T. B.: Synteny of human genes for glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase and hexokinase in somatic cell hybrids. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 13: 143-145, 1974.

26. Shows, T. B.; Eddy, R. L.; Byers, M. G.; Haley, L. L.; Henry,
W. M.; Nishi, S.; Bell, G. I.: Localization of the human hexokinase
I gene (HK1) to chromosome 10q22. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1079 only, 1989.

27. Snyder, F. F.; Lin, C. C.; Rudd, N. L.; Shearer, J. E.; Heikkila,
E. M.; Hoo, J. J.: A de novo case of trisomy 10p: gene dosage studies
of hexokinase, inorganic pyrophosphatase and adenosine kinase. Hum.
Genet. 67: 187-189, 1984.

28. Ureta, T.: The comparative isozymology of vertebrate hexokinases. Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. 71B: 549-555, 1982.

29. van Wijk, R.; Rijksen, G,; Huizinga, E. G.; Nieuwenhuis, H. K.;
van Solinge, W. W.: HK Utrecht: missense mutation in the active site
of human hexokinase associated with hexokinase deficiency and severe
nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. Blood 101: 345-347, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/9/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/4/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 07/09/2013
ckniffin: 7/9/2013
carol: 7/8/2013
carol: 6/7/2013
ckniffin: 6/4/2013
carol: 3/18/2013
carol: 3/8/2013
ckniffin: 3/5/2013
carol: 7/7/2010
carol: 8/5/2002
dkim: 7/2/1998
jenny: 4/4/1997
terry: 4/1/1997
mark: 11/6/1996
mark: 11/1/1995
davew: 8/5/1994
carol: 11/20/1992
carol: 10/13/1992
carol: 8/31/1992
carol: 8/21/1992

189889	TITLE *189889 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR CP2; TFCP2
;;ALPHA-GLOBIN TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR CP2;;
LATE SV40 FACTOR; LSF
LBP1C, INCLUDED;;
LBP1D, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Swendeman et al. (1994) characterized the genomic structure, chromosome
location, promoter, and expression pattern of CP2, a 66-kD cellular
transcription factor that interacts with the alpha-globin (141800)
promoter as well as with additional cellular and viral promoter
elements. Homodimers of CP2, together with a 45-kD partner protein, form
the so-called stage selector protein complex (Jane et al., 1995) that
binds to a proximal gamma-globin gene promoter regulatory sequence,
termed the stage selector element (SSE). The SSE is thought to be
involved in silencing beta globin gene (141900) transcription during
fetal erythropoiesis (Cunningham et al., 1995).

LBP1 is a cellular protein that binds strongly to sequences around the
human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) initiation site and weakly over
the TATA box. By PCR using primers designed from LBP1 purified from HeLa
cell extracts, Yoon et al. (1994) obtained 4 LBP1 cDNAs, which they
termed LBP1A, LBP1B, LBP1C, and LBP1D. LBP1A and LBP1B are splice
variants of UBP1 (609784), and LBP1C and LBP1D are splice variants of
TFCP2. The deduced LBP1C and LBP1D proteins contain 502 and 451 amino
acids, respectively. In vitro translation resulted in proteins with
apparent molecular masses of 64 and 58 kD, respectively. LBP1D lacks
part of a putative N-terminal DNA-binding domain found in LBP1C. LBP1C
shares 72% amino acid identity with LBP1A, with highest identity in the
N-terminal halves.

GENE FUNCTION

Yoon et al. (1994) found that LBP1C bound to the HIV-1 promoter in a
sequence-specific fashion, but LBP1D did not. LBP1C could activate
transcription from a promoter containing an LBP1-binding site. Both
LBP1C and LBP1D could bind the UBP1 isoforms LBP1A and LBP1B and form
heteromeric complexes. However, LBP1D inhibited the binding of the other
LBPs to the LBP1 recognition site on DNA.

By cDNA microarray, Western blot analysis, and luciferase reporter
assay, Yoo et al. (2009) found significant upregulation of LSF and LSF
transcriptional activity in the nuclei of hepatocellular carcinoma cells
(HCC; 114550) expressing AEG1 (MTDH: 610323) compared to those without
AEG1 expression. The increase in LSF activity correlated with
significant increases in the downstream targets thymidylate synthetase
(TYMS; 188350) during the growth cycle and dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPYD; 612779). The AEG1-transfected HCC cells showed more
resistance to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment compared to those without
AEG1 expression, which could be explained by the upregulation of both
TYMS and DPYD. Studies with siRNA targeting AEG1, LSF, or DPYD abrogated
the 5-FU resistance. In nude xenograft mice transfected with an HCC cell
line that expressed AEG1 and showed resistance to 5-FU, inhibition of
AEG1 resulted in significant inhibition in tumor growth, and a
combination of 5-FU and AEG1 inhibition resulted in an additive effect
on tumor growth inhibition. The findings demonstrated that AEG1 confers
resistance to 5-FU by inducing the expression of LSF and DPYD, and
pointed to a central role of AEG1 in HCC development and progression.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Yoo et al. (2010) found that nuclear
expression of LSF was upregulated in human HCC samples compared with
normal liver. FISH suggested that elevated LSF expression was due to
chromosome 12 polysomy in several HCC samples. Overexpression of LSF in
HepG3 cells increased cell proliferation, colony forming ability, and
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar in culture, and it increased
tumor angiogenesis and metastasis in vivo in mice. Overexpression of a
dominant-negative LSF mutant abrogated these effects. Gene expression
profiling revealed significant induction of osteopontin (OPN, or SPP1;
166490), a gene important in tumor metastasis. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis and reporter gene assays confirmed that LSF
bound and activated the OPN promoter. Yoo et al. (2010) concluded that,
by regulating OPN expression, LSF functions as a key regulator of HCC
development and progression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Swendeman et al. (1994) found that the murine and human TFCP2 genes
contain 16 and 15 exons, respectively. Both genes span approximately 30
kb of chromosomal DNA, and among coding exons, all exon/intron
boundaries are conserved.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Swendeman et al. (1994) showed that
the human TFCP2 gene resides on chromosome 12, while interspecific
backcross analysis demonstrated that the murine gene maps to the distal
end of chromosome 15 in a region syntenic with human chromosome 12. The
murine and human promoters initiated mRNAs at multiple start sites in a
conserved region that spanned more than 450 nucleotides.

Cunningham et al. (1995) mapped the TFCP2 gene to 12q13 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization and within 250 kb of NFE2 (601490), another
erythroid-specific transcription factor which binds to sequences in the
beta-globin locus control region (152424).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Lambert et al. (2000) reported an association between a noncoding
polymorphism (G-A) in the 3-prime untranslated region of TFCP2 and
sporadic Alzheimer disease (AD5; 602096) in French and British
populations and a similar trend in a North American population. The
combined analysis of the 3 independent populations suggested a
protective effect of the A allele (OR = 0.58, 95% CI 0.44-0.75). The A
allele demonstrated reduced binding to nuclear protein(s) from a
neuroblastoma cell line, and absence of the A allele was associated with
lower gene expression in lymphocytes from AD cases compared with
controls. The authors suggested that polymorphic variation in TFCP2 may
be important for the pathogenesis of AD, particularly since the gene
product interacts with proteins such as GSK3B (605004), Fe65 (602709),
and certain factors involved in the inflammatory response.

Taylor et al. (2001) reported an analysis of 216 necropsy-confirmed
Alzheimer disease cases and 301 nondemented controls greater than 73
years. The frequency of the A allele of the TFCP2 gene was reduced in
the Alzheimer disease cases compared to the controls (odds ratio = 0.59,
95% CI, 0.35-1.00). However, the genotype frequencies of the Alzheimer
disease cases when compared to controls were not significantly
different. No significant effects were found when the data were adjusted
for age, sex, or the presence of the apoE4 allele (107741.0016).

REFERENCE 1. Cunningham, J. M.; Vanin, E. F.; Tran, N.; Valentine, M.; Jane,
S. M.: The human transcription factor CP2 (TFCP2), a component of
the human gamma-globin stage selector protein, maps to chromosome
region 12q13 and is within 250 kb of the NF-E2 gene. Genomics 30:
398-399, 1995.

2. Jane, S. M.; Nienhuis, A. W.; Cunningham, J. M.: Hemoglobin switching
in man and chicken is mediated by a heteromeric complex between the
ubiquitous transcription factor CP2 and a developmentally specific
protein. EMBO J. 13: 197-105, 1995.

3. Lambert, J.-C.; Goumidi, L.; Wavrant-De Vrieze, F.; Frigard, B.;
Harris, J. M.; Cummings, A.; Coates, J.; Pasquier, F.; Cottel, D.;
Gaillac, M.; St. Clair, D.; Mann, D. M. A.; Hardy, J.; Lendon, C.
L.; Amouyel, P.; Chartier-Harlin, M.-C.: The transcriptional factor
LBP-1c/CP2/LSF gene on chromosome 12 is a genetic determinant of Alzheimer's
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2275-2280, 2000.

4. Swendeman, S. L.; Spielholz, C.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Copeland, N. G.; Sheffery, M.: Characterization of the genomic structure,
chromosomal location, promoter, and developmental expression of the
alpha-globin transcription factor CP2. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 11663-11671,
1994.

5. Taylor, A. E.; Yip, A.; Brayne, C.; Easton, D.; Evans, J. G.; Xuereb,
J.; Cairns, N.; Esiri, M. M.; Rubinsztein, D. C.: Genetic association
of an LBP-1c/CP2/LSF gene polymorphism with late onset Alzheimer's
disease. J. Med. Genet. 38: 232-233, 2001.

6. Yoo, B. K.; Emdad, L.; Gredler, R.; Fuller, C.; Dumur, C. I.; Jones,
K. H.; Jackson-Cook, C.; Su, Z.; Chen, D.; Saxena, U. H.; Hansen,
U.; Fisher, P. B.; Sarkar, D.: Transcription factor Late SV40 Factor
(LSF) functions as an oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 8357-8362, 2010.

7. Yoo, B. K.; Gredler, R.; Vozhilla, N.; Su, Z.; Chen, D.; Forcier,
T.; Shah, K.; Saxena, U.; Hansen, U.; Fisher, P. B.; Sarkar, D.:
Identification of genes conferring resistance to 5-fluorouracil. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 12938-12943, 2009.

8. Yoon, J.-B.; Li, G.; Roeder, R. G.: Characterization of a family
of related cellular transcription factors which can modulate human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 transcription in vitro. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 14: 1776-1785, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/24/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/23/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/13/2005
Michael J. Wright  - updated: 7/1/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/14/2000
Alan F. Scott - updated: 1/15/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED mgross: 05/27/2011
terry: 5/24/2011
wwang: 10/5/2010
ckniffin: 9/23/2010
mgross: 12/13/2005
carol: 9/20/2004
alopez: 7/2/2002
terry: 7/1/2002
cwells: 1/12/2001
terry: 12/14/2000
mark: 6/14/1997
carol: 11/10/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 1/15/1996
jason: 6/17/1994

191523	TITLE *191523 UPSTREAM STIMULATORY FACTOR 1; USF1
;;MAJOR LATE TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR; MLTF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a ubiquitously expressed cellular
transcription factor. Purified USF consists of 2 related polypeptides,
USF1, of 43 kD, and USF2 (600390), of 44 kD. USF1 belongs to the MYC
(190080) family of DNA-binding proteins (Gregor et al., 1990; Viollet et
al., 1996).

CLONING

Gregor et al. (1990) cloned USF1 by microsequence analysis of purified
USF protein. USF1 contains a C-terminal DNA-binding domain that includes
a helix-loop-helix motif and a leucine repeat. Gregor et al. (1990) also
identified alternatively spliced USF1 variants.

Sirito et al. (1994) cloned mouse Usf1. Northern blot analysis detected
Usf1 expression in all mouse tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Gregor et al. (1990) found that USF1 interacted with its target DNA as a
dimer. The leucine repeat of USF1 was required for efficient DNA binding
and USF1 dimerization, but the isolated helix-loop-helix domain also
bound DNA.

Sirito et al. (1994) found that mouse Usf1 and Usf2 had similar DNA
binding properties.

Viollet et al. (1996) found that USF1/USF2a heterodimers represented
more than 66% of the USF-binding activity in vivo, whereas USF1 and
USF2a homodimers represented less that 10%. USF1/USF2b heterodimers
accounted for almost 15% of the USF species in some cell lines. The
preferential heterodimerization of USF subunits was reproduced ex vivo,
but in vitro cotranslated subunits or recombinant USF proteins dimerized
randomly. In transiently transfected HeLa or hepatoma cells, USF2a and
USF1 homodimers transactivated a minimal promoter with similar
efficiency, whereas USF2b was a poor transactivator of the minimal
promoter. USF1, USF2a, and USF2b homodimers were equally efficient in
transactivating the liver-specific pyruvate kinase gene (609712)
promoter.

By transfection experiments, Roy et al. (1997) found that USF1 can act
synergistically with GTF2I (601679) to activate transcription through
both pyrimidine-rich initiator (Inr) elements and E-box elements of the
adenovirus major late promoter. By mutation analysis, they determined
that this synergistic action requires both the activation and
dimerization domains of USF1. By in vitro cotranslation followed by
coimmunoprecipitation studies, they confirmed direct protein interaction
between GTF2I and USF1.

Iynedjian (1998) demonstrated that mammalian USF1 activated reporter
gene expression from the E box within the promoter of the liver-specific
glucokinase gene (GCK; 138079). Expression of a truncated form of USF1
lacking the transcription activation domain and the basic region
decreased reporter activity by a dominant-negative effect.

Hosts and pathogens evolve various responses for controlling infection
and evading destruction, respectively. Using column chromatography,
Zhong et al. (2001) identified a factor in Chlamydia trachomatis, the
causative organism of trachoma and chronic urogenital infection, that
degrades the transcription factors RFX5 (601863) and USF1. The
degradation of these host factors correlates with the suppression of MHC
class I and class II antigen expression in infected cells, thereby
suppressing the host immune response.

Resting human lymphocytes do not have telomerase activity, but
activation by a variety of stimuli induces TERT (187270) expression and
telomerase activity. Yago et al. (2002) found that activated human T and
B lymphocytes expressed USF1 and the full-length isoform of USF2, and
that dimers of these proteins bound E boxes in the TERT promoter and
activated TERT expression. In contrast, resting human T and B
lymphocytes expressed both the N-terminally truncated isoform of USF2
and full-length USF2, and the truncated isoform had a dominant-negative
effect on TERT expression induced by full-length USF2.

MAPPING

Shieh et al. (1993) assigned the USF1 gene to 1q22-q23 by study of
mouse/human somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization. With the
isolation of the Usf1 cDNA in the mouse by RT-PCR, Henrion et al. (1995)
could use isotopic in situ hybridization to map the gene to bands 1H and
11C-E in the mouse. Since chromosome 1 of the mouse is homologous to the
region of human chromosome 1 where USF1 is located, Henrion et al.
(1995) suggested that the sequence on chromosome 11 is a pseudogene or a
related gene. In the mouse, Steingrimsson et al. (1995) mapped this and
4 other bHLH-ZIP transcription factors by interspecific backcross
analysis. Usf1 had previously been mapped to mouse chromosome 1 by in
situ hybridization, but its position on the meiotic linkage map had not
been determined. Its location was consistent with the location of the
human gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Pajukanta et al. (2004) showed that familial combined hyperlipidemia
(FCHL1; 602491) was linked and associated with the USF1 gene in 60
extended Finnish families, including 721 genotyped individuals (p =
0.00002), especially in males with high triglycerides (p = 0.0000009).
They identified several SNPs in tight linkage disequilibrium and a
common SNP haplotype defining the disease-associated USF1 allele. They
also identified a new putative regulatory element in USF1 flanking the
susceptibility haplotype.

Shoulders (2004) diagrammed a theoretical scenario whereby the use of a
putative promoter in intron 7 of USF1 might lead to the generation of a
mini-USF1 protein lacking the transactivation domain. Because mini-USF
proteins in vitro behave as transdominant inhibitors
(Lefrancois-Martinez et al., 1995; Viollet et al., 1996), whether the
putative promoter identified by Pajukanta et al. (2004) might operate in
vivo to downregulate USF1 activity should be established.

USF1 is a transcription factor controlling expression of several genes
involved in lipid and glucose homeostasis and colocalizes with FCHL and
type 2 diabetes (see 125853) on chromosome 1q22-q23. Putt et al. (2004)
identified 3 common polymorphisms in USF1 and examined their association
with fasting and postprandial lipids and with response to an oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) in the European Atherosclerosis Research
Study II offspring study. In haplotype analysis, 475C/1748T showed
significantly higher and 475T/1748T showed lower peak glucose during the
OGTT. There was significant case-control heterogeneity in the
interaction of genotype with body mass index (BMI) and fasting low
density lipoprotein (LDL) with 306A-G and 1748C-T, respectively. The
interaction of BMI and 475C-T on fasting glucose levels achieved
case-control heterogeneity of borderline significance. Furthermore,
475C-T showed interaction with polymorphisms in both hormone-sensitive
lipase (HSL; 151750) and APOC3 (107720) on area under the curve (AUC)
triglycerides and plasma apoE levels, respectively. Putt et al. (2004)
concluded that in these healthy young men, variation in USF1 was the
influencing feature of both glucose and lipid homeostasis, showing
case-control heterogeneity.

Coon et al. (2005) reported an association between the 2 USF1 SNPs
identified by Pajukanta et al. (2004) and FCHL, LDL cholesterol, and
triglycerides in a large sample of 2,195 individuals from 87 Utah
pedigrees. The pedigrees were ascertained for traits related to FCHL,
including early death due to coronary heart disease, early strokes, or
early-onset hypertension.

ANIMAL MODEL

By analyzing the glucose responsiveness of Usf knockout mice, Vallet et
al. (1998) determined that normal responsiveness required either
Usf1/Usf2 heterodimers or Usf2 homodimers, even in mice with total Usf
binding activity reduced by half. Usf1 homodimers gave rise to delayed
glucose responsiveness.

Casado et al. (1999) stated that the E box within the FASN (600212)
promoter is regulated by USF1, USF2, and SREBP1 (184756). They analyzed
the glucose responsiveness of hepatic Fasn gene expression in Usf1 and
Usf2 knockout mice and found that in both types of mutant mice,
induction of the Fasn gene by refeeding a carbohydrate-rich diet was
severely delayed. In contrast, expression of Srebp1 was almost normal,
and insulin response was unchanged. Casado et al. (1999) concluded that
the USF transactivators, and especially USF1/USF2 heterodimers, are
essential to sustain the dietary induction of the FASN gene in liver.

Wu et al. (2010) reported that overexpression of human USF1 in both
transgenic mice and mice with transient liver-specific overexpression
influenced metabolic trait phenotypes, including obesity, total
cholesterol level, LDL and VLDL cholesterol level, and glucose/insulin
ratio. Additional analyses of trait and hepatic gene expression data
from an F2 population derived from C57BL/6J and C3H/HeJ strains in which
there is a naturally occurring variation in Usf1 expression supported a
causal role for Usf1 for relevant metabolic traits. Gene network and
pathway analyses of the liver gene expression signatures in the F2
population and the hepatic overexpression model suggested the
involvement of Usf1 in immune responses and metabolism, including an
Igfbp2 (146731)-centered module. In all 3 mouse model settings, notable
sex specificity was observed, consistent with human studies showing
differences in association with USF1 gene polymorphisms between sexes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERLIPIDEMIA, FAMILIAL COMBINED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
USF1, USF1S1

Pajukanta et al. (2004) identified 2 SNPs of the USF1 gene, usf1s1
(dbSNP rs3737787) and usf1s2 (191523.0002), that were associated with
familial combined hyperlipidemia mapping to a locus on 1q21-q23
(602491). The usf1s1 SNP is located in the 3-prime untranslated region
(Naukkarinen et al., 2005). The common alleles (1-1) of the 2 SNPs
define an at-risk haplotype. Allelic associations of the at-risk
haplotype were found with triglycerides, apoB (107730), total
cholesterol, and LDL peak particle size, supporting the concept that
USF1 affects the complex lipid phenotype of FCHL and not only 1 lipid
trait.

.0002
HYPERLIPIDEMIA, FAMILIAL COMBINED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
USF1, USF1S2

The usf1s2 SNP (dbSNP rs2073658) is located in intron 7; see 191523.0001
and Pajukanta et al. (2004).

Naukkarinen et al. (2005) identified a 20-bp DNA sequence in intron 7 of
the USF1 gene, containing dbSNP rs2073658, that bound nuclear proteins
and likely represented a transcriptional regulatory element. This
functional role was further supported by the differential expression of
USF1-regulated genes in fat biopsy between individuals carrying
different allelic variants of USF1. Apolipoprotein E (APOE; 107741) was
the most downregulated gene in the at-risk individuals, linking the
potential risk alleles of USF1 with the impaired APOE-dependent
catabolism of atherogenic lipoprotein particles.

REFERENCE 1. Casado, M.; Vallet, V. S.; Kahn, A.; Vaulont, S.: Essential role
in vivo of upstream stimulatory factors for a normal dietary response
of the fatty acid synthase gene in the liver. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
2009-2013, 1999.

2. Coon, H.; Xin, Y.; Hopkins, P. N.; Cawthon, R. M.; Hasstedt, S.
J.; Hunt, S. C.: Upstream stimulatory factor 1 associated with familial
combined hyperlipidemia, LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides. Hum.
Genet. 117: 444-451, 2005.

3. Gregor, P. D.; Sawadogo, M.; Roeder, R. G.: The adenovirus major
late transcription factor USF is a member of the helix-loop-helix
group of regulatory proteins and binds to DNA as a dimer. Genes Dev. 4:
1730-1740, 1990.

4. Henrion, A. A.; Martinez, A.; Mattei, M.-G.; Kahn, A.; Raymondjean,
M.: Structure, sequence, and chromosomal location of the gene for
USF2 transcription factors in mouse. Genomics 25: 36-43, 1995.

5. Iynedjian, P. B.: Identification of upstream stimulatory factor
as transcriptional activator of the liver promoter of the glucokinase
gene. Biochem. J. 333: 705-712, 1998.

6. Lefrancois-Martinez, A.-M.; Martinez, A.; Antoine, B.; Raymondjean,
M.; Kahn, A.: Upstream stimulatory factor proteins are major components
of the glucose response complex of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene
promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 2640-2643, 1995.

7. Naukkarinen, J.; Gentile, M.; Soro-Paavonen, A.; Saarela, J.; Koistinen,
H. A.; Pajukanta, P.; Taskinen, M.-R.; Peltonen, L.: USF1 and dyslipidemias:
converging evidence for a functional intronic variant. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 2595-2605, 2005.

8. Pajukanta, P.; Lilja, H. E.; Sinsheimer, J. S.; Cantor, R. M.;
Lusis, A. J.; Gentile, M.; Duan, X. J.; Soro-Paavonen, A.; Naukkarinen,
J.; Saarela, J.; Laakso, M.; Ehnholm, C.; Taskinen, M.-R.; Peltonen,
L.: Familial combined hyperlipidemia is associated with upstream
transcription factor 1 (USF1). Nature Genet. 36: 371-376, 2004.

9. Putt, W.; Palmen, J.; Nicaud, V.; Tregouet, D.-A.; Tahri-Daizadeh,
N.; Flavell, D. M.; Humphries, S. E.; Talmud, P. J.: Variation in
USF1 shows haplotype effects, gene:gene and gene:environment associations
with glucose and lipid parameters in the European Atherosclerosis
Research Study II. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 1587-1597, 2004.

10. Roy, A. L.; Du, H.; Gregor, P. D.; Novina, C. D.; Martinez, E.;
Roeder, R. G.: Cloning of an Inr- and E-box binding protein, TFII-I,
that interacts physically and functionally with USF1. EMBO J. 16:
7091-7104, 1997.

11. Shieh, B.-H.; Sparkes, R. S.; Gaynor, R. B.; Lusis, A. J.: Localization
of the gene-encoding upstream stimulatory factor (USF) to human chromosome
1q22-q23. Genomics 16: 266-268, 1993.

12. Shoulders, C. C.: USF1 on trial. Nature Genet. 36: 322-323,
2004.

13. Sirito, M.; Lin, Q.; Maity, T.; Sawadogo, M.: Ubiquitous expression
of the 43- and 44-kDa forms of transcription factor USF in mammalian
cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 22: 427-433, 1994.

14. Steingrimsson, E.; Sawadogo, M.; Gilbert, D. J.; Zervos, A. S.;
Brent, R.; Blanar, M. A.; Fisher, D. E.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.: Murine chromosomal location of five bHLH-Zip transcription
factor genes. Genomics 28: 179-183, 1995.

15. Vallet, V. S.; Casado, M.; Henrion, A. A.; Bucchini, D.; Raymondjean,
M.; Kahn, A.; Vaulont, S.: Differential roles of upstream stimulatory
factors 1 and 2 in the transcriptional response of liver genes to
glucose. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 20175-20179, 1998.

16. Viollet, B.; Lefrancois-Martinez, A.-M.; Henrion, A.; Kahn, A.;
Raymondjean, M.; Martinez, A.: Immunochemical characterization and
transacting properties of upstream stimulatory factor isoforms. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 1405-1415, 1996.

17. Wu, S.; Mar-Heyming, R.; Dugum, E. Z.; Kolaitis, N. A.; Qi, H.;
Pajukanta, P.; Castellani, L. W.; Lusis, A. J.; Drake, T. A.: Upstream
transcription factor 1 influences plasma lipid and metabolic traits
in mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 597-608, 2010.

18. Yago, M.; Ohki, R.; Hatakeyama, S.; Fujita, T.; Ishikawa, F.:
Variant forms of upstream stimulatory factors (USFs) control the promoter
activity of hTERT, the human gene encoding the catalytic subunit of
telomerase. FEBS Lett. 520: 40-46, 2002.

19. Zhong, G.; Fan, P.; Ji, H.; Dong, F.; Huang, Y.: Identification
of a chlamydial protease-like activity factor responsible for the
degradation of host transcription factors. J. Exp. Med. 193: 935-942,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 2/8/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/23/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/16/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/23/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/5/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/18/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/18/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/7/1993

EDITED wwang: 03/11/2011
terry: 2/8/2011
wwang: 1/23/2009
carol: 2/2/2007
alopez: 1/17/2007
terry: 1/16/2007
mgross: 12/5/2006
mgross: 11/17/2006
terry: 11/15/2006
terry: 11/13/2006
wwang: 11/8/2005
wwang: 10/26/2005
ckniffin: 10/17/2005
terry: 8/17/2004
alopez: 5/20/2004
mgross: 5/7/2004
mgross: 4/23/2004
alopez: 4/8/2004
alopez: 4/7/2004
terry: 4/5/2004
alopez: 4/2/2004
alopez: 3/18/2004
carol: 4/18/2002
mgross: 10/4/2001
mark: 11/14/1995
carol: 2/10/1995
carol: 5/7/1993

603957	TITLE *603957 FLAVIN-CONTAINING MONOOXYGENASE 5; FMO5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The flavin-containing monooxygenases (EC 1.14.13.8) catalyze the
oxidation of nucleophilic nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus atoms in a
wide variety of compounds, including many pesticides and drugs (Phillips
et al., 1995).

CLONING

By screening liver cDNA libraries with rabbit FMO5 as probe, Overby et
al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding guinea pig and human FMO5. The
predicted 533-amino acid human protein shares 85% and 87% sequence
identity with rabbit and guinea pig FMO5, respectively. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the human FMO5 gene is expressed as 2.6- and
3.8-kb mRNAs in liver. The FMO5 protein had an apparent molecular mass
of 60 kD on Western blots of adult and neonatal human liver.

Phillips et al. (1995) cloned human FMO5 by screening adult human
placenta and liver cDNA libraries with the rabbit coding sequence. The
deduced protein is between 51 and 56% identical to the 4 previously
identified human FMO proteins and shares the highest sequence identity
with FMO2 (603955).

GENE FUNCTION

Overby et al. (1995) found that the rabbit, guinea pig, and human FMO5
enzymes exhibited similar catalytic activities, which were distinct from
those of other FMOs. The authors concluded that FMO5 is not an efficient
drug-metabolizing enzyme and that it may have an alternative physiologic
role.

Miller et al. (1997) demonstrated that FMO5 transcripts are
progesterone-regulated in breast cancer cells specifically under the
control of the progesterone receptor B-isoform (PRB; 607311). Because
FMOs are involved in the metabolic activation of drugs and xenobiotic
compounds, including tamoxifen, the authors speculated that progesterone
may enhance the carcinogenicity of tamoxifen in target tissues that
overexpress PRB by upregulating FMO5.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrids, McCombie et al. (1996) mapped
the FMO2 (603955) and FMO5 genes to chromosome 1q, where 3 other human
FMO genes are located. Using sequence analysis of a YAC contig, Gelb et
al. (1997) found that the FMO5 gene is located between the NPR1 (108960)
and CX40 (GJA5; 121013) genes. By FISH, they mapped this contig to
1q21.1. Gelb et al. (1997) noted that since the FMO1 gene maps to
1q23-q25, this excluded the possibility that a single gene cluster
contains the entire FMO family.

REFERENCE 1. Gelb, B. D.; Zhang, J.; Cotter, P. D.; Gershin, I. F.; Desnick,
R. J.: Physical mapping of the human connexin 40 (GJA5), flavin-containing
monooxygenase 5, and natriuretic peptide receptor A genes on 1q21. Genomics 39:
409-411, 1997.

2. McCombie, R. R.; Dolphin, C. T.; Povey, S.; Phillips, I. R.; Shephard,
E. A.: Localization of human flavin-containing monooxygenase genes
FMO2 and FMO5 to chromosome 1q. Genomics 34: 426-429, 1996.

3. Miller, M. M.; James, R. A.; Richer, J. K.; Gordon, D. F.; Wood,
W. M.; Horwitz, K. B.: Progesterone regulated expression of flavin-containing
monooxygenase 5 by the B-isoform of progesterone receptors: implications
for tamoxifen carcinogenicity. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82: 2956-2961,
1997.

4. Overby, L. H.; Buckpitt, A. R.; Lawton, M. P.; Atta-Asafo-Adjei,
E.; Schulze, J.; Philpot, R. M.: Characterization of flavin-containing
monooxygenase 5 (FMO5) cloned from human and guinea pig: evidence
that the unique catalytic properties of FMO5 are not confined to the
rabbit ortholog. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 317: 275-284, 1995.

5. Phillips, I. R.; Dolphin, C. T.; Clair, P.; Hadley, M. R.; Hutt,
A. J.; McCombie, R. R.; Smith, R. L.; Shephard, E. A.: The molecular
biology of the flavin-containing monooxygenases of man. Chem. Biol.
Interact. 96: 17-32, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 6/3/2008

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/1/1999

EDITED carol: 06/06/2008
carol: 6/5/2008
joanna: 6/3/2008
mgross: 7/1/1999

609061	TITLE *609061 ENABLED, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; ENAH
;;ENA;;
MAMMALIAN ENABLED; MENA;;
NDPP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sazuka et al. (1992) cloned mouse Enah, which they called Ndpp1. The
3-prime UTR contains 7 ATTTA mRNA destabilization motifs. The deduced
389-amino acid protein has a proline-rich N terminus, followed by a
leucine/proline-rich region, a 4-arginine cluster near a possible alpha
helix, and a second possible alpha helix at the C terminus. Enah also
has 3 putative N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected a
number of mRNA species that were downregulated during mouse embryonic
development and were only faintly detected in adult mouse brain.
Southern blot analysis of RT-PCR products found Enah expressed in
several adult mouse tissues, with highest expression in heart and
testis. Southern blot analysis detected homologs of mouse Enah in
several vertebrate species, including human.

Tani et al. (2003) cloned full-length mouse Enah, which they called
Mena, and a shorter splice variant, which they called Mena(S). The
full-length Mena cDNA encodes a deduced 541-amino acid protein
containing an N-terminal Ena/VASP (601703) homology-1 (EVH1) domain, an
arg-leu-glu-rich region, a pro-rich profilin (176610)-binding motif, and
a C-terminal EVH2 domain. The Mena(S) cDNA encodes a deduced 508-amino
acid protein that lacks a portion of the profilin-binding motif.
Immunofluorescence microscopy localized Mena at focal contacts and the
leading edge of mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

By database analysis and PCR and 5-prime RACE of adult and fetal brain
and fibroblast cDNA libraries, Urbanelli et al. (2006) cloned
full-length human ENAH. The deduced 570-amino acid ENAH protein shares
86.6% identity with mouse Enah. Human ENAH has N- and C-terminal EVH
domains separated by a LERER repeat region and a proline-rich region. It
also has potential phosphorylation sites and 2 short amino acid
stretches located in an arg-leu-glu-rich region that are not found in
mouse Enah. The LERER repeats are predicted to form an extended helix
with alternating charges. Northern blot analysis detected a major
transcript of about 4.8 kb in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in skeletal muscle, pancreas, and placenta, and lowest
expression in brain. A smaller transcript was also detected in skeletal
muscle. RT-PCR detected an ENAH splice variant homologous to the mouse
Enah(S) variant in a human glioblastoma cell line and 3 ENAH splice
variants homologous to 3 mouse neural-specific Enah variants in a human
neuroblastoma cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

By pull-down from mouse brain lysates and coimmunoprecipitation of COS
cells overexpressing rat Fe65 (APBB1; 602709), Ermekova et al. (1997)
determined that the WW domain of rat Fe65 interacted with the
polyproline-rich region of mouse Mena.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Tani et al. (2003) found that human ABI1
(SSH3BP1; 603050) bound mouse Mena. Binding analysis revealed that the
EVH1 domain of Mena bound a polyproline structure of ABI1. Endogenous
MENA and ABL1 (189980) coprecipitated with epitope-tagged ABI1 from
human embryonic kidney cells. ABI1 dramatically promoted ABL1-mediated
tyrosine phosphorylation of MENA, but not of other substrates. Mutation
analysis demonstrated that Mena was tyrosine phosphorylated on tyr296.

Using a rat adenocarcinoma cell line and nude mice, Philippar et al.
(2008) found that 1 splice variant of Mena encodes an isoform that
functions in cell invasion. This isoform, which they called Mena(INV),
promoted carcinoma cell motility and invasiveness in vivo and in vitro
and increased lung metastasis. Both Mena and Mena(INV) potentiated EGF
(131530)-induced membrane protrusion and increased the matrix
degradation activity of tumor cells. However, Mena(INV) more efficiently
drove metastases and sensitized cells to EGF-dependent membrane
protrusion and invasion.

GENE STRUCTURE

Urbanelli et al. (2006) determined that the ENAH gene contains 14 major
exons and spans approximately 157 kb. Alternative splicing results in
the inclusion of a larger form of exon 6, 2 additional minor exons in
intron 3, and/or an additional intron in exon 7.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Urbanelli et al. (2006) mapped the ENAH
gene to chromosome 1q42.13. They mapped the mouse Enah gene to
chromosome 1H5.

REFERENCE 1. Ermekova, K. S.; Zambrano, N.; Linn, H.; Minopoli, G.; Gertler,
F.; Russo, T.; Sudol, M.: The WW domain of neural protein FE65 interacts
with proline-rich motifs in Mena, the mammalian homolog of Drosophila
Enabled. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 32869-32877, 1997.

2. Philippar, U.; Roussos, E. T.; Oser, M.; Yamaguchi, H.; Kim, H.-D.;
Giampieri, S.; Wang, Y.; Goswami, S.; Wyckoff, J. B.; Lauffenburger,
D. A.; Sahai, E.; Condeelis, J. S.; Gertler, F. B.: A Mena invasion
isoform potentiates EGF-induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis. Dev.
Cell 15: 813-828, 2008.

3. Sazuka, T.; Tomooka, Y.; Kathju, S.; Ikawa, Y.; Noda, M.; Kumar,
S.: Identification of a developmentally regulated gene in the mouse
central nervous system which encodes a novel proline rich protein. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1132: 240-248, 1992.

4. Tani, K.; Sato, S.; Sukezane, T.; Kojima, H.; Hirose, H.; Hanafusa,
H.; Shishido, T.: Abl interactor 1 promotes tyrosine 296 phosphorylation
of mammalian Enabled (Mena) by c-Abl kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
21685-21692, 2003.

5. Urbanelli, L.; Massini, C.; Emiliani, C.; Orlacchio, A.; Bernardi,
G.; Oralcchio, A.: Characterization of human Enah gene. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1759: 99-107, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/13/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/6/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/13/2010
terry: 10/13/2010
mgross: 12/6/2004

605828	TITLE *605828 TRANSMEMBRANE CHANNEL-LIKE PROTEIN 6; TMC6
;;EPIDERMODYSPLASIA VERRUCIFORMIS GENE 1; EVER1; EV1
DESCRIPTION For phenotypic information on epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV), see
226400.

CLONING

Ramoz et al. (2002) positionally cloned the EVER1 gene from the EV1
locus on 17q25 (Ramoz et al., 1999). Computational analysis of the EV1
interval on the Human Genome Draft Sequence allowed construction of a
contig of partially sequenced overlapping BACs. The region contained the
genes encoding thymidine kinase-1 (TK1; 188300) and synaptogyrin-2
(SYNGR2; 603926) as well as the EV1 and EV2 genes, which were assigned
the symbols EVER1 and EVER2 (605829), respectively. The EVER1 gene
encodes 2 alternatively spliced proteins, one of 805 amino acids and the
other of 454 amino acids, in the same open reading frame. The EVER1
protein was predicted to contain 10 transmembrane domains and 2 leucine
zipper motifs. EVER1 shares approximately 75% amino acid identity with a
mouse homolog, and EVER1 and EVER2 share approximately 28% of their
constituent amino acids. EVER1 and EVER2 are expressed in the cytoplasm
and colocalize with calnexin (114217), an integral membrane protein
located in the endoplasmic reticulum.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ramoz et al. (2002) determined that the EVER1 gene contains 20 exons.
The EVER1 and EVER2 genes are in opposite orientation from the first
in-frame ATG start codon and are separated by 4,732 bp.

MAPPING

Ramoz et al. (1999) mapped a susceptibility locus for epidermodysplasia
verruciformis (226400) to chromosome 17qter (EV1), within the 1-cM
interval between markers D17S939 and D17S802 in 3 consanguineous
families. Ramoz et al. (2000) performed genotyping for 10 microsatellite
markers spanning 29 cM around EV1 in 2 additional consanguineous
epidermodysplasia verruciformis families. Using homozygosity mapping,
linkage with 17qter markers was observed in 1 family, and multipoint
linkage analysis yielded maximum multipoint lod score values above 10
between markers D17S1839 and D17S802, encompassing the EV1 locus.

Ramoz et al. (2002) narrowed the EV1 interval to about 180 kb on 17q25
and cloned the EVER1 gene from this region.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ramoz et al. (2002) studied 2 Algerian and 2 Colombian consanguineous
families who had been previously described (Ramoz et al., 1999; Ramoz et
al., 2000) and an additional EV1-linked Algerian family in which an
individual was affected with HPV5. In 2 Algerian families and in 1
Colombian family, Ramoz et al. (2002) found that epidermodysplasia
verruciformis was associated with homozygosity for separate nonsense
mutations of the EVER1 gene. They also found 2 mutations in the EVER2
gene.

In a Japanese woman with epidermodysplasia verruciformis, Tate et al.
(2004) identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in the EVER1
gene (605828.0003-605828.0004).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EPIDERMODYSPLASIA VERRUCIFORMIS
TMC6, ARG94TER

In 2 consanguineous Algerian families, Ramoz et al. (2002) found that
epidermodysplasia verruciformis (226400) was associated with
homozygosity for a C-to-T transition of nucleotide 280 in the TMC6 cDNA,
predicted to cause a nonsense change, arg94 to ter (R94X). Affected
individuals in the 2 families shared the same haplotype markers in
homozygosity, suggesting a common ancestral mutation.

.0002
EPIDERMODYSPLASIA VERRUCIFORMIS
TMC6, GLU576TER

In a consanguineous Colombian family, Ramoz et al. (2002) found that
epidermodysplasia verruciformis (226400) was associated with
homozygosity for a 1726G-T transversion in the TMC6 gene, resulting in a
glu576-to-ter (E576X) mutation.

.0003
EPIDERMODYSPLASIA VERRUCIFORMIS
TMC6, TYR248TER

In a 65-year-old Japanese woman with epidermodysplasia verruciformis
(226400), Tate et al. (2004) found compound heterozygosity for mutations
in the TMC6 gene: a 744C-A transversion in exon 8, resulting in a
tyr248-to-ter mutation (Y248X), and an IVS8AS-2A-T transversion
(605828.0004). The patient had suffered from warts beginning when she
was a teenager. Excision of Bowen disease from the skin of the hand was
carried out 3 times at the ages of 51, 52, and 64 years, and gastrectomy
was performed for gastric cancer when she was 53 years of age. Multiple
skin cancers of the face showed squamous cell carcinoma and Bowen
disease. The parents were unaffected and were not related. Three of 6
sibs were also affected.

.0004
EPIDERMODYSPLASIA VERRUCIFORMIS
TMC6, IVS8AS, A-T, -2

See 605828.0003 and Tate et al. (2004).

REFERENCE 1. Ramoz, N.; Rueda, L.-A.; Bouadjar, B.; Favre, M.; Orth, G.: A
susceptibility locus for epidermodysplasia verruciformis, an abnormal
predisposition to infection with the oncogenic human papillomavirus
type 5, maps to chromosome 17qter in a region containing a psoriasis
locus. J. Invest. Derm. 112: 259-263, 1999.

2. Ramoz, N.; Rueda, L.-A.; Bouadjar, B.; Montoya, L.-S.; Orth, G.;
Favre, M.: Mutations in two adjacent novel genes are associated with
epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Nature Genet. 32: 579-581, 2002.

3. Ramoz, N.; Taieb, A.; Rueda, L.-A.; Montoya, L.-S.; Bouadjar, B.;
Favre, M.; Orth, G.: Evidence for a nonallelic heterogeneity of epidermodysplasia
verruciformis with two susceptibility loci mapped to chromosome regions
2p21-p24 and 17q25. J. Invest. Derm. 114: 1148-1153, 2000.

4. Tate, G.; Suzuki, T.; Kishimoto, K.; Mitsuya, T.: Novel mutations
of EVER1/TMC6 gene in a Japanese patient with epidermodysplasia verruciformis. J.
Hum. Genet. 49: 223-225, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/13/2004

CREATED Gary A. Bellus: 4/6/2001

EDITED mgross: 04/14/2010
ckniffin: 1/13/2010
tkritzer: 5/20/2004
terry: 5/13/2004
alopez: 11/27/2002
terry: 11/26/2002
alopez: 4/6/2001

612681	TITLE *612681 CUGBP- AND ELAV-LIKE FAMILY, MEMBER 6; CELF6
;;BRUNO-LIKE 6; BRUNOL6;;
CUGBP- AND ETR3-LIKE FACTOR 6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the CELF family, such as CELF6, play various roles in
cotranscriptional and posttranscriptional RNA processing. All CELF
proteins appear to affect pre-mRNA splicing, but individual CELFs have
divergent roles in regulating mRNA stability and translation (summary by
Wagnon et al., 2012).

CLONING

By searching databases for human sequences similar to Xenopus Brunol1
(TNRC4; 612678), Good et al. (2000) identified BRUNOL6. The deduced
protein contains 2 N-terminal domain RNA-recognition motifs (RRMs), a
long linker region, and a C-terminal RRM.

By searching genomic sequences from CELF-like proteins, followed by PCR
of a human brain cDNA library, Ladd et al. (2004) cloned full-length
BRUNOL6, which they called CELF6. The deduced 481-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 50.4 kD. CELF6 has 3 RRMs, with a
268-amino acid divergent domain separating RRM2 and RRM3. It also has
numerous potential phosphorylation sites, a potential nuclear
localization signal at the C terminus, and an alanine-rich region within
the divergent domain. Ladd et al. (2004) also identified 3 splice
variants of CELF6 that encode proteins with C-terminal truncations
compared with full-length CELF6 (isoform-1). Isoform-2 contains RRM1 and
part of RRM2, isoform-3, the shortest isoform, contains only RRM1, and
isoform-4 contains RRM1, RRM2, and part of the divergent domain.
Northern blot analysis detected 7.5- and 4.0-kb transcripts that were
abundantly expressed in kidney and brain, respectively. Both variants
were detected at low levels in several other tissues. RNA dot blot
analysis revealed highest CELF6 expression in adult kidney, brain, and
testis, with low expression in most other tissues. CELF6 was detected in
fetal brain, but only low expression was detected in fetal kidney.
Western blot analysis showed that full-length CELF6, isoform-2, and
isoform-4 were expressed in transfected quail fibroblasts, but isoform-3
was not detected, apparently due to protein instability.

GENE FUNCTION

CELF proteins (e.g., TNRC4; 612678) promote active exon inclusion of
cardiac troponin T (TNNT2; 191045) minigenes in vivo via muscle-specific
splicing enhancer (MSE) sequences. Ladd et al. (2004) showed that
full-length CELF6, isoform-2, and isoform-4 promoted exon inclusion from
these minigenes in a dose- and isoform-dependent manner. Full-length
CELF6 also promoted insulin receptor (INSR; 147670) exon 11 skipping in
a dose-dependent manner, similar to CUGBP (601074), whereas CELF6
isoform-4 showed weaker exon skipping potential, and isoform-2 had no
effect.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Good et al. (2000) mapped the BRUNOL6 gene
to chromosome 15q24.

REFERENCE 1. Good, P. J.; Chen, Q.; Warner, S. J.; Herring, D. C.: A family
of human RNA-binding proteins related to the Drosophila Bruno transcriptional
regulator. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 28583-28592, 2000.

2. Ladd, A. N.; Nguyen, N. H.; Malhotra, K.; Cooper, T. A.: CELF6,
a member of the CELF family of RNA-binding proteins, regulates muscle-specific
splicing enhancer-dependent alternative splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
17756-17764, 2004.

3. Wagnon, J. L.; Briese, M.; Sun, W.; Mahaffey, C. L.; Curk, T.;
Rot, G.; Ule, J.; Frankel, W. N.: CELF4 regulates translation and
local abundance of a vast set of mRNAs, including genes associated
with regulation of synaptic function. PLoS Genet. 8: e1003067, 2012.
Note: Electronic Article.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 07/26/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/19/2009

EDITED mgross: 07/26/2013
mgross: 3/20/2009
mgross: 3/19/2009

613741	TITLE *613741 GLYCOGEN PHOSPHORYLASE, LIVER; PYGL
;;LGP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phosphorylases (EC 2.4.1.1), such as PYGL, remove glycosyl units from
the terminal branches of glycogen through phosphorolysis, forming
glucose 1-phosphate. During stress, exercise, hypoxia, and hypoglycemia,
phosphorylase activity is primarily regulated by interconversion of the
active phosphorylated form and the inactive, nonphosphorylated form
(summary by Ercan-Fang et al., 2002).

CLONING

Newgard et al. (1986) reported the cDNA sequence encoding human liver
glycogen phosphorylase. The deduced protein contains 845 amino acids.

Burwinkel et al. (1998) reported corrections in the previously reported
PYGL coding sequence and polymorphisms in that sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

Burwinkel et al. (1998) reported a partial PYGL gene structure showing
introns in the same positions as in PYGM (608455), which encodes the
muscle isoform of phosphorylase.

MAPPING

By the method of chromosome sorting and spot blotting, Newgard et al.
(1987) assigned the structural gene for hepatic phosphorylase to
chromosome 14. The gene in the mouse maps to chromosome 12 (Glaser et
al., 1989).

Gross (2011) mapped the PYGL gene to chromosome 14q22.1 based on an
alignment of the PYGL sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF046785) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Using recombinant proteins expressed in insect cells, Ercan-Fang et al.
(2002) measured the effects of small molecular mass molecules on the
phosphorylase activities of the rat and human LGP active forms (LGPa).
When added individually at estimated physiologic concentrations, AMP
stimulated, whereas ADP, ATP, and glucose inhibited, both enzymes.
However, glucose inhibition was about 2-fold more potent with the human
enzyme. UDP-glucose, glucose 6-phosphate, and fructose 1-phosphate were
only minor inhibitors of both enzymes. When all effectors were present
in combination at estimated intracellular concentrations, the net effect
reduced human LGPa activity, but it had little effect on rat Lgpa
activity. This inhibition of human LGPa was glucose dependent.
Ercan-Fang et al. (2002) concluded that glucose may be a major regulator
of human LGPa activity, since glucose concentration changes greatly with
feeding and fasting.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 patients with glycogen storage disease VI (GSD6; 232700), also
known as Hers disease, Burwinkel et al. (1998) identified mutations in
the PYGL gene in homozygous or compound heterozygous state
(613741.0001-613741.0004).

By sequencing genomic DNA in a Mennonite family segregating glycogen
storage disease VI, Chang et al. (1998) identified a homozygous
abnormality of the intron 13 splice donor (613741.0005). This mutation
was estimated to be present on 3% of Mennonite chromosomes.

EVOLUTION

Newgard et al. (1986) compared the human liver phosphorylase cDNA
sequence with the previously determined rabbit muscle phosphorylase
sequence. Despite an amino acid identity of 80%, the 2 cDNAs exhibited a
remarkable divergence in G+C content. In the sequence for muscle
phosphorylase, 86% of the nucleotides at the third codon position are
either deoxyguanosine or deoxycytidine residues whereas in the liver
homolog the figure is only 60%. The liver phosphorylase cDNA appeared to
represent an evolutionary mosaic; the segment encoding the N-terminal 80
amino acids contained more than 90% G+C at the third codon position.
Newgard et al. (1986) proposed that the high G+C content in the
N-terminal region of the liver message indicates that this segment was
spliced onto the liver gene from the muscle gene long after the
divergence of liver and muscle tissues. This appears to be evidence for
exon shuffling as proposed by Gilbert (1978). Newgard et al. (1986)
considered it of interest, however, that organisms such as the
thermophilic bacteria and the protozoan Leischmania, which are exposed
to environmental stresses of high temperature and low pH, respectively,
have high G+C content in their coding sequences, presumably because the
greatest stability of G-C basepairs aids the processes of gene
replication, transcription, and, to a lesser extent, translation.
Possibly skeletal muscle, which undergoes a fall in pH and a rise in
temperature during exercise, represents a similarly stressful
environment that selectively maintains high G+C content in expressed
genes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VI
PYGL, IVS14DS, G-A, +1

In a 4.5-year-old boy with glycogen storage disease VI (232700), the son
of first-cousin Israeli-Arab Bedouin parents, Burwinkel et al. (1998)
described a splice site mutation. The patient presented at 2 years of
age with hepatomegaly and growth retardation, but had no clinical
history of fasting hypoglycemia. He was found to be homozygous for an
insertion of 119 nucleotides in codon R589, resulting in a frameshift
and introducing a stop codon after 5 missense codons. Sequencing showed
that the insert was an intron, presumably intron 14, but with a G-to-A
replacement in the GT consensus dinucleotide of the 5-prime splice site.
This splice site mutation thus led to the retention of intron 14 and 2
aberrant splice products employing neighboring GT dinucleotides in exon
14 and in intron 14, respectively, as illegitimate 5-prime splice sites.
Both parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0002
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VI
PYGL, IVS4AS, G-C, -1

In a boy with glycogen storage disease VI (232700), the son of unrelated
and healthy parents of Suriname Hindustani background, Burwinkel et al.
(1998) identified a splice site mutation in the PYGL gene.. The patient
presented at age 2 years with hepatomegaly and severe growth
retardation. Transaminases were intermittently elevated. Marked glycogen
storage in hepatocytes was demonstrated. There was no known parental
consanguinity. The child was found to be heterozygous for a G-to-C
substitution in the AG consensus of the 3-prime splice site of intron 4
of the PYGL gene. Two missense mutations, val221 to ile (V221I) and
asn338 to ser (N338S), were found on the other allele. Burwinkel et al.
(1998) thought that the N338S mutation was probably the second disease
mutation because codon N338 is absolutely conserved in all 3 isoforms of
glycogen phosphorylase and also conserved in plants, yeast, and
bacterial phosphorylases; the same cannot be said for the V221.

.0003
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VI
PYGL, ASN338SER

See 613741.0002 and Burwinkel et al. (1998).

.0004
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VI
PYGL, ASN376LYS

In a girl with glycogen storage disease VI (232700), the daughter of
consanguineous Turkish parents, Burwinkel et al. (1998) found
homozygosity for an asn376-to-lys missense (N376K) mutation in the PYGL
gene. The patient presented with hepatomegaly at the age of 1 year. Body
length was at the fiftieth percentile, but weight was at the tenth
percentile. Transaminases, triglycerides, and cholesterol were elevated.
There was a heavy accumulation of glycogen in the liver.

.0005
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE VI
PYGL, IVS13DS, G-A, +1

In affected members of a Mennonite kindred with an autosomal recessive
form of glycogen storage disease (232700), Chang et al. (1998) found
that the consensus GT at the splice donor site of intron 13 was
converted to AT in the PYGL gene. This mutation predicts a PYGL protein
with a deletion of either 3 or 34 amino acids.

REFERENCE 1. Burwinkel, B.; Bakker, H. D.; Herschkovitz, E.; Moses, S. W.; Shin,
Y. S.; Kilimann, M. W.: Mutations in the liver glycogen phosphorylase
gene (PYGL) underlying glycogenosis type VI (Hers disease). Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 62: 785-791, 1998.

2. Chang, S.; Rosenberg, M. J.; Morton, H.; Francomano, C. A.; Biesecker,
L. G.: Identification of a mutation in liver glycogen phosphorylase
in glycogen storage disease type VI. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 865-870,
1998.

3. Ercan-Fang, N.; Gannon, M. C.; Rath, V. L.; Treadway, J. L.; Taylor,
M. R.; Nuttall, F. Q.: Integrated effects of multiple modulators
on human liver glycogen phosphorylase alpha. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrin.
Metab. 283: E29-E37, 2002.

4. Gilbert, W.: Why genes in pieces? Nature 271: 501 only, 1978.

5. Glaser, T.; Matthews, K. E.; Hudson, J. W.; Seth, P.; Housman,
D. E.; Crerar, M. M.: Localization of the muscle, liver and brain
glycogen phosphorylase genes on linkage maps of mouse chromosomes
19, 12 and 2, respectively. Genomics 5: 510-521, 1989.

6. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/20/2011.

7. Newgard, C. B.; Fletterick, R. J.; Anderson, L. A.; Lebo, R. V.
: The polymorphic locus for glycogen storage disease VI (liver glycogen
phosphorylase) maps to chromosome 14. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 40: 351-364,
1987.

8. Newgard, C. B.; Nakano, K.; Hwang, P. K.; Fletterick, R. J.: Sequence
analysis of the cDNA encoding human liver glycogen phosphorylase reveals
tissue-specific codon usage. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 8132-8136,
1986.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 05/20/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/8/2011

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/14/2011

EDITED mgross: 05/20/2011
terry: 4/8/2011
terry: 2/15/2011
carol: 2/14/2011

607533	TITLE *607533 DIS3 MITOTIC CONTROL, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; DIS3
;;RIBOSOMAL RNA-PROCESSING PROTEIN 44, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; RRP44;;
KIAA1008
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RNA exosome is an approximately 400-kD multimeric ribonucleolytic
complex that participates in both endonucleolytic and 3-prime/5-prime
exonucleolytic activity in RNA processing and in the degradation of a
variety of RNA substrates. DIS3 is a catalytic subunit that has both
endonucleolytic and 3-prime/5-prime exonucleolytic activity (summary by
Tomecki et al., 2010).

CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned DIS3, which they designated
KIAA1008. The deduced 928-amino acid protein shares 44.5% identity with
the mitotic control protein Dis3 of S. pombe. PCR-ELISA detected low to
moderate expression in all tissues and brain regions tested, with
highest expression in testis and moderate expression in kidney, ovary,
corpus callosum, spinal cord, and fetal brain.

By sequence analysis of chromosome 13q21-q22 to identify a breast cancer
susceptibility gene, Rozenblum et al. (2002) identified DIS3. The
deduced protein contains 958 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression.

By searching a human EST database for sequences similar to yeast Dis3,
Tomecki et al. (2010) identified DIS3. The deduced 958-amino acid
protein contains a well conserved N-terminal PIN domain, followed by 2
cold-shock domains, an RNB exonuclease catalytic domain, and a
C-terminal S1 domain. DIS3 localized predominantly to the nucleus in
HEK293 and HeLa cells, with exclusion from nucleoli.

GENE FUNCTION

Tomecki et al. (2010) found that epitope-tagged human DIS3 or DIS3L
(614183) coimmunoprecipitated with core exosome subunits from
transfected HEK293 cells. Depletion of DIS3 or RRP6 (EXOSC10; 605960)
from HeLa cells resulted in the accumulation of nuclear 5.8 rRNA
precursors, an effect that was exacerbated by RRP6/DIS3 double
knockdown. Double depletion also resulted in partial stabilization of
cytoplasmic MYC (190080) mRNA. DIS3 purified from transfected HEK293
cells showed 3-prime/5-prime exonuclease activity against
single-stranded RNA and endonuclease activity against a circular RNA
substrate. Domain analysis revealed that the PIN and RNB domains of DIS3
conferred endonuclease and exonuclease activity, respectively.
Expression of human DIS3 could partially complement Dis3 depletion in
yeast.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rozenblum et al. (2002) determined that the DIS3 gene contains 21 exons
and spans 26.5 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rozenblum et al. (2002) mapped the DIS3
gene to chromosome 13q21-q22.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

2. Rozenblum, E.; Vahteristo, P.; Sandberg, T.; Bergthorsson, J. T.;
Syrjakoski, K.; Weaver, D.; Haraldsson, K.; Johannsdottir, H. K.;
Vehmanen, P.; Nigam, S.; Golberger, N.; Robbins, C.; and 12 others
: A genomic map of a 6-Mb region at 13q21-q22 implicated in cancer
development: identification and characterization of candidate genes. Hum.
Genet. 110: 111-121, 2002.

3. Tomecki, R.; Kristiansen, M. S.; Lykke-Andersen, S.; Chlebowski,
A.; Larsen, K. M.; Szczesny, R. J.; Drazkowska, K.; Pastula, A.; Andersen,
J. S.; Stepien, P. P.; Dziembowski, A.; Jensen, T. H.: The human
core exosome interacts with differentially localized processive RNases:
hDIS3 and hDIS3L. EMBO J. 29: 2342-2357, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/30/2003

EDITED wwang: 08/22/2011
terry: 7/14/2011
mgross: 8/2/2004
mgross: 1/30/2003

600754	TITLE *600754 MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE 14; MMP14
;;MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE 14, MEMBRANE-TYPE;;
MEMBRANE-TYPE MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE 1;;
MT1-MMP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are Zn(2+)-binding endopeptidases that
degrade various components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). The MMPs
are enzymes implicated in normal and pathologic tissue remodeling
processes, wound healing, angiogenesis, and tumor invasion. MMPs have
different substrate specificities and are encoded by different genes.
Sato et al. (1994) cloned a cDNA for the human gene from a placenta cDNA
library (they called the gene MMP-X1 and the gene product membrane-type
metalloproteinase). The authors noted that the protein was expressed at
the surface of invasive tumor cells. Using degenerate PCR, Takino et al.
(1995) cloned the entire genomic sequence of this member of the MMP
superfamily (see MMP1; 120353). The cDNA identified codes for a
582-amino acid protein which shared conserved sequence and a similar
domain structure to other MMPs. They noted that the cDNA, termed MMP-X1
by them, had a unique transmembrane domain at the C terminus. Thus, they
predicted that MMP-X1 was a membrane spanning protein rather than a
secretory protein like the other MMPs. Northern blots showed that MMP-X1
expression was present at varying intensity in almost all tissues
examined, but was highest in the placenta.

MAPPING

By isotopic in situ hybridization, Mignon et al. (1995) mapped the MMP14
gene to chromosome 14q11-q12.

GENE FAMILY

Mignon et al. (1995) tabulated 11 members of the matrix
metalloproteinase family and their chromosomal locations; with 1
exception, the genes encoding them had been mapped. Six of them,
including 3 collagenases and 2 stromelysins, had been assigned to 11q.

GENE FUNCTION

Mignon et al. (1995) stated that membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP14) may be an activator of pro-gelatinase A (MMP2; 120360) and is
expressed in fibroblast cells during both wound healing and human cancer
progression.

Ueda et al. (2002) investigated survivin gene and protein expression in
a tumor-like benign disease, endometriosis, and correlated them with
apoptosis and invasive phenotype of endometriotic tissues. Gene
expression levels of survivin (603352), MMP2, MMP9 (120361), and MMP14
in 63 pigmented or nonpigmented endometriotic tissues surgically
obtained from 35 women with endometriosis were compared with those in
normal eutopic endometrium obtained from 12 women without endometriosis.
Survivin, MMP2, MMP9, and MMP14 mRNA expression levels in clinically
aggressive pigmented lesions were significantly higher than those in
normal eutopic endometrium, and survivin gene expression in pigmented
lesions was also higher than that in nonpigmented lesions (P less than
0.05). There was a close correlation between survivin and MMP2, MMP9,
and MMP14 gene expression levels in 63 endometriotic tissues examined (P
less than 0.01). The authors concluded that upregulation of survivin and
MMPs may cooperatively contribute to survival and invasion of
endometriosis.

Noda et al. (2003) studied MMPs and their activation in association with
the pathogenesis of proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR; 603933).
They demonstrated that pro-MMP2 was efficiently activated in the
fibrovascular tissues of PDR, probably through interaction with MT1-MMP
and TIMP2 (188825). The results suggested that MMP2 and MT1-MMP may be
involved in the formation of the fibrovascular tissues.

Hotary et al. (2003) found that MT1-MMP conferred human tumor cell lines
with a 3-dimensional growth advantage in vitro and in vivo. The
replicative advantage conferred by MT1-MMP required pericellular
proteolysis of the extracellular matrix, as proliferation was suppressed
by protease-resistant collagen gels. In the absence of proteolysis,
tumor cells embedded in extracellular matrices were trapped in a
compact, spherical configuration and were unable to undergo changes in
cell shape or cytoskeletal reorganization required for 3-dimensional
growth.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a proband with Winchester syndrome (WNCHRS; 277950), originally
described by Winchester et al. (1969), Evans et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous missense mutation in the MMP14 gene (600754.0001). The
mutation, which occurred in the hydrophobic region of the signal
peptide, decreased MMP14 membrane localization with consequent
impairment of pro-MMP2 activation.

ANIMAL MODEL

By gene targeting, Holmbeck et al. (1999) generated mice deficient in
the Mmp14 gene, which they called MT1-MMP. Mmp14 deficiency caused
craniofacial dysmorphism, arthritis, osteopenia, dwarfism, and fibrosis
of soft tissues due to ablation of a collagenolytic activity that is
essential for modeling of skeletal and extraskeletal connective tissues.
These findings demonstrated the pivotal function of MMP14 in connective
tissue metabolism and illustrated that modeling of the soft connective
tissue matrix by resident cells is essential for the development and
maintenance of the hard tissues of the skeleton.

The MMP family, which has approximately 25 members in mammals, has been
implicated in extracellular matrix remodeling associated with embryonic
development, cancer formation and progression, and various other
physiologic and pathologic events. Oh et al. (2004) stated that at the
time of their report, inactivating mutations in individual matrix
metalloproteinase genes in mice were nonlethal, at least for the first
few weeks after birth, suggesting functional redundancy among MMP family
members. The authors reported that mice lacking 2 MMPs, a nonmembrane
type (MMP2; 120360) and a membrane type (MT1-MMP), die immediately after
birth with respiratory failure, abnormal blood vessels, and immature
muscle fibers reminiscent of central core disease (117000). In the
absence of Mmp2 and MT1-MMP, myoblast fusion in vitro was also
significantly retarded. These findings suggested functional overlap in
mice between the 2 MMPs with distinct molecular natures. Mutations in
both were synthetically lethal in mice.

Chun et al. (2006) showed that Mt1-mmp coordinated adipocyte
differentiation in mice. In the absence of Mt1-mmp, white adipose tissue
development was aborted, leaving tissues populated by mini-adipocytes
that rendered null mice lipodystrophic. Null preadipocytes were able to
differentiate into functional adipocytes in a 2-dimensional culture, but
not in a 3-dimensional gel.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WINCHESTER SYNDROME (1 family)
MMP14, THR17ARG

In a proband with Winchester syndrome (WNCHRS; 277950), originally
described by Winchester et al. (1969), Evans et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 284C-G transversion in the MMP14 gene, resulting in a
thr17-to-arg (T17R) substitution. The mutation, which occurred in the
hydrophobic region of the signal peptide, decreased MMP14 membrane
localization with consequent impairment of pro-MMP2 activation. The
mutation was not present in the dbSNP132 or 1000 Genomes databases or in
100 Puerto Rican control chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Chun, T.-H.; Hotary, K. B.; Sabeh, F.; Saltiel, A. R.; Allen, E.
D.; Weiss, S. J.: A pericellular collagenase directs the 3-dimensional
development of white adipose tissue. Cell 125: 577-591, 2006.

2. Evans, B. R.; Mosig, R. A.; Lobl, M.; Martignetti, C. R.; Camacho,
C.; Grum-Tokars, V.; Glucksman, M. J.; Martignetti, J. A.: Mutation
of membrane type-1 metalloproteinase, MT1-MMP, causes the multicentric
osteolysis and arthritis disease Winchester syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 91: 572-576, 2012.

3. Holmbeck, K.; Bianco, P.; Caterina, J.; Yamada, S.; Kromer, M.;
Kuznetsov, S. A.; Mankani, M.; Robey, P. G.; Poole, A. R.; Pidoux,
I.; Ward, J. M.; Birkedal-Hansen, H.: MT1-MMP-deficient mice develop
dwarfism, osteopenia, arthritis, and connective tissue disease due
to inadequate collagen turnover. Cell 99: 81-92, 1999.

4. Hotary, K. B.; Allen, E. D.; Brooks, P. C.; Datta, N. S.; Long,
M. W.; Weiss, S. J.: Membrane type I matrix metalloproteinase usurps
tumor growth control imposed by the three-dimensional extracellular
matrix. Cell 114: 33-45, 2003.

5. Mignon, C.; Okada, A.; Mattei, M. G.; Basset, P.: Assignment of
the human membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase (MMP14) gene to 14q11-q12
by in situ hybridization. Genomics 28: 360-361, 1995.

6. Noda, K.; Ishida, S.; Inoue, M.; Obata, K.; Oguchi, Y.; Okada,
Y.; Ikeda, E.: Production and activation of matrix metalloproteinase-2
in proliferative diabetic retinopathy. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44:
2163-2170, 2003.

7. Oh, J.; Takahashi, R.; Adachi, E.; Kondo, S.; Kuratomi, S.; Noma,
A.; Alexander, D. B.; Motoda, H.; Okada, A.; Seiki, M.; Itoh, T.;
Itohara, S.; Takahashi, C.; Noda, M.: Mutations in two matrix metalloproteinase
genes, MMP-2, and MT1-MMP, are synthetic lethal in mice. Oncogene 23:
5041-5048, 2004.

8. Sato, H.; Takino, T.; Okada, Y.; Cao, J.; Shinagawa, A.; Yamamoto,
E.; Seiki, M.: A matrix metalloproteinase expressed on the surface
of invasive tumor cells. Nature 370: 61-65, 1994.

9. Takino, T.; Sato, H.; Yamamoto, E.; Seiki, M.: Cloning of a human
gene potentially encoding a novel matrix metalloproteinase having
a C-terminal transmembrane domain. Gene 155: 293-298, 1995.

10. Ueda, M.; Yamashita, Y.; Takehara, M.; Terai, Y.; Kumagai, K.;
Ueki, K.; Kanda, K.; Yamaguchi, H.; Akise, D.; Hung, Y.-C.; Ueki,
M.: Survivin gene expression in endometriosis. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 87: 3452-3459, 2002.

11. Winchester, P.; Grossman, H.; Lim, W. N.; Danes, B. S.: A new
acid mucopolysaccharidosis with skeletal deformities simulating rheumatoid
arthritis. Am. J. Roentgen. 106: 121-128, 1969.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/25/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/8/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/4/2004
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/25/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 12/6/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/25/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 2/26/1996

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 8/28/1995

EDITED carol: 09/25/2013
carol: 9/25/2013
carol: 2/13/2009
mgross: 10/8/2007
terry: 8/30/2007
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 5/8/2006
tkritzer: 10/8/2004
terry: 10/4/2004
mgross: 8/25/2003
alopez: 12/6/2002
mgross: 10/25/1999
psherman: 5/15/1998
mark: 9/4/1997
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 2/26/1996
mark: 8/28/1995

600025	TITLE *600025 KINESIN LIGHT CHAIN 1; KLC1
;;KINESIN 2; KNS2;;
KNS2A;;
KLC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Kinesins are tubulin (see 191130) molecular motors that transport
organelles within cells and move chromosomes along microtubules during
cell division. In sea urchin and mammalian cells, kinesins have been
characterized as tetrameric proteins containing 2 heavy (alpha) chains
of approximately 120 kD and 2 light (beta) chains of approximately 70
kD. The alpha chains provide the tubulin binding site and the ATPase
domains, whereas the beta chains are responsible for the specific
attachment of the organelle to be moved by the kinesin tetramer.
Kinesins transport their bound organelle to the plus end of the
microtubule (summary by Chernajovsky et al., 1996).

CLONING

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) noted that differential splicing occurs for
the kinesin beta (light chain) cDNA sequences at the 3-prime end of the
rat kinesin mRNA, producing kinesins having different C-terminal ends
that seem to confer the kinesin specificity for organelle binding.
Cabeza-Arvelaiz et al. (1993) isolated and sequenced a cDNA encoding the
human kinesin light chain protein (KLC). The cDNA encodes a deduced
polypeptide of 569 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 64,789
Da. The predicted secondary internal structure of the KLC molecule
consists of about 27 contiguous repeats, each of approximately 21 amino
acids, and could be divided into 3 domains.

Rahman et al. (1998) cloned mouse Klc1. The deduced 581-amino acid
protein has an N-terminal coiled-coil region of about 100 amino acids
and 6 imperfect tetratricopeptide repeats of about 34 amino acids each.
Northern and Western blot analyses detected Klc1 predominantly in mouse
central and peripheral neuronal tissues. Immunofluorescence analysis of
cultured rat hippocampal precursor cells showed that Klc1 levels
increased with differentiation. In situ hybridization of mouse brain
showed that both Klc1 and Klc2 (611729) were enriched in olfactory bulb,
hippocampus, dentate gyrus, and the granular layer of cerebellum. Klc1
was expressed in a subset of cells in the sciatic nerve and showed
diffuse axonal staining. Fractionation of whole mouse brain extracts
revealed Klc1 and Klc2 in the cytosolic fraction and Klc2 in the
microsomal fraction.

GENE FUNCTION

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) characterized the human KNS2 gene product of
a differentially spliced, T-cell-derived mRNA and cloned its promoter
region. The promoter region transcribes constitutively. In permanently
transfected human HeLa and NB100 neuroblastoma cells, a reporter gene
containing the promoter and part of the first exon of beta kinesin was
75-fold more active than the HSV-tk promoter. The first exon contains a
5-prime untranslated sequence capable of forming a stable double-hairpin
loop, which functions as a translational enhancer. Its deletion
decreases the efficiency of in vitro translation of beta kinesin mRNA.

Kamal et al. (2000) demonstrated that the axonal transport of APP
(104760) in neurons is mediated by the direct binding of APP to the
light chain subunit of kinesin-1.

Using anti-mouse Klc1 antibodies to immunoprecipitate proteins from
mouse brain lysates, Rahman et al. (1998) showed that Klc1 associated
with Nkhc (KIF5A; 602821) and Ukhc (KIF5B; 602809), but not with Klc2.
In the presence of a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog, both Klc1 and Klc2
cosedimented with taxol-stabilized mouse brain microtubules.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) determined that the entire KNS2 gene spans 90
kb and encodes a 70-kD protein.

MAPPING

Cabeza-Arvelaiz et al. (1993) assigned the KLC gene to chromosome 14 by
screening of a human/hamster somatic cell hybrid panel. Goedert et al.
(1996) mapped the KNS2 gene to 14q32.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Cabeza-Arvelaiz, Y.; Shih, L.-C. N.; Hardman, N.; Asselbergs, F.;
Bilbe, G.; Schmitz, A.; White, B.; Siciliano, M. J.; Lachman, L. B.
: Cloning and genetic organization of the human kinesin light-chain
(KLC) gene. DNA Cell Biol. 12: 881-892, 1993.

2. Chernajovsky, Y.; Brown, A.; Clark, J.: Human kinesin light (beta)
chain gene: DNA sequence and functional characterization of its promoter
and first exon. DNA Cell Biol. 15: 965-974, 1996.

3. Goedert, M.; Marsh, S.; Carter, N.: Localization of the human
kinesin light chain gene (KNS2) to chromosome 14q32.3 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Genomics 32: 173-175, 1996.

4. Kamal, A.; Stokin, G. B.; Yang, Z.; Xia, C.; Goldstein, L. S.:
Axonal transport of amyloid precursor protein is mediated by direct
binding to the kinesin light chain subunit of kinesin-I. Neuron 28:
449-459, 2000.

5. Rahman, A.; Friedman, D. S.; Goldstein, L. S. B.: Two kinesin
light chain genes in mice: identification and characterization of
the encoded proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15395-15403, 1998. Note:
Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24280 only, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/12/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2002
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 8/29/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1994

EDITED carol: 07/26/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 3/9/2009
mgross: 1/16/2008
terry: 12/12/2007
joanna: 3/9/2007
alopez: 1/8/2002
mark: 9/16/1997
mark: 7/8/1996
terry: 6/26/1996
mark: 3/13/1996
mark: 3/11/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 7/12/1994

169190	TITLE *169190 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 18; CDK18
;;PCTAIRE PROTEIN KINASE 3; PCTK3;;
PCTAIRE3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The PCTAIRE protein kinases comprise a distinct subfamily of the CDC2
(116940)-related serine/threonine-specific protein kinases. See PCTK1
(311550). Meyerson et al. (1992) isolated a partial cDNA encoding
PCTAIRE3. Like other members of the PCTAIRE subfamily, the predicted
PCTAIRE3 protein contains an N-terminal extension relative to CDC2. The
CDC2-related region of PCTAIRE3, excluding the N-terminal extension,
shares 51%, 79%, and 80% protein sequence identity with CDC2, PCTK1, and
PCTK2 (603440), respectively. Northern blot analysis revealed that
PCTAIRE3 is expressed in a variety of human cell lines and tissues.
Okuda et al. (1992) identified the mouse homolog of PCTK3.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Okuda et al. (1994) mapped the
CDK18 gene to 1q31-q32.

REFERENCE 1. Meyerson, M.; Enders, G. H.; Wu, C.-L.; Su, L.-K.; Gorka, C.; Nelson,
C.; Harlow, E.; Tsai, L.-H.: A family of human cdc2-related protein
kinases. EMBO J. 11: 2909-2917, 1992.

2. Okuda, T.; Cleveland, J. L.; Downing, J. R.: PCTAIRE-1 and PCTAIRE-3,
two members of a novel cdc2/CDC28-related protein kinase gene family. Oncogene 7:
2249-2258, 1992.

3. Okuda, T.; Valentine, V. A.; Shapiro, D. N.; Downing, J. R.: Cloning
of genomic loci and chromosomal localization of the human PCTAIRE-1
and -3 protein kinase genes. Genomics 21: 217-221, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/18/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED alopez: 04/15/2013
alopez: 1/18/1999
alopez: 11/18/1998
psherman: 11/3/1998
jason: 6/17/1994

605737	TITLE *605737 BACULOVIRAL IAP REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 7; BIRC7
;;INHIBITOR OF APOPTOSIS PROTEIN, MELANOMA; MLIAP;;
INHIBITOR OF APOPTOSIS PROTEIN, KIDNEY; KIAP;;
LIVIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) contain conserved, unique
N-terminal baculovirus IAP repeats (BIRs) and usually a C-terminal RING
finger domain. The BIR domain is essential for inhibitory activity and
typically interacts with cysteine-containing aspartate-specific
proteases (caspases, e.g., CASP3; 600636) or with APAF1 (602233), which
together with cytochrome C (123970) mediates activation of CASP9
(602234). The RING finger domain sometimes enhances antiapoptotic
activity but does not inhibit apoptosis alone.

CLONING

By searching a sequence database for BIR-containing sequences, Vucic et
al. (2000) identified cDNAs encoding BIRC7, which they termed MLIAP. The
deduced 280- and 298-amino acid BIRC7 proteins each contain a single BIR
domain and a RING finger motif. The BIR domain is most similar to the
second and third BIRs of BIRC2 (601712), BIRC3 (601721), and BIRC4
(XIAP; 300079). Northern blot analysis revealed highest expression of
1.5- and 2.2-kb transcripts in melanomas, with lower expression in some
lymphomas, fetal kidney, fetal liver, testis, and thymus; expression was
not detected in normal melanocytes. Confocal microscopy showed
localization predominantly to the cytoplasm and, unlike that of survivin
(BIRC5; 603352), not to mitotic spindles.

Lin et al. (2000) also cloned BIRC7, which they called KIAP, by
searching an EST database and using 5-prime and 3-prime RACE on a fetal
kidney cDNA library. Like apollon (BIRC6; 605638) and survivin, the
deduced 299-amino acid BIRC7 protein contains only 1 BIR motif with the
signature 3 cysteines and 1 histidine. Northern blot analysis detected
1.4-, 2.2-, and 4.0-kb transcripts in placenta, lymph node, and fetal
kidney; expression was not detected in other normal tissues tested.

Kasof and Gomes (2001) also cloned BIRC7, which they termed livin. The
deduced 280-amino acid protein lacks the coiled-coil domain found in
survivin but does have a RING finger. Northern blot analysis revealed
expression of 1.4-, 2.0-, and 2.8-kb transcripts in placenta and fetal
brain, as well as in melanomas and, to a lesser extent, in HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Functional analysis by Vucic et al. (2000) showed that expression of
BIRC7 blocked apoptosis induced by engagement of FAS (134637), tumor
necrosis factor receptor-1 (TNFR1; 191190), death receptor-4 (DR4;
603611), and DR5 (603612), as well as apoptosis induced by
chemotherapeutic agents, with a potency comparable to that observed with
BIRC2 and BIRC4. Further analysis indicated that MLIAP is active against
CASP3 and the cytochrome C pathway but not against CASP7 (601761).
Mutational analysis determined that the BIR domain is essential for
antiapoptotic activity.

Lin et al. (2000) showed that BIRC7 blocked apoptosis induced by BAX
(600040) induction of cytochrome C release from mitochondria. The
authors also found that BIRC7 blocked apoptosis induced by
chemotherapeutic agents, but in contrast to the findings of Vucic et al.
(2000), it did not block apoptosis induced by FAS.

Kasof and Gomes (2001) demonstrated that, through its BIR domain, livin
inhibited apoptosis mediated by DR6 and downstream adaptor proteins
within the TNF/FAS pathway. This inhibition could be reversed by an
antisense construct to livin. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot
analysis indicated livin binds to CASP3, CASP7, and CASP9, but it only
inhibits CASP9. In contrast to the findings of Vucic et al. (2000),
immunofluorescence microscopy detected overexpressed livin in the
nucleus and in a filamentous pattern in the cytoplasm, as observed with
survivin.

The identification of antigens associated with tumor destruction is a
major goal of cancer immunology. Vaccination with irradiated tumor cells
engineered to secrete granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(CSF2; 138960) generates potent, specific, and long-lasting antitumor
immunity through improved tumor antigen presentation by dendritic cells
and macrophages. A phase I clinical trial of this immunization strategy
in patients with disseminated melanoma revealed the consistent induction
in distant metastases of dense T- and B-cell infiltrates that
effectuated substantial tumor necrosis and fibrosis (Soiffer et al.,
1998). To delineate the target antigens of this vaccine-stimulated tumor
destruction, Schmollinger et al. (2003) screened a melanoma cDNA
expression library with postimmunization sera from a long-term
responding patient. High-titer IgG antibodies recognized MLIAP. Although
the patient harbored antibodies to this protein at the time of study
entry, multiple courses of vaccination over 4 years increased antibody
titers and elicited isotype switching. Moreover, lymphocyte infiltrates
in necrotic metastases included CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells specific for
MLIAP, as revealed by proliferation, tetramer, enzyme-linked immunospot,
and cytotoxicity analysis. Whereas melanoma cells in densely infiltrated
lesions showed strong MLIAP expression by immunohistochemistry, lethal
disease progression was associated with the loss of MLIAP staining and
the absence of lymphocyte infiltrates. These findings demonstrated that
MLIAP can serve as a target for immune-mediated tumor destruction, but
that antigen-loss variants can lead to immune escape.

Ye et al. (2013) found that microRNA-198 (MIR198; 605547) downregulated
livin expression in human prostate cancer cells by directly binding to
the livin 3-prime UTR.

MAPPING

Vucic et al. (2000) mapped the BIRC7 gene to 20q13, a region frequently
amplified in melanomas and other malignancies, using radiation hybrid
analysis. By FISH, Lin et al. (2000) localized the BIRC7 gene to
20q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Kasof, G. M.; Gomes, B. C.: Livin, a novel inhibitor of apoptosis
protein family member. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 3238-3246, 2001.

2. Lin, J.-H.; Deng, G.; Huang, Q.; Morser, J.: KIAP, a novel member
of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 279: 820-831, 2000.

3. Schmollinger, J. C.; Vonderheide, R. H.; Hoar, K. M.; Maecker,
B.; Schultze, J. L.; Hodi, F. S.; Soiffer, R. J.; Jung, K.; Kuroda,
M. J.; Letvin, N. L.; Greenfield, E. A.; Mihm, M.; Kutok, J. L.; Dranoff,
G.: Melanoma inhibitor of apoptosis protein (ML-IAP) is a target
for immune-mediated tumor destruction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
3398-3403, 2003.

4. Soiffer, R.; Lynch, T.; Mihm, M.; Jung, K.; Rhuda, C.; Schmollinger,
J. C.; Hodi, F. S.; Liebster, L.; Lam, P.; Mentzer, S.; Singer, S.;
Tanabe, K. K.; and 15 others: Vaccination with irradiated autologous
melanoma cells engineered to secrete human granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor generates potent antitumor immunity in patients
with metastatic melanoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 13141-13146,
1998.

5. Vucic, D.; Stennicke, H. R.; Pisabarro, M. T.; Salvesen, G. S.;
Dixit, V. M.: ML-IAP, a novel inhibitor of apoptosis that is preferentially
expressed in human melanomas. Curr. Biol. 10: 1359-1366, 2000.

6. Ye, L.; Li, S.; Ye, D.; Yang, D.; Yue, F.; Guo, Y.; Chen, X.; Chen,
F.; Zhang, J.; Song, X.: Livin expression may be regulated by miR-198
in human prostate cancer cell lines. Europ. J. Cancer 49: 734-740,
2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/02/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/15/2001

EDITED mgross: 05/02/2013
wwang: 1/6/2011
tkritzer: 5/9/2003
tkritzer: 5/6/2003
terry: 4/25/2003
mgross: 3/15/2001

605129	TITLE *605129 PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR SUBUNIT 3; PSME3
;;PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR 28-GAMMA; PA28G;;
PA28-GAMMA;;
REG-GAMMA;;
KI ANTIGEN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PSME3 belongs to the proteasome activator subunit (PSME) gene family.
For background information on the PSME gene family, see PSME1 (600654).

CLONING

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700) produce
autoantibodies against a number of nuclear antigens, including SNRP70
(180740), PCNA (176740), CDR1 (302650), and Ki. By screening a human
placenta cDNA library with a probe obtained by screening a bovine retina
cDNA library with anti-Ki sera from an SLE patient, Nikaido et al.
(1990) isolated a cDNA encoding PSME3, which they called Ki. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 254-amino acid, hydrophilic PSME3 protein
contains a nuclear localization signal and has a molecular mass of
approximately 30 kD, close to the 32 kD observed by Western blot
analysis. PSME3 shares over 99% amino acid identity with the bovine
sequence. RNA blot analysis of human placenta, bovine brain, and mouse
embryos detected 3.0- and 1.5-kb PSME3 transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Steroid receptor coactivator-3 (SRC3, or NCOA3; 601937) is an oncogene
frequently amplified and overexpressed in breast cancer. Using
immunoprecipitation analysis, Li et al. (2006) found that endogenous
SRC3 and REG-gamma interacted in HeLa cell nuclear extracts and MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Protein pull-down assays showed the REG-gamma
interacted specifically with the HAT domain of SRC3. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNA interference (RNAi) in breast cancer and human
embryonic kidney cell lines resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in SRC3
protein levels. Conversely, REG-gamma overexpression in HeLa cells
reduced SRC3 protein levels. In vitro proteasome assays using purified
proteins showed that REG-gamma promoted degradation of SRC3 by the 20S
proteasome in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNAi increased estrogen receptor (ER; see 133430) target
gene expression and enhanced estradiol-mediated cell growth in MCF-7
cells, and these effects were secondary to the effect of REG-gamma on
SRC3.

MAPPING

By analysis of overlapping YAC contigs and by FISH, Albertsen et al.
(1994) mapped the PSME3 gene to 17q12-q21. Kandil et al. (1997) mapped
the mouse Psme3 gene to chromosome 14 using interspecific backcross
analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Barton et al. (2004) found that mice lacking Psme3 had normal levels of
surface class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules,
slightly reduced Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells, and normal responses
to infection with influenza or SV40 virus. However, the ability of Psme3
-/- mice to clear the pulmonary fungal pathogen Histoplasma capsulatum
was slower than wildtype mice. Barton et al. (2004) proposed that PSME3
functions in the MHC class I antigen-processing pathway and that it
exerts an influence on proteasome cleavage specificity.

REFERENCE 1. Albertsen, H. M.; Smith, S. A.; Mazoyer, S.; Fujimoto, E.; Stevens,
J.; Williams, B.; Rodriguez, P.; Cropp, C. S.; Slijepcevic, P.; Carlson,
M.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; Lawrence, E.; Harrington, T.; Mei
Sheng, Z.; Hoopes, R.; Sternberg, N.; Brothman, A.; Callahan, R.;
Ponder, B. A. J.; White, R.: A physical map and candidate genes in
the BRCA1 region on chromosome 17q12-21. Nature Genet. 7: 472-479,
1994.

2. Barton, L. F.; Runnels, H. A.; Schell, T. D.; Cho, Y.; Gibbons,
R.; Tevethia, S. S.; Deepe, G. S., Jr.; Monaco, J. J.: Immune defects
in 28-kDa proteasome activator gamma-deficient mice. J. Immun. 172:
3948-3954, 2004.

3. Kandil, E.; Kohda, K.; Ishibashi, T.; Tanaka, K.; Kasahara, M.
: PA28 subunits of the mouse proteasome: primary structures and chromosomal
localization of the genes. Immunogenetics 46: 337-344, 1997.

4. Li, X.; Lonard, D. M.; Jung, S. Y.; Malovannaya, A.; Feng, Q.;
Qin, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: The SRC-3/AIB1
coactivator is degraded in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner
by the REG-gamma proteasome. Cell 124: 381-392, 2006.

5. Nikaido, T.; Shimada, K.; Shibata, M.; Hata, M.; Sakamoto, M.;
Takasaki, Y.; Sato, C.; Takahashi, T.; Nishida, Y.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of cDNA for Ki antigen, a highly conserved nuclear protein
detected with sera from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin.
Exp. Immun. 79: 209-214, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/20/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/11/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2000

EDITED carol: 07/12/2010
alopez: 9/30/2009
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/20/2009
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/11/2005
joanna: 1/31/2001
mgross: 7/11/2000

608821	TITLE *608821 KERATIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1-4; KRTAP1-4
;;KAP1.4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The main structural proteins of mammalian hair fiber are the hair
keratins (see 601077) and the keratin-associated proteins (KAPs), which
form a rigid and resistant hair shaft through extensive disulfide bond
crosslinking with the abundant cysteines of hair keratins (Shimomura et
al., 2002).

CLONING

By screening a human PAC library and an arrayed human scalp cDNA
library, Rogers et al. (2001) cloned KAP1.4. The deduced 121-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 12.3 kD. KAP1.4 is classified
as a high sulfur protein owing to a cysteine content of 24.8 mol %. It
contains 2 unique motifs conserved among KAP1 family members, several
characteristic pentapeptide repeats, and a 20-amino acid subdomain that
was conserved among KAP1 family members in all species examined. KAP1.4
lacks an amino-terminal motif common to other members of the KAP1
family.

Shimomura et al. (2002) analyzed the KAP1.4 gene in unrelated Japanese
and Caucasian individuals. By in situ hybridization, Shimomura et al.
(2002) demonstrated KAP1.4 expression in the middle to upper cortex
region of the human hair follicle. While Shimomura et al. (2002) found
polymorphism in the KAP1.1 (608819) and KAP1.3 (608820) genes in
Japanese and Caucasian individuals, they found none in the KAP1.4 gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rogers et al. (2001) stated that the KRTAP1-4 gene is about 1.0 kb long
and consists of a single exon.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rogers et al. (2001) mapped the KRTAP1-4
gene to a region of chromosome 17q12-q21 that contains 8 other
identified KAP genes or pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Rogers, M. A.; Langbein, L.; Winter, H.; Ehmann, C.; Praetzel,
S.; Korn, B.; Schweizer, J.: Characterization of a cluster of human
high/ultrahigh sulfur keratin-associated protein genes embedded in
the type I keratin gene domain on chromosome 17q12-21. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
19440-19451, 2001.

2. Shimomura, Y.; Aoki, N.; Schweizer, J.; Langbein, L.; Rogers, M.
A.; Winter, H.; Ito, M.: Polymorphisms in the human high sulfur hair
keratin-associated protein 1, KAP1, gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
45493-45501, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/29/2004

EDITED alopez: 07/29/2004

608610	TITLE *608610 PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH 4; PDCD4
;;NEOPLASTIC TRANSFORMATION INHIBITOR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a glioma cDNA expression library with antibodies raised
against a nuclear protein, Matsuhashi et al. (1997) cloned PDCD4, which
they designated H731. The deduced 458-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 50.6 kD. PDCD4 is an acidic protein with
characteristics of a nuclear nonhistone protein. It contains 2
overlapping GxGxxG nucleotide-binding motifs, which are characteristic
of protein kinases, but it does not have a kinase catalytic domain.
PDCD4 also has several putative serine and threonine phosphorylation
sites. Northern blot analysis detected transcripts of about 2.7 and 3.8
kb in HeLa cell total RNA. Recombinant PDCD4 expressed in E. coli
resulted in proteins with apparent molecular masses of 56 and 37 kD. The
37-kD truncated protein was synthesized from val127, reading the val
codon as an f-met initiation codon.

Yoshinaga et al. (1999) found that PDCD4 accumulated in the nuclei of
confluent or quiescent normal fetal lung fibroblasts, but it was
overproduced and localized in the cytoplasm during the cell cycle in
tumor cell lines. Immunohistologic analysis revealed that PDCD4 was
highly expressed in bladder carcinoma and breast carcinoma tissues
compared with normal tissues. PDCD4 was also abundantly expressed in the
small duct epithelial cells of normal mammary gland.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot and Western blot analyses, Kang et al. (2002)
determined that expression of both the PDCD4 transcript and protein was
upregulated in senescent diploid fibroblasts compared with cells in log
phase growth. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis showed that the C terminus of
PDCD4 could interact with a component of the 40S ribosome complex, RPS13
(180476), and with RPL5 (603634) and TI-227H. In vitro binding assays
confirmed the interaction between PDCD4 and RPS13. In vitro pull-down
assays also showed that PDCD4 interacted with EIF4G (600495), but not
with EIF4E (133440). Furthermore, PDCD4 localized to polysome fractions
of fractionated HeLa cells. Kang et al. (2002) concluded that PDCD4 may
regulate EIF4G-dependent translation through direct interaction with
EIF4G and RPS13 in senescent fibroblasts.

Dorrello et al. (2006) found that the tumor suppressor PDCD4 inhibits
the translation initiation factor EIF4A (see 602641), an RNA helicase
that catalyzes the unwinding of secondary structure at the 5-prime
untranslated region of mRNAs. In response to mitogens, PDCD4 was rapidly
phosphorylated on ser67 by the protein kinase S6K1 (608938) and
subsequently degraded via the ubiquitin ligase SCF-beta(TRCP) (603482).
Expression in cultured cells of a stable PDCD4 mutant that was unable to
bind beta-TRCP inhibited translation of an mRNA with a structured
5-prime untranslated region, resulted in smaller cell size, and slowed
down cell cycle progression. Dorrello et al. (2006) proposed that
regulated degradation of PDCD4 in response to mitogens allows efficient
protein synthesis and consequently cell growth.

PDCD4 contains 2 tandem MA3 domains consisting of conserved
alpha-helical hairpins. Using x-ray crystallography, NMR, and surface
plasmon resonance, Suzuki et al. (2008) found that both MA3 domains of
human PDCD4 were structurally and functionally similar and bound
specifically to the N-terminal domain of EIF4A using similar binding
interfaces. The MA3 domains of PDCD4 competed with the MA3 domain of
EIF4G and RNA for EIF4A binding. Suzuki et al. (2008) concluded that
PDCD4 inhibits translation initiation by displacing EIF4G and RNA from
EIF4A. They proposed that the PDCD4 MA3 domains act synergistically to
form a tighter and more stable complex with EIF4A, explaining the need
for 2 tandem MA3 domains.

Davis et al. (2008) demonstrated that induction of a contractile
phenotype in human vascular smooth muscle cells by TGF-beta (190180) and
BMPs (see 112264) is mediated by miR21 (611020). miR21 downregulates
PDCD4, which in turn acts as a negative regulator of smooth muscle
contractile genes. Davis et al. (2008) concluded that PDCD4 is a
functional target of miR21 involved in the BMP-mediated induction of
smooth muscle cell markers in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Asangani et al. (2008) identified an miR21 target sequence in the
3-prime UTR of PDCD4 and confirmed binding and inhibition of PDCD4 by
miR21 using reporter gene assays. They observed an inverse correlation
between miR21 and PDCD4 expression in 10 colorectal cell lines and in 22
colorectal cancer tissues and matched normal controls. Transfection of
RKO human colorectal cancer cells with anti-miR21 increased PDCD4
protein concentration, reduced the invasive potential of RKO cells in
3-dimensional gels, and reduced intravasation and lung metastasis of RKO
cells in a chicken embryo metastasis assay. Overexpression of miR21
reduced expression of PDCD4 protein, but not mRNA, in Colo206f cells.

MAPPING

By FISH, Soejima et al. (1999) mapped the PDCD4 gene to chromosome
10q24.

REFERENCE 1. Asangani, I. A.; Rasheed, S. A. K.; Nikolova, D. A.; Leupold, J.
H.; Colburn, N. H.; Post, S.; Allgayer, H.: MicroRNA-21 (miR-21)
post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates
invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer. Oncogene 27:
2128-2136, 2008.

2. Davis, B. N.; Hilyard, A. C.; Lagna, G.; Hata, A.: SMAD proteins
control DROSHA-mediated microRNA maturation. Nature 454: 56-61,
2008.

3. Dorrello, N. V.; Peschiaroli, A.; Guardavaccaro, D.; Colburn, N.
H.; Sherman, N. E.; Pagano, M.: S6K1- and beta-TRCP-mediated degradation
of PDCD4 promotes protein translation and cell growth. Science 314:
467-471, 2006.

4. Kang, M.-J.; Ahn, H.-S.; Lee, J.-Y.; Matsuhashi, S.; Park, W.-Y.
: Up-regulation of PDCD4 in senescent human diploid fibroblasts. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 293: 617-621, 2002.

5. Matsuhashi, S.; Yoshinaga, H.; Yatsuki, H.; Tsugita, A.; Hori,
K.: Isolation of a novel gene from a human cell line with Pr-28 MAb
which recognizes a nuclear antigen involved in the cell cycle. Res.
Commun. Biochem. Cell Molec. Biol. 1: 109-120, 1997.

6. Soejima, H.; Miyoshi, O.; Yoshinaga, H.; Masaki, Z.; Ozaki, I.;
Kajiwara, S.; Niikawa, N.; Matsuhashi, S.; Mukai, T.: Assignment
of the programmed cell death 4 gene (PDCD4) to human chromosome band
10q24 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 87: 113-114,
1999.

7. Suzuki, C.; Garces, R. G.; Edmonds, K. A.; Hiller, S.; Hyberts,
S. G.; Marintchev, A.; Wagner, G.: PDCD4 inhibits translation initiation
by binding to eIF4A using both its MA3 domains. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 3274-3279, 2008.

8. Yoshinaga, H.; Matsuhashi, S.; Fujiyama, C.; Masaki, Z.: Novel
human PDCD4 (H731) gene expressed in proliferative cells is expressed
in the small duct epithelial cells of the breast as revealed by an
anti-H731 antibody. Path. Int. 49: 1067-1077, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/2/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/19/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/26/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/08/2010
terry: 12/2/2010
alopez: 9/11/2008
terry: 8/29/2008
mgross: 5/19/2008
alopez: 11/6/2006
terry: 10/31/2006
mgross: 4/26/2004

608786	TITLE *608786 PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE; PC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pyruvate carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.1) is a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to oxaloacetate. It is
a key regulatory enzyme in gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis, and
neurotransmitter synthesis. Human PC is a tetramer composed of identical
subunits (Barden et al., 1974).

CLONING

Using an oligonucleotide probe specific for the amino acid sequence at
the biotin site of pyruvate carboxylase to screen a human liver cDNA
library, Freytag and Collier (1984) isolated 3 cDNA clones for pyruvate
carboxylase. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.2-kb mRNA.

Wexler et al. (1994) isolated a PC cDNA, which encodes a deduced
1,178-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 129.6 kD for the
full-length precursor and 127.4 kD for the mature apoprotein. Northern
blot analysis demonstrated that the highest level of PC mRNA is in the
liver. Based on homology with other biotin-containing proteins, the ATP,
pyruvate, and biotin-binding sites were identified. MacKay et al. (1994)
isolated and cloned PC cDNA from human kidney.

Carbone et al. (1998) characterized the PC gene by PCR amplification,
subcloning, and sequencing.

GENE STRUCTURE

Carbone et al. (1998) determined that the PC gene contains 19 exons
spanning approximately 16 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

Using Southern blotting of human-Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrids,
Freytag and Collier (1984) localized the PC gene to the long arm of
chromosome 11.

Rochelle et al. (1992) indicated that the corresponding locus in the
mouse is located on chromosome 19 near the centromere. Comparative
mapping suggested that the human PC locus is in the proximal part of
11q, perhaps 11q12-q13.

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization to normal chromosomes and
chromosomes carrying the FRA11A (136560) fragile site, Walker et al.
(1995) mapped PC to 11q13, distal to FRA11A, thus localizing it to
11q13.4-q13.5. Perucca-Lostanlen et al. (1997) used fluorescence in situ
hybridization with yeast artificial chromosome and cosmid probes on
metaphase chromosomes of patients expressing the fragile site to show
that FRA11A is situated centromeric to ACTN3 (102574) and telomeric to
D11S913, these markers being within an interval of approximately 1 Mb in
the 11q13.3 region.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 11 Ojibwa and 2 Cree patients with group A pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency (266150), Carbone et al. (1998) identified a missense
mutation in the PC gene (608786.0001). In 2 brothers of Micmac origin,
they identified a transversion mutation in the PC gene (608786.0002).
Carrier frequency was estimated to be as high as 1 in 10 in some
groupings. The 2 point mutations were located in the region of homology
conserved among yeast, rat, and human PC, in the vicinity of the
carboxylation domain of the enzyme.

NOMENCLATURE

Brun et al. (1999) referred to pyruvate carboxylase as a key enzyme in
the gluconeogenesis and anaplerotic metabolic pathways. Anaplerotic is a
somewhat archaic term derived from the Greek stems ana, meaning 'for
up,' and plerotic, meaning 'for filling.' The adjective anaplerotic
refers to a reaction that effects best the formation of an intermediate
of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, in order to maintain the intracellular
concentration of it, or of another such intermediate, as those
intermediates are utilized for biosynthesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, ALA610THR

In 11 Ojibwa and 2 Cree Amerindian patients with simple pyruvate
carboxylase deficiency (266150), Carbone et al. (1998) identified a
homozygous 1828G-A transition in the PC gene, resulting in an
ala610-to-thr (A610T) substitution.

.0002
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, MET743ILE

In 2 Micmac brothers from Nova Scotia with simple pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency (266150), Carbone et al. (1998) identified a 2229G-T
transversion in the PC gene, resulting in a met743-to-ile (M743I)
substitution in the carboxylation domain of the enzyme.

.0003
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, VAL145ALA

In affected members of a consanguineous family with PC deficiency
(266150), Wexler et al. (1998) identified a homozygous 434T-C transition
in the PC gene, resulting in a val145-to-ala (V145A) substitution. Both
parents were heterozygous for the mutation. The patients were found to
have low PC activity (range 2-25% of control) in blood lymphocytes and
skin fibroblasts associated with either diminished or normal protein
levels.

.0004
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, ARG451CYS

In an affected brother and sister from a consanguineous family with PC
deficiency (266150), Wexler et al. (1998) identified a homozygous
1351C-T transition the PC gene, resulting in an arg451-to-cys (R451C)
substitution. Both parents were heterozygous for the mutation. Both
mutations occurred in relatively conserved amino acid residues and were
located in the biotin carboxylase domain.

.0005
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, IVS15, 4-BP DEL, TAGG, +2-5

In 2 brothers with severe (type B) pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
(266150), Carbone et al. (2002) found compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the PC gene: a TAGG deletion at the exon 15/intron 15
splice site (IVS15+2-5delTAGG) and a dinucleotide deletion in exon 16
(2491-2492delGT; 608786.0006). By RT-PCR and sequencing of aberrant
transcripts, Carbone et al. (2002) found that the splice site mutation
resulted in the retention of intron 15 during pre-mRNA splicing. In
addition, both deletions were predicted to result in a frameshift to
generate a premature termination codon such that the encoded mRNA would
be subject to nonsense-mediated decay. In 1 brother, the diagnosis was
made at the age of 4 hours and death occurred at 7 weeks; in the younger
brother, the diagnosis was made in the fetus and death was in the
neonatal period.

.0006
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, 2-BP DEL, 2491GT

See (608786.0005) and Carbone et al. (2002).

.0007
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, ARG156GLN

In a patient with type A PC deficiency (266150), Monnot et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous 467G-A transition in exon 3 of the PC gene,
resulting in an arg156-to-gln (R156Q) substitution in the biotin
carboxylase domain. The mutation had no detectable effect on mRNA size
or amount. Monnot et al. (2009) observed that the relatively milder type
A phenotype results from missense mutations in the PC gene.

.0008
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, ARG583LEU

In a patient with type B PC deficiency (266150), Monnot et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PC gene: a
1748G-T transversion in exon 12, resulting in an arg583-to-leu (R583L)
substitution in the carboxytransferase domain, and a 1-bp duplication in
exon 17 (2876dupT; 608786.0009), resulting in a frameshift,
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, and no functional protein. The R583L
mutation had no detectable effect on mRNA size or amount. Monnot et al.
(2009) commented that patients with the relatively more severe type B
tend to have at least 1 truncating mutation in the PC gene.

.0009
PYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE DEFICIENCY
PC, 1-BP DUP, 2876T

See 608786.0008 and Monnot et al. (2009).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Freytag et al. (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Barden, R. E.; Taylor, B. L.; Isohashi, F.; Frey, W. H., II; Zander,
G.; Lee, J. C.; Utter, M. F.: Structural properties of pyruvate carboxylases
from chicken liver and other sources. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 72:
4308-4312, 1974.

2. Brun, N.; Robitaille, Y.; Grignon, A.; Robinson, B. H.; Mitchell,
G. A.; Lambert, M.: Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency: prenatal onset
of ischemia-like brain lesions in two sibs with the acute neonatal
form. Am. J. Med. Genet. 84: 94-101, 1999.

3. Carbone, M. A.; Applegarth, D. A.; Robinson, B. H.: Intron retention
and frameshift mutations result in severe pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
in two male siblings. Hum. Mutat. 20: 48-56, 2002.

4. Carbone, M. A.; MacKay, N.; Ling, M.; Cole, D. E. C.; Douglas,
C.; Rigat, B.; Feigenbaum, A.; Clarke, J. T. R.; Haworth, J. C.; Greenberg,
C. R.; Seargeant, L.; Robinson, B. H.: Amerindian pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency is associated with two distinct missense mutations. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1312-1319, 1998.

5. Freytag, S. O.; Collier, K. J.: Molecular cloning of a cDNA for
human pyruvate carboxylase: structural relationship to other biotin-containing
carboxylases and regulation of mRNA content in differentiating preadipocytes. J.
Biol. Chem. 259: 12831-12837, 1984.

6. Freytag, S. O.; Ledbetter, D. H.; Collier, K.; Gage, P.: Cloning
of the human pyruvate carboxylase gene. (Abstract) Fed. Proc. 43:
1726, 1984.

7. MacKay, N.; Rigat, B.; Douglas, C.; Chen, H. S.; Robinson, B. H.
: cDNA cloning of human kidney pyruvate carboxylase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 202: 1009-1014, 1994.

8. Monnot, S.; Serre, V.; Chadefaux-Vekemans, B.; Aupetit, J.; Romano,
S.; De Lonlay, P.; Rival, J.-M.; Munnich, A.; Steffann, J.; Bonnefont,
J.-P.: Structural insights on pathogenic effects of novel mutations
causing pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. Hum. Mutat. 30: 734-740,
2009.

9. Perucca-Lostanlen, D.; Hecht, B. K.; Courseaux, A.; Grosgeorge,
J.; Hecht, F.; Gaudray, P.: Mapping FRA11A, a folate-sensitive fragile
site in human chromosome band 11q13.3. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 79:
88-91, 1997.

10. Rochelle, J. M.; Watson, M. L.; Oakey, R. J.; Seldin, M. F.:
A linkage map of mouse chromosome 19: definition of comparative mapping
relationships with human chromosomes 10 and 11 including the MEN1
locus. Genomics 14: 26-31, 1992.

11. Walker, M. E.; Baker, E.; Wallace, J. C.; Sutherland, G. R.:
Assignment of the human pyruvate carboxylase gene (PC) to 11q13.4
by fluorescence in situ hybridisation. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 69:
187-189, 1995.

12. Wexler, I. D.; Du, Y.; Lisgaris, M. V.; Mandal, S. K.; Freytag,
S. O.; Yang, B.-S.; Liu, T.-C.; Kwon, M.; Patel, M. S.; Kerr, D. S.
: Primary amino acid sequence and structure of human pyruvate carboxylase. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1227: 46-52, 1994.

13. Wexler, I. D.; Kerr, D. S.; Du, Y.; Kaung, M. M.; Stephenson,
W.; Lusk, M. M.; Wappner, R. S.; Higgins, J. J.: Molecular characterization
of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency in two consanguineous families. Pediat.
Res. 43: 579-584, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2009

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 7/9/2004

EDITED wwang: 09/04/2009
ckniffin: 8/18/2009
terry: 2/10/2005
carol: 7/13/2004
ckniffin: 7/12/2004

611030	TITLE *611030 TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 30C; TMEM30C
;;CDC50, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, C; CDC50C
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of yeast Cdc50 family proteins,
which are involved in polarized cell division, Katoh and Katoh (2004)
identified 3 human CDC50 genes, including TMEM30C, which they called
CDC50C. The predicted CDC50C protein contains 341 amino acids. The human
and yeast CDC50 proteins all have 2 transmembrane domains and an
extracellular loop with 3 cysteines and an N-glycosylation site.

Osada et al. (2007) obtained TMEM30C cDNAs by 3-prime RACE of human and
chimpanzee testis RNA. In both species, the TMEM30C transcripts were
truncated due to mutations in splicing or poly(A) signals relative to
the macaque gene, which encodes 2 splice variants derived from 7 or 8
exons that produce proteins with 1 or 2 transmembrane domains,
respectively. In contrast, the major human transcript originates from 3
exons and lacks a stop codon, suggesting it does not produce a
functional protein. A minor human transcript transcribed from 2 exons
encodes a predicted 113-amino acid protein with 1 transmembrane domain.
RT-PCR showed that TMEM30C was expressed exclusively in testis of human,
macaque, and mouse. Expression of exons 5 through 8 in human and exons 6
through 8 in chimpanzee was not detected, suggesting that the
2-transmembrane form of TMEM30C is dispensable in hominoids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Katoh and Katoh (2004) determined that the TMEM30C gene contains 7
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Katoh and Katoh (2004) mapped the TMEM30C
gene to chromosome 3q12.

EVOLUTION

By phylogenetic analysis, Osada et al. (2007) showed that an accelerated
rate of amino acid substitutions in TMEM30C occurred after the
divergence of chimps and humans from Old World monkeys. They suggested
that the excess of substitutions might result from positive selection
for a new function or, more likely, relaxation of selection, as occurs
in pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Katoh, Y.; Katoh, M.: Identification and characterization of CDC50A,
CDC50B and CDC50C genes in silico. Oncol. Rep. 12: 939-943, 2004.

2. Osada, N.; Hashimoto, K.; Hirai, M.; Kusuda, J.: Aberrant termination
of reproduction-related TMEM30C transcripts in the hominoids. Gene 392:
151-156, 2007.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/15/2007

EDITED mgross: 05/15/2007

602805	TITLE *602805 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H2B HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER E; HIST1H2BE
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H2BE;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H2BE;;
H2B HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER H; H2BFH;;
H2B/H
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H2B histone family, see HIST1H2BA (609904).

MAPPING

By analysis of a YAC contig from chromosome 6p21.3, Albig et al. (1997)
characterized a cluster of 35 histone genes that included H2B/h.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H2BE.

GENE FUNCTION

See HIST1H2BA (609904) for functional information on H2B histones.

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

2. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 01/29/2013

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2013
mgross: 7/22/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/9/1998

615166	TITLE *615166 COX ASSEMBLY MITOCHONDRIAL PROTEIN 1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; CMC1
;;MITOCHONDRIAL METALLOCHAPERONE-LIKE PROTEIN;;
C3ORF68
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Based on experiments in yeast, CMC1 is predicted to be a mitochondrial
copper chaperone that facilitates copper incorporation into
mitochondrial enzymes that require copper as a cofactor (Horn et al.,
2008).

CLONING

By searching databases, Horn et al. (2008) identified orthologs of yeast
Cmc1 in vertebrates, flies, and plants. The deduced 106-amino acid human
CMC1 protein contains 4 conserved cysteines in twin Cx(9)C motifs that
are predicted to coordinate copper. Epitope-tagged CMC1 colocalized with
COX subunit 1 (MTCO1; 516030) in a typical mitochondrial network
pattern. In yeast, Cmc1 localized to the mitochondrial intermembrane
space.

GENE FUNCTION

Horn et al. (2008) found that deletion of Cmc1 in yeast impaired cell
growth and respiratory capacity, and reduced synthesis of Cox1. Growth
was significantly increased with exogenous copper supplementation.
Spectroscopic analysis of recombinant yeast Cmc1 was consistent with
Cmc1 coordination of copper as Cu(I)-thiolate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Horn et al. (2008) determined that the CMC1 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Horn et al. (2008) mapped the CMC1 gene to
chromosome 3p24.

REFERENCE 1. Horn, D.; Al-Ali, H.; Barrientos, A.: Cmc1p is a conserved mitochondrial
twin CX(9)C protein involved in cytochrome c oxidase biogenesis. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 28: 4354-4364, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/8/2013

EDITED alopez: 04/08/2013

177040	TITLE *177040 SERGLYCIN; SRGN
;;PROTEOGLYCAN 1; PRG1; PRG;;
PLATELET PROTEOGLYCAN PROTEIN CORE; PPG;;
PROTEOGLYCAN PROTEIN CORE FOR MAST CELL SECRETORY GRANULE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The proteoglycans that are stored in the secretory granules of many
hematopoietic cells contain a peptide core, termed serglycin (or
'serine/glycine-rich peptide core of secretory granule proteoglycan'),
with a protease-resistant, glycosaminoglycan-attachment region
consisting predominantly of alternating serine and glycine residues
(summary by Humphries et al., 1992). Serglycin proteoglycans have been
isolated that contain O-linked heparin, heparan sulfate, chondroitin
sulfate A, etc.

CLONING

The promyelocytic leukemia cell line HL-60 is a transformed human cell
that synthesizes chondroitin sulfate to proteoglycans and stores the
proteoglycans in its secretory granules. Under certain in vitro
conditions this cell can be induced to differentiate into cells that
resemble neutrophils, monocyte-macrophages, eosinophils, and basophils.
Stevens et al. (1988) used a rat cell-derived cDNA for a proteoglycan to
isolate a cDNA from an HL-60 cell cDNA library. As assessed by Northern
and Southern blot analyses, a single gene encodes the 1.3-kb mRNA for
this proteoglycan peptide core. The deduced amino acid sequence includes
an 18-amino acid glycosaminoglycan attachment region that consists
primarily of alternating serine and glycine.

Perin et al. (1988) characterized the protein core of platelet
proteoglycan and Alliel et al. (1988) determined its complete amino acid
structure by a combination of protein and cDNA sequencing.

Mattei et al. (1989) found that the sequence of the peptide core of the
secretory granule proteoglycan was identical to that of PPG.

Bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC) synthesize 200- to 250-kD highly
acidic proteoglycans containing glycosaminoglycans that are almost
exclusively chondroitin sulfate E. These intracellular proteoglycans are
stored in secretory granules. Avraham et al. (1989) isolated and
sequenced a full-length cDNA from a mouse BMMC-derived cDNA library. The
same peptide core is found in all cells of bone marrow origin (Austen,
1990); see Rothenberg et al. (1988) and Avraham et al. (1988) for
information on the eosinophil proteoglycan and the basophil
proteoglycan, respectively. Differences in the secretory granules of the
several cell types are related to the sugar moieties that are
polymerized onto the glycine-serine copolymer to form the
glycosoaminoglycan.

Humphries et al. (1992) determined the complete nucleotide sequence of
the human serglycin gene.

MAPPING

By probing DNA from a panel of human/mouse and human/hamster hybrid
cells with the cDNA, Stevens et al. (1988) showed that the gene that
encodes the HL-60 cell proteoglycan peptide core resides on chromosome
10. The mouse gene encoding the proteoglycan peptide core is located on
chromosome 10 (Avraham et al., 1988).

Mattei et al. (1989) showed by in situ hybridization that the PRG1 gene
is located in band 10q22.1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Humphries et al. (1992) determined that the human serglycin gene
contains 3 exons and spans 16.7 kb. The exons and introns 1 and 2
comprise 7, 53, and 40% of the gene, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Alliel, P. M.; Perin, J. P.; Maillet, P.; Bonnet, F.; Rosa, J.
P.; Jolles, P.: Complete amino acid sequence of a human platelet
proteoglycan. FEBS Lett. 236: 123-126, 1988.

2. Austen, K. F.: Personal Communication. Boston, Mass.  1/29/1990.

3. Avraham, S.; Stevens, R. L.; Gartner, M. C.; Austen, K. F.; Lalley,
P. A.; Weis, J. H.: Isolation of a cDNA that encodes the peptide
core of the secretory granule proteoglycan of rat basophilic leukemia-1
cells and assessment of its homology to the human analogue. J. Biol.
Chem. 263: 7292-7296, 1988.

4. Avraham, S.; Stevens, R. L.; Nicodemus, C. F.; Gartner, M. C.;
Austen, K. F.; Weis, J. H.: Molecular cloning of a cDNA that encodes
the peptide core of a mouse mast cell secretory granule proteoglycan
and comparison with the analogous rat and human cDNA. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 86: 3763-3767, 1989.

5. Humphries, D. E.; Nicodemus, C. F.; Schiller, V.; Stevens, R. L.
: The human serglycin gene: nucleotide sequence and methylation pattern
in human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells and T-lymphoblast Molt-4
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 13558-13563, 1992.

6. Mattei, M. G.; Perin, J.-P.; Alliel, P. M.; Bonnet, F.; Maillet,
P.; Passage, E.; Mattei, J.-F.; Jolles, P.: Localization of human
platelet proteoglycan gene to chromosome 10, band q22.1, by in situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 82: 87-88, 1989.

7. Perin, J. P.; Bonnet, F.; Maillet, P.; Jolles, P.: Characterization
and N-terminal sequence of human platelet proteoglycan. Biochem.
J. 255: 1007-1013, 1988.

8. Rothenberg, M. E.; Pomerantz, J. L.; Owen, W. F., Jr.; Avraham,
S.; Soberman, R. J.; Austen, K. F.; Stevens, R. L.: Characterization
of a human eosinophil proteoglycan, and augmentation of its biosynthesis
and size by interleukin 3, interleukin 5, and granulocyte/macrophage
colony stimulating factor. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 13901-13908, 1988.

9. Stevens, R. L.; Avraham, S.; Gartner, M. C.; Bruns, G. A. P.; Austen,
K. F.; Weis, J. H.: Isolation and characterization of a cDNA that
encodes the peptide core of the secretory granule proteoglycan of
human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 7287-7291,
1988.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/8/1989

EDITED alopez: 12/14/2009
carol: 10/11/2001
alopez: 8/15/2000
mark: 5/14/1997
mark: 1/3/1997
mark: 7/2/1996
carol: 2/3/1995
warfield: 4/14/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 3/9/1990
carol: 3/7/1990

610754	TITLE *610754 WINGS APART-LIKE PROTEIN, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; WAPAL
;;KIAA0261;;
WAPL;;
FRIEND OF EBNA2; FOE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from an immature myeloid leukemia cell
line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned WAPAL, which they
designated KIAA0261. The WAPAL protein contains 1,287 amino acids. By
Northern blot analysis, moderate expression was detected in placenta,
lung, liver, thymus, prostate, skeletal muscle, kidney, pancreas,
spleen, testis, ovary, small intestine, and peripheral blood leukocytes
with weak expression in heart, brain, and colon.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear
antigen-2 (EBNA2) sequence as bait to screen an EBV-immortalized B cell
cDNA library, followed by PCR, Kwiatkowski et al. (2004) cloned WAPAL,
which they called FOE. The deduced 1227-amino acid protein has a
predicted molecular mass of 137 kD. WAPAL contains an N-terminal
arginine-rich motif (ARM), a bipartite nuclear localization sequence, 3
highly acidic domains, 4 predicted coiled-coil domains, and a C-terminal
nuclear export signal. WAPAL shares shares 38% amino acid identity over
the C-terminal region with the parallel sister chromatid product (PASC)
of the Drosophila wapl gene. Northern blot analysis detected 6.5- and
4.4-kb transcripts in all human tissues examined. Multiple tissue
expression array confirmed ubiquitous expression in 72 human tissues
with highest expression in testis and lowest in ovary. Western blot
analysis of hematopoietic and epithelial cell lines detected WAPAL at
approximately 140 kD. Immunofluorescence studies localized WAPAL
throughout the nucleus in HeLa cells with exclusion from regions
adjacent to nucleoli. In mitotic cells, WAPAL was concentrated around
condensed chromosomes in metaphase and in later stages around separating
chromosomes in anaphase. Using subcellular fractionation as well as
immunohistochemical studies, Kwiatkowski et al. (2004) colocalized WAPAL
and EBNA2 to the nuclear matrix and showed partial colocalization of
both WAPAL and EBNA2 in a diffuse granular nuclear-staining pattern
excluded from nucleoli.

Oikawa et al. (2004) independently cloned WAPAL from human testis cDNA
library by PCR using primers derived from the Drosophila wapl sequence.
The deduced protein contains 1,190 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
and quantitative real-time PCR of human cancers and normal tissues
detected significantly higher expression in cervical tumors compared to
normal cervix and normal and tumor tissue from uterine body, ovary,
breast, lung, stomach, kidney, and colon. Immunohistochemistry showed
nuclear localization of WAPAL in all samples.

GENE FUNCTION

Oikawa et al. (2004) showed that WAPL localized to the basal and
parabasal cell layers in benign squamous epithelia but displayed
increased expression and localization extending to more superficial cell
layers in cervical dysplasia and invasive carcinoma, suggesting a role
for WAPL in cervical carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Oikawa et al.
(2004) showed that RNAi of WAPL in cervical carcinoma-derived cell lines
resulted in repressed cell growth and induced cell death. Flow cytometry
of siRNA-transfected cells showed an increase in the number of cells
exhibiting S phase DNA content, which may also be apoptotic cells at
G2-M phase, and an increase in apoptotic cells displaying sub-G1 DNA
content. Oikawa et al. (2004) suggested that malfunction of the WAPL
pathway may activate an S phase checkpoint or other apoptotic pathway
leading to cell death.

Using immunohistochemical analysis in mouse testis, Kuroda et al. (2005)
showed that Wapl localized to large pachytene spermatocytes, with no
staining in condensing forms of sperm. Mouse Wapl localized to the
synaptonemal complex and partially synapsed X and Y chromosomes in early
zygotene and pachytene stage spermatocytes. Kuroda et al. (2005)
suggested that Wapl may play a role in spermatogenesis, possibly in
homologous recombination and DNA recombination.

Kueng et al. (2006) showed that human WAPL interacted with cohesin
throughout the cell cycle in HeLa cells via cohesin's SCC1 (RAD21;
606462) and SA1 (STAG1; 604358)/SA2 (STAG2; 300826) subunits. WAPL also
formed a subcomplex with PDS5A (613200). Like cohesin, WAPL associated
with chromatin from telophase until prophase of the next mitosis.
Depletion of WAPL by RNA interference inhibited dissociation of cohesin
from chromosomes during prophase, prometaphase, and metaphase.
Resolution of chromosome arms was severely impaired in WAPL-depleted
cells until anaphase, which occurred after a delay, implying that
separase (ESPL1; 604143) was activated in the absence of WAPL. Depletion
of WAPL also resulted in increased levels of cohesin on chromatin in
interphase, and cohesin remained bound to chromatin longer in the
absence of WAPL. Kueng et al. (2006) concluded that WAPL is required for
release of cohesin from both interphase chromatin and mitotic
chromosomes.

Rolef Ben-Shahar et al. (2008) identified spontaneous suppressors of the
thermosensitive eco1-1 allele (see 609674) in budding yeast. An
acetylation-mimicking mutation of a conserved lysine in cohesin's Smc3
(606062) subunit makes Eco1 dispensable for cell growth, and Rolef
Ben-Shahar et al. (2008) showed that Smc3 is acetylated in an
Eco1-dependent manner during DNA replication to promote sister chromatid
cohesion. A second set of eco1-1 suppressors inactivate the budding
yeast ortholog of the cohesin destabilizer Wapl. Rolef Ben-Shahar et al.
(2008) concluded that Eco1 modifies cohesin to stabilize sister
chromatid cohesion in parallel with a cohesion establishment reaction
that is in principle Eco1-independent.

Through single-molecule analysis, Terret et al. (2009) demonstrated that
a replication complex, the RFC-CTF18 clamp loader, controls the velocity
spacing and restart activity of replication forks in human cells and is
required for robust acetylation of cohesin's SMC3 subunit and sister
chromatid cohesion. Unexpectedly, Terret et al. (2009) discovered that
cohesin acetylation itself is a central determinant of fork
processivity, as slow-moving replication forks were found in cells
lacking the Eco1-related acetyltransferases ESCO1 or ESCO2 (609353)
(including those derived from Roberts syndrome (268300) patients, in
whom ESCO2 is biallelically mutated), and in cells expressing a form of
SMC3 that cannot be acetylated. This defect was a consequence of
cohesin's hyperstable interaction with 2 regulatory cofactors, WAPL and
PDS5A (613200); removal of either cofactor allowed forks to progress
rapidly without ESCO1, ESCO2, or RFC-CTF18. Terret et al. (2009)
concluded that their results showed a novel mechanism for clamp
loader-dependent fork progression, mediated by the posttranslational
modification and structural remodeling of the cohesin ring. Loss of this
regulatory mechanism leads to the spontaneous accrual of DNA damage and
may contribute to the abnormalities of the Roberts syndrome
cohesinopathy.

Using HeLa cells and Xenopus oocytes, Nishiyama et al. (2010) showed
that the function of WAPL in destabilizing chromosome cohesion was
countered by sororin (CDCA5; 609374), which functioned to maintain
sister chromatid cohesion. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that
sororin interacted with PDS5 and displaced WAPL from its interaction
with PDS5. Nishiyama et al. (2010) concluded that sororin maintains
sister chromatid cohesion by inhibiting WAPL-induced dissociation of
cohesin from DNA.

Using conditional mutagenesis in the mouse, Tedeschi et al. (2013)
demonstrated that depletion of the cohesin-associated protein Wapl
stably locks cohesin on DNA, leads to clustering of cohesin in axial
structures, and causes chromatin condensation in interphase chromosomes.
The findings revealed that the stability of cohesin-DNA interactions is
an important determinant of chromatin structure and indicated that
cohesin has an architectural role in interphase chromosome territories.
Tedeschi et al. (2013) also showed that regulation of cohesin-DNA
interactions by Wapl is important for embryonic development, expression
of genes such as c-myc, and cell cycle progression. In mitosis,
Wapl-mediated release of cohensin from DNA is essential for proper
chromosome segregation and protects cohesin from cleavage by the
protease separase, thus enabling mitotic exit in the presence of
functional cohesin complexes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kwiatkowski et al. (2004) determined that the WAPAL gene contains 21
exons and spans 90 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the WAPAL gene
to chromosome 10. By genomic sequence analysis, Kwiatkowski et al.
(2004) mapped the WAPAL gene to chromosome 10q23.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Oikawa et al. (2004) showed that WAPL-transfected NIH3T3 cells induced
tumors in nude mice and concluded that WAPL has oncogenic
characteristics. Oikawa et al. (2004) stated that Wapl-deficient mice
displayed embryonic lethality.

Kuroda et al. (2005) showed that the dioxin TCDD induced Wapl expression
in Ahr (600253) -/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Higher levels of TCDD
decreased Wapl levels in Ahr +/+ cells, but further increased Wapl
levels in Ahr -/- cells. Following a single peritoneal injection of TCDD
into male C57/BL6 mice, the authors analyzed testes samples and found
decreased levels of Wapl expression, suggesting that Wapl may be a
target gene mediating the reproductive toxicity of TCDD.

REFERENCE 1. Kueng, S.; Hegemann, B.; Peters, B. H.; Lipp, J. J.; Schleiffer,
A.; Mechtler, K.; Peters, J.-M.: Wapl controls the dynamic association
of cohesin with chromatin. Cell 127: 955-967, 2006.

2. Kuroda, M.; Oikawa, K.; Ohbayashi, T.; Yoshida, K.; Yamada, K.;
Mimura, J.; Matsuda, Y.; Fujii-Kuriyama, Y.; Mukai, K.: A dioxin
sensitive gene, mammalian WAPL, is implicated in spermatogenesis. FEBS
Lett. 579: 167-172, 2005.

3. Kwiatkowski, B. A.; Ragoczy, T.; Ehly, J.; Schubach, W. H.: Identification
of cloning of a novel chromatin-associated protein partner of Epstein-Barr
nuclear protein 2. Exp. Cell Res. 300: 223-233, 2004.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

5. Nishiyama, T.; Ladurner, R.; Schmitz, J.; Kreidl, E.; Schleiffer,
A.; Bhaskara, V.; Bando, M.; Shirahige, K.; Hyman, A. A.; Mechtler,
K.; Peters, J.-M.: Sororin mediates sister chromatid cohesion by
antagonizing Wapl. Cell 143: 737-749, 2010.

6. Oikawa, K.; Ohbayashi, T.; Kiyono, T.; Nishi, H.; Isaka, K.; Umezawa,
A.; Kuroda, M.; Mukai, K.: Expression of a novel human gene, human
wings apart-like (hWAPL), is associated with cervical carcinogenesis
and tumor progression. Cancer Res. 64: 3545-3549, 2004.

7. Rolef Ben-Shahar, T.; Heeger, S.; Lehane, C.; East, P.; Flynn,
H.; Skehel, M.; Uhlmann, F.: Eco1-dependent cohesin acetylation during
establishment of sister chromatid cohesion. Science 321: 563-566,
2008.

8. Tedeschi, A.; Wutz, G.; Huet, S.; Jaritz, M.; Wuensche, A.; Schirghuber,
E.; Davidson, I. F.; Tang, W.; Cisneros, D. A.; Bhaskara, V.; Nishiyama,
T.; Vaziri, A.; Wutz, A.; Ellenberg, J.; Peters, J.-M.: Wapl is an
essential regulator of chromatin structure and chromosome segregation. Nature 501:
564-568, 2013.

9. Terret, M.-E.; Sherwood, R.; Rahman, S.; Qin, J.; Jallepalli, P.
V.: Cohesin acetylation speeds the replication fork. Nature 462:
231-234, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/28/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/29/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2008

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 2/12/2007

EDITED alopez: 10/28/2013
mgross: 4/5/2011
terry: 2/11/2011
carol: 11/8/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
wwang: 12/30/2009
terry: 12/29/2009
mgross: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/30/2009
alopez: 8/27/2008
terry: 8/27/2008
wwang: 2/12/2007

147572	TITLE *147572 INTERFERON-ALPHA-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 6; IFI6
;;INTERFERON-INDUCED PROTEIN IFI-6-16; IFI616;;
G1P3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential screening of an alpha-interferon (IFNA; 147660)-induced
neuroblastoma cell cDNA library, followed by screening an IFNA-treated
Daudi lymphoblastoid cell cDNA library, Kelly et al. (1986) cloned IFI6,
which they called 6-16. The deduced 130-amino acid protein is
hydrophobic and contains an N-terminal signal peptide.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelly et al. (1986) showed that IFI6 was induced in HeLa cells by IFNA
and IFNB (147640). Following transfection in mouse cells, human IFI6 was
expressed in response to mouse Ifna and Ifnb, but not Ifng (147570),
with the same kinetics and dose response as in human cells.

Itzhaki and Porter (1991) reported a method for targeted disruption of
the IFI6 gene and detection by secretion of human growth hormone (GH1;
139250).

Cheriyath et al. (2007) showed that treatment of human myeloma cells
with IFN-alpha-2b (see IFNA2; 147562) for 24 hours antagonized TRAIL
(TNFSF10; 603598)-mediated apoptosis, but after 72 hours it augmented
TRAIL apoptotic activity. The antiapoptotic activity of IFN-alpha-2b was
associated with increased expression of G1P3. Ectopically expressed G1P3
localized to mitochondria and antagonized TRAIL-mediated mitochondrial
potential loss, cytochrome c release, and apoptosis. Conversely, RNA
interference-mediated downregulation of G1P3 restored
IFN-alpha-2b-induced apoptosis. Cheriyath et al. (2007) concluded that
curtailing G1P3-mediated antiapoptotic signals may improve therapies for
myeloma and other malignancies.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kelly et al. (1986) determined that the IFI6 gene contains 5 exons and
has a TATA box upstream of the transcription initiation site.

Porter et al. (1988) described the interferon response element of the
human IFI6 gene.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Clauss et al. (1990) mapped the IFI6
gene to chromosome 1.

Itzhaki et al. (1992) reported that the IFI6 gene maps to chromosome
1p35, based on the work of others using fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Itzhaki et al. (1992) used telomere-associated chromosome
fragmentation (TACF), a novel approach for chromosome mapping based on
the nontargeted introduction of clone telomeres into mammalian
chromosomes, to target telomeric DNA to the IFI6 gene on chromosome 1p.
They deduced that the IFI6 gene is oriented away from the centromere by
targeting telomeric DNA to the specific locus by homologous
recombination, using a selection strategy that imposed the requirement
that the telomeric DNA be oriented in the same direction as the IFI6
gene.

REFERENCE 1. Cheriyath, V.; Glaser, K. B.; Waring, J. F.; Baz, R.; Hussein,
M. A.; Borden, E. C.: G1P3, an IFN-induced survival factor, antagonizes
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in human myeloma cells. J. Clin. Invest. 117:
3107-3117, 2007.

2. Clauss, I. M.; Wathelet, M. G.; Szpirer, J.; Content, J.; Islam,
M. Q.; Levan, G.; Szpirer, C.; Huez, G. A.: Chromosomal localization
of two human genes inducible by interferons, double-stranded RNA,
and viruses. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53: 166-168, 1990.

3. Itzhaki, J. E.; Barnett, M. A.; MacCarthy, A. B.; Buckle, V. J.;
Brown, W. R. A.; Porter, A. C. G.: Targeted breakage of a human chromosome
mediated by cloned human telomeric DNA. Nature Genet. 2: 283-287,
1992.

4. Itzhaki, J. E.; Porter, A. C. G.: Targeted disruption of a human
interferon-inducible gene detected by secretion of human growth hormone. Nucleic
Acids Res. 19: 3835-3842, 1991.

5. Kelly, J. M.; Porter, A. C. G.; Chernajovsky, Y.; Gilbert, C. S.;
Stark, G. R.; Kerr, I. M.: Characterization of a human gene inducible
by alpha- and beta-interferons and its expression in mouse cells. EMBO
J. 5: 1601-1606, 1986.

6. Porter, A. C. G.; Chernajovsky, Y.; Dale, T. C.; Gilbert, C. S.;
Stark, G. R.; Kerr, I. M.: Interferon response element of the human
gene 6-16. EMBO J. 7: 85-92, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/06/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/5/1990

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2007
terry: 11/2/2007
mgross: 8/14/2007
carol: 5/24/1999
carol: 8/20/1998
carol: 6/30/1998
jason: 6/17/1994
carol: 3/1/1993
carol: 2/25/1993
carol: 2/4/1993
carol: 1/26/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

191060	TITLE *191060 TRYPTOPHAN HYDROXYLASE 1; TPH1
;;TPH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH; EC 1.14.16.4) catalyzes the
biopterin-dependent monooxygenation of tryptophan to 5-hydroxytryptophan
(5HT), which is subsequently decarboxylated to form the neurotransmitter
serotonin. It is thus the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of
serotonin. TPH expression is limited to a few specialized tissues: raphe
neurons, pinealocytes, mast cells, mononuclear leukocytes, beta-cells of
the islets of Langerhans, and intestinal and pancreatic enterochromaffin
cells.

CLONING

Stoll et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA for tryptophan hydroxylase (Tph)
from a library constructed from RNA prepared from a mouse mastocytoma
cell line. Boularand et al. (1990) gave the sequence of a cDNA clone
containing the complete coding sequence of TPH.

GENE FUNCTION

Matsuda et al. (2004) found that mouse mammary glands stimulated by
prolactin (176760) expressed genes essential for serotonin biosynthesis,
including Tph. Tph mRNA was elevated during pregnancy and lactation, and
serotonin was detected in the mammary epithelium and in milk. Tph was
induced by prolactin in mammosphere cultures and by milk stasis in
nursing dams, suggesting that expression of TPH is controlled by milk
filling in the alveoli. Serotonin suppressed beta-casein (115460)
expression and caused shrinkage of mammary alveoli. Conversely,
disruption of the Tph gene or antiserotonergic drugs enhanced secretory
features and alveolar dilation. Matsuda et al. (2004) concluded that
autocrine-paracrine serotonin signaling is an important regulator of
mammary homeostasis and early involution.

The liver can regenerate its volume after major tissue loss. Lesurtel et
al. (2006) showed that in a mouse model of liver regeneration,
thrombocytopenia resulted in the failure to initiate cellular
proliferation in the liver. Platelets are major carriers of serotonin in
the blood. In thrombocytopenic mice, a serotonin agonist reconstituted
liver proliferation. The expression of 5-HT2A (182135) and 2B (601122)
subtype serotonin receptors in the liver increased after hepatectomy.
Antagonists of 5-HT2A and 2B receptors inhibited liver regeneration.
Liver regeneration was also blunted in mice lacking TPH1, which is the
rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of peripheral serotonin. This
failure of regeneration was rescued by reloading serotonin-free
platelets with a serotonin precursor molecule. Lesurtel et al. (2006)
concluded that platelet-derived serotonin is involved in the initiation
of liver regeneration.

Loss- and gain-of-function mutations in mouse Lrp5 (603506) affect bone
formation, causing osteoporosis and high bone mass, respectively. Yadav
et al. (2008) identified Tph1 as the most highly overexpressed gene in
Lrp5 -/- mice. Tph1 expression was also elevated in Lrp5 -/- duodenal
cells, its primary site of expression. Decreasing serotonin blood levels
normalized bone formation and bone mass in Lrp5 -/- mice, and
gut-specific Lrp5 inactivation decreased bone formation in a
beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806)-independent manner. Moreover, gut-specific
activation of Lrp5 or inactivation of Tph1 increased bone mass and
prevented ovariectomy-induced bone loss in mice. Yadav et al. (2008)
showed that serotonin determined the extent of bone formation by binding
its receptor, Htr1b (182131), on osteoblasts and limiting osteoblast
proliferation by inhibiting Creb (see 123810)-mediated cyclin D1 (CCND1;
168461) expression. Yadav et al. (2008) concluded that LRP5 inhibits
bone formation by inhibiting serotonin production.

To examine putative central and peripheral sources of embryonic brain
5-HT (serotonin), Bonnin et al. (2011) used Pet1 (FEV; 607150)-null mice
in which most dorsal raphe neurons lack 5-HT. They detected previously
unknown differences in accumulation of 5-HT between the forebrain and
hindbrain during early and late fetal stages, through an exogenous
source of 5-HT which is not of maternal origin. Using additional genetic
strategies, a new technology for studying placental biology ex vivo and
direct manipulation of placental neosynthesis, Bonnin et al. (2011)
investigated the nature of this exogenous source and uncovered a
placental 5-HT synthetic pathway from a maternal tryptophan precursor in
both mice and humans. The mouse placenta expresses both Tph1 and Aadc
(608643) in the syncytiotrophoblastic cell layer at embryonic days 10.5
through 14.5. Human placental fetal villi at 11 weeks' gestation showed
robust 5-HT neosynthesis, indicating that a placental source of 5-HT is
important for human fetal development. Bonnin et al. (2011) concluded
that their study revealed a new, direct role for placental metabolic
pathways in modulating fetal brain development and indicated that
maternal-placental-fetal interactions could underlie the pronounced
impact of 5-HT on long-lasting mental health outcomes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gizatullin et al. (2006) noted that the TPH1 gene spans 29 kb and
contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

Using a clone for rabbit tryptophan hydroxylase as a probe in the study
of a panel of hamster-human somatic cell hybrids, Ledley et al. (1987)
assigned the gene to chromosome 11. They discussed the evolution of the
aromatic amino acid hydroxylase superfamily, which also includes TH
(191290), located at 11p15.5, and phenylalanine hydroxylase (612349),
located at 12q24.1. The locations of these genes and their evolutionary
distance (as indicated by their sequences) suggested to Ledley et al.
(1987) that at least 3 distinct genetic events have occurred during the
evolution of this superfamily: 2 sequential gene duplications giving
rise to 3 distinct loci, and a translocation which separated the
tryptophan and tyrosine hydroxylase loci on chromosome 11 from the
phenylalanine hydroxylase locus on chromosome 12. HGM9 regionalized the
assignment to 11p15-p13. Craig et al. (1991) regionalized the assignment
to 11p15.3-p14 by in situ hybridization.

By examining introns of the human TPH gene by PCR amplification and
analysis by the single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP)
technique, Nielsen et al. (1992) identified an informative intronic
polymorphism useful in linkage studies. Using this polymorphism in 24
informative CEPH families, they showed that TPH lies between D11S151 and
D11S134.

Stoll et al. (1990) mapped the mouse Tph gene by Southern blot analysis
of somatic cell hybrids and by an interspecific backcross to a position
in the proximal half of chromosome 7. Thus, this is another example of
homology of synteny between human chromosome 11 and mouse chromosome 7.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bellivier et al. (2004) conducted a metaanalysis of 9 association
studies (961 patients and 1,485 controls) of the relationship between
the A218C polymorphism of the TPH gene and suicidal behavior. A
significant association was observed between this polymorphism and
suicidal behavior using the fixed effect method (odds ratio, 1.62; 95%
CI, 1.26; 2.07) and in the random effect method (odds ratio = 1.61; CI,
1.11; 2.35). When 2 of the studies that deviated from the calculated
global effect were removed, significant association remained. A
dose-dependent effect of the A allele on the risk for suicidal behavior
was observed.

Stefulj et al. (2006) studied the TPH1 A218C polymorphism in 247 male
victims of violent suicide and 320 controls of Slavic (Croatian) origin,
with specific relation to age. The frequency of the CC genotype was
increased in victims aged 65 and older as compared to controls (p =
0.0126 and 0.0008, for comparison with age-specific and integral control
samples, respectively), while there was no difference between victims
under age 65 and controls. The authors suggested a possible combined
effect of the genetic factor and physiologic changes due to aging on the
predisposition to violent suicide.

In a metaanalysis of 34 case-control studies from 21 published articles
and an unpublished paper, Li and He (2006) found an overall association
between suicidal behavior and the TPH A779C/A218C polymorphisms. The A
allele was the risk allele for both polymorphisms, yielding an odds
ratio of 1.12 overall for carriers of both A alleles. Sand (2007)
commented that the report of Li and He (2006) used pooled populations,
pooled SNP frequencies, imprecise phenotypes, and redundant reports, and
questioned the finding of allelic association.

Gizatullin et al. (2006) screened TPH1 SNPs spanning over 23 kb
(promoter to exon 8) in 228 patients with major depression (608516) and
253 healthy control subjects. Several haplotypes were associated with
depression, and the 6-SNP haplotypes that occurred in less than 5% of
both groups were associated with the disease (31.6% vs 18.0% in
controls, p less than 0.00005). A sliding window analysis attributed the
strongest disease association to a 2-SNP haplotype comprising dbSNP
rs1799913 (A779C) and dbSNP rs7933505 localized between intron 7 and 8
(p less than 0.00005). Gizatullin et al. (2006) concluded that the most
common variants appear not to carry risk while some less frequent
variants might contribute to major depression.

Li et al. (2006) examined the relationship between the A218C and A-6526G
polymorphisms of the TPH1 gene and attention deficit-hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD; 143465) in the Chinese Han population; 362 unrelated
ADHD probands and their biologic parents were studied. No biased
transmission of any allele of the 2 polymorphisms was associated by
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) analysis. However, haplotype
analysis showed that the rare 218A/-6526G haplotype was significantly
not transmitted to probands with ADHD (chi square = 4.4995, p = 0.034),
regardless of subtype.

Allen et al. (2008) performed a metaanalysis across all ancestries
comparing 829 patients with schizophrenia with 1,268 controls and found
that the A versus C allele at position 218 in intron 7 (dbSNP rs1800532)
of the TPH1 gene was associated with susceptibility to schizophrenia
(OR, 1.31; 95% CI, 1.15-1.51; p less than 8(-5)). According to the
Venice guidelines for the assessment of cumulative evidence in genetic
association studies (Ioannidis et al., 2008), the TPH1 association
showed a 'strong' degree of epidemiologic credibility.

ANIMAL MODEL

Walther et al. (2003) developed Tph-null mice. Mutant mice showed no
significant differences in 5HT-related behaviors and expressed normal
amounts of 5HT in classical serotonergic brain regions. However,
Tph-null mice lacked 5HT in the periphery, except for the duodenum.
Using RNAse protection assays, they determined that Tph2 (607478) is the
predominant isoform expressed in mouse brain.

Walther et al. (2003) found that mice selectively deficient in
peripheral Tph and serotonin exhibited impaired hemostasis, resulting in
a reduced risk of thrombosis and thromboembolism, although platelet
ultrastructure was not affected. While the aggregation of
serotonin-deficient platelets in vitro was apparently normal, their
adhesion in vivo was reduced due to reduced secretion of adhesive
alpha-granular proteins. Walther et al. (2003) showed that serotonin was
transamidated to small GTPases by transglutaminases (see TGM2; 190196)
during activation and aggregation of platelets, rendering these GTPases
constitutively active.

Using lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus in a Cd8 (see 186910)-positive
T cell-dependent mouse model of immunopathologic hepatitis, Lang et al.
(2008) showed that Tph1-deficient mice, but not wildtype mice,
normalized hepatic microcirculatory dysfunction, accelerated clearance
of virus from liver, and reduced Cd8-positive T cell-dependent liver
cell damage. In contrast, serotonin treatment of infected wildtype mice
delayed entry to liver of Cd8-positive T cells, delayed viral clearance,
and aggravated liver immunopathology. Lang et al. (2008) concluded that
vasoactive serotonin supports virus persistence in liver and aggravates
virus-induced immunopathology.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, N. C.; Bagade, S.; McQueen, M. B.; Ioannidis, J. P. A.;
Kavvoura, F. K.; Khoury, M. J.; Tanzi, R. E.; Bertram, L.: Systematic
meta-analyses and field synopsis of genetic association studies in
schizophrenia: the SzGene database. Nature Genet. 40: 827-834, 2008.

2. Bellivier, F.; Chaste, P.; Malafosse, A.: Association between
the TPH gene A218C polymorphism and suicidal behavior: a meta-analysis. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 124B: 87-91, 2004.

3. Bonnin, A.; Goeden, N.; Chen, K.; Wilson, M. L.; King, J.; Shih,
J. C.; Blakely, R. D.; Deneris, E. S.; Levitt, P.: A transient placental
source of serotonin for the fetal forebrain. Nature 472: 347-350,
2011.

4. Boularand, S.; Darmon, M. C.; Ganem, Y.; Launay, J.-M.; Mallet,
J.: Complete coding sequence of human tryptophan hydroxylase. Nucleic
Acids Res. 18: 4257 only, 1990.

5. Craig, S. P.; Boularand, S.; Darmon, M. C.; Mallet, J.; Craig,
I. W.: Localization of human tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) to chromosome
11p15.3-p14 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 56:
157-159, 1991.

6. Gizatullin, R.; Zaboli, G.; Jonsson, E. G.; Asberg, M.; Leopardi,
R.: Haplotype analysis reveals tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) 1 gene
variants associated with major depression. Biol. Psychiat. 59: 295-300,
2006.

7. Ioannidis, J. P.; Boffetta, P.; Little, J.; O'Brien, T. R.; Uitterlinden,
A. G.; Vineis, P.; Balding, D. J.; Chokkalingam, A.; Dolan, S. M.;
Flanders, W. D.; Higgins, J. P.; McCarthy, M. I.; McDermott, D. H.;
Page, G. P.; Rebbeck, T. R.; Seminara, D.; Khoury, M. J.: Assessment
of cumulative evidence on genetic associations: interim guidelines. Int.
J. Epidemiol. 37: 133-135, 2008.

8. Lang, P. A.; Contaldo, C.; Georgiev, P.; El-Badry, A. M.; Recher,
M.; Kurrer, M.; Cervantes-Barragan, L.; Ludewig, B.; Calzascia, T.;
Bolinger, B.; Merkler, D.; Odermatt, B.; and 10 others: Aggravation
of viral hepatitis by platelet-derived serotonin. Nature Med. 14:
756-761, 2008.

9. Ledley, F. D.; Grenett, H. E.; Bartos, D. P.; van Tuinen, P.; Ledbetter,
D. H.; Woo, S. L. C.: Assignment of human tryptophan hydroxylase
locus to chromosome 11: gene duplication and translocation in evolution
of aromatic amino acid hydroxylases. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 13:
575-580, 1987.

10. Lesurtel, M.; Graf, R.; Aleil, B.; Walther, D. J.; Tian, Y.; Jochum,
W.; Gachet, C.; Bader, M.; Clavien, P.-A.: Platelet-derived serotonin
mediates liver regeneration. Science 312: 104-107, 2006.

11. Li, D.; He, L.: Further clarification of the contribution of
the tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) gene to suicidal behavior using systematic
allelic and genotypic meta-analyses. Hum. Genet. 119: 233-240, 2006.

12. Li, J.; Wang, Y.; Zhou, R.; Zhang, H.; Yang, L.; Wang, B.; Faraone,
S. V.: Association between tryptophan hydroxylase gene polymorphisms
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in Chinese Han population. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 141B: 126-129, 2006.

13. Matsuda, M.; Imaoka, T.; Vomachka, A. J.; Gudelsky, G. A.; Hou,
Z.; Mistry, M.; Bailey, J. P.; Nieport, K. M.; Walther, D. J.; Bader,
M.; Horseman, N. D.: Serotonin regulates mammary gland development
via an autocrine-paracrine loop. Dev. Cell 6: 193-203, 2004.

14. Nielsen, D. A.; Dean, M.; Goldman, D.: Genetic mapping of the
human tryptophan hydroxylase gene on chromosome 11, using an intronic
conformational polymorphism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 1366-1371, 1992.

15. Sand, P. G.: Comments on the paper by D. Li and L. He: meta-analysis
showed association between the tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) gene and
schizophrenia. (Letter) Hum. Genet. 122: 409-411, 2007.

16. Stefulj, J.; Kubat, M.; Balija, M.; Jernej, B.: TPH gene polymorphism
and aging: indication of combined effect on the predisposition to
violent suicide. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 141B:
139-141, 2006.

17. Stoll, J.; Kozak, C. A.; Goldman, D.: Characterization and chromosomal
mapping of a cDNA encoding tryptophan hydroxylase from a mouse mastocytoma
cell line. Genomics 7: 88-96, 1990.

18. Walther, D. J.; Peter, J.-U.; Bashammakh, S.; Hortnagl, H.; Voits,
M.; Fink, H.; Bader, M.: Synthesis of serotonin by a second tryptophan
hydroxylase isoform. Science 299: 76 only, 2003.

19. Walther, D. J.; Peter, J.-U.; Winter, S.; Holtje, M.; Paulmann,
N.; Grohmann, M.; Vowinckel, J.; Alamo-Bethencourt, V.; Wilhelm, C.
S.; Ahnert-Hilger, G.; Bader, M.: Serotonylation of small GTPases
is a signal transduction pathway that triggers platelet alpha-granule
release. Cell 115: 851-862, 2003.

20. Yadav, V. K.; Ryu, J.-H.; Suda, N.; Tanaka, K. F.; Gingrich, J.
A.; Schutz, G.; Glorieux, F. H.; Chiang, C. Y.; Zajac, J. D.; Insogna,
K. L.; Mann, J. J.; Hen, R.; Ducy, P.; Karsenty, G.: Lrp5 controls
bone formation by inhibiting serotonin synthesis in the duodenum. Cell 135:
825-837, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/6/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/25/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/14/2008
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/4/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/2/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 5/17/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/25/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/20/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1987

EDITED alopez: 07/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
mgross: 3/20/2009
terry: 3/20/2009
carol: 12/8/2008
terry: 8/6/2008
mgross: 7/28/2008
terry: 7/25/2008
wwang: 5/21/2008
ckniffin: 4/14/2008
carol: 10/4/2007
carol: 8/8/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 6/8/2006
terry: 6/2/2006
wwang: 5/22/2006
terry: 5/17/2006
wwang: 5/17/2006
ckniffin: 5/10/2006
alopez: 4/25/2006
terry: 4/25/2006
carol: 4/10/2006
terry: 4/6/2006
terry: 4/4/2005
mgross: 4/20/2004
mgross: 1/14/2003
carol: 1/20/1993
carol: 4/21/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/19/1991
carol: 12/10/1990
carol: 6/6/1990

176991	TITLE *176991 S100 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN A5; S100A5
;;S100D
DESCRIPTION The S100 proteins are small calcium-binding proteins which display
different expression patterns in human tissues. Some S100 proteins are
associated with tumor development and the metastatic behavior of tumors.
Engelkamp et al. (1993) established the physical linkage of 6 S100 genes
by pulsed field gel electrophoresis and DNA sequencing of 15 kb
containing the full coding region of 4 different S100 genes: S100E
(S100A3; 176992), CAPL (S100A4; 114210), S100D (S100A5), and calcyclin
(S100A6; 114110). Engelkamp et al. (1993) stated that 'this is the
tightest mammalian gene cluster discovered so far.' The cluster was
assigned to 1q21 by in situ hybridization. Two other S100 genes were
located within 450 kb: S100L (S100A2; 176993) and S100A (S100A1;
176940).

Schafer et al. (1995) isolated a YAC from 1q21 on which 9 different
genes coding for S100 calcium-binding proteins could be localized. The
clustered organization of S100 genes allowed introduction of a new
logical nomenclature based on their physical arrangement on the
chromosome, with S100A1 being closest to the telomere and S100A9
(123886) being closest to the centromere. In this nomenclature, S100D
became S100A5.

REFERENCE 1. Engelkamp, D.; Schafer, B. W.; Mattei, M. G.; Erne, P.; Heizmann,
C. W.: Six S100 genes are clustered on human chromosome 1q21: identification
of two genes coding for the two previously unreported calcium-binding
proteins S100D and S100E. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 6547-6551, 1993.

2. Schafer, B. W.; Wicki, R.; Engelkamp, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Heizmann,
C. W.: Isolation of a YAC clone covering a cluster of nine S100 genes
on human chromosome 1q21: rationale for a new nomenclature of the
S100 calcium-binding protein family. Genomics 25: 638-643, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/25/1993

EDITED alopez: 10/12/1998
carol: 6/23/1997
mark: 12/21/1996
mark: 6/15/1995
carol: 1/23/1995
carol: 9/15/1993
carol: 8/25/1993

601752	TITLE *601752 ECTONUCLEOSIDE TRIPHOSPHATE DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE 1; ENTPD1
;;CD39 ANTIGEN; CD39;;
VASCULAR ATP DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE; ATPDase;;
APYRASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Endothelial cells have the ability to regulate platelet activation, in
part by the surface expression of ATP diphosphohydrolase (ATPDase; EC
3.6.1.5). ATPDase hydrolyzes extracellular ATP and ADP to AMP, which is
further converted to adenosine by another enzyme, 5-prime nucleotidase.
ADP is a powerful agonist for platelet recruitment and adhesion;
adenosine is an antagonist of these processes. Kaczmarek et al. (1996)
demonstrated that CD39, a B-cell activation marker previously
characterized by Maliszewski et al. (1994), encodes vascular ATPDase.
They isolated the cDNA of human ATPDase/CD39 by RT-PCR using RNA from
human umbilical endothelial cells. They expressed this cDNA in COS-7
cells and confirmed that it is expressed on the cell surface, hydrolyzes
both ATP and ADP, and inhibits platelet aggregation. CD39 was found to
have both immunologic identity to, and functional characteristics of,
vascular ATPDase. By Northern blot analysis, Chadwick and Frischauf
(1998) found that CD39 is expressed as a major 3.2- and a minor 3.6-kb
mRNA in several tissues. Additional bands were observed in a few
tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors, as well as CD39 and CD73 (NT5E; 129190), during
differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line. Granulocytic
differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. CD39
expression was nearly undetectable in undifferentiated cells, but
differentiation to either granulocytic or monocytic cells caused a
strong increase in CD39 transcript. CD39 was moderately expressed in
normal blood leukocytes.

MAPPING

Gray et al. (1997) mapped the CD39 gene to a YAC contig of 10q24 between
the genes for CYP2C (see 124020) and DNTT (187410).

ANIMAL MODEL

CD39 has been considered an important inhibitor of platelet activation.
Unexpectedly, Enjyoji et al. (1999) found that Cd39-deficient mice had
prolonged bleeding times with minimally perturbed coagulation
parameters. Platelet interactions with injured mesenteric vasculature
were considerably reduced in vivo, and purified mutant platelets failed
to aggregate to standard agonists in vitro. This platelet hypofunction
was reversible and associated with purinergic type P2y1 receptor
(601167) desensitization. In keeping with deficient vascular protective
mechanisms, fibrin deposition was found at multiple organ sites in
Cd39-deficient mice and in transplanted cardiac grafts. The data
indicated the dual role for CD39 in modulating hemostasis and thrombotic
reactions.

Langerhans cells (LC) are members of the dendritic cell (DC) family of
antigen-presenting cells residing in the skin. Wolff and Winkelmann
(1967) established that LC can be simply identified with light, rather
than electron, microscopy using surface ATPase staining. Mizumoto et al.
(2002) established that LC from CD39 -/- mice are not able to hydrolyze
both ATP and ADP and that CD39 +/- mice have a diminished ability to
effect ATP and ADP hydrolysis compared to wildtype mice. Histochemical,
Northern, and Western blot analyses showed that CD39 is expressed in
epidermal DC but not keratinocyte cell lines. CD39-deficient mice have
amplified inflammatory responses to irritant chemicals, while
heterozygous mice have intermediate responses compared to wildtype mice.
On the other hand, CD39 -/- mice have similar responses to ultraviolet
radiation and attenuated responses to contact allergens compared to
heterozygotes and wildtype mice. Using a fluorescent contact allergen,
Mizumoto et al. (2002) showed that the mutant mice LC are functional in
their homing and phenotypic maturation but are less able to stimulate T
cells, indicating that CD39 expression is required for optimal
stimulation of hapten-reactive T cells in mice. CD39-deficient DC are
unresponsive to ATP and are susceptible to cell death after prolonged
exposure to ADP. Mizumoto et al. (2002) and Granstein (2002) proposed
that if keratinocyte release of ATP and ADP occurs in response to all
chemical irritants and if the magnitude of release correlates with the
potency of the irritant, measurement of this release may be a useful in
vitro method to assess the risk of cosmetics and other topical agents
instead of animal testing.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Chadwick, B. P.; Frischauf, A.-M.: The CD39-like gene family:
identification of three new human members (CD39L2, CD39L3, and CD39L4),
their murine homologues, and a member of the gene family from Drosophila
melanogaster. Genomics 50: 357-367, 1998.

3. Enjyoji, K.; Sevigny, J.; Lin, Y.; Frenette, P. S.; Christie, P.
D.; am Esch, J. S., II; Imai, M.; Edelberg, J. M.; Rayburn, H.; Lech,
M.; Beeler, D. L.; Csizmadia, E.; Wagner, D. D.; Robson, S. C.; Rosenberg,
R. D.: Targeted disruption of cd39/ATP diphosphohydrolase results
in disordered hemostasis and thromboregulation. Nature Med. 5: 1010-1017,
1999.

4. Granstein, R. D.: The skinny on CD39 in immunity and inflammation. Nature
Med. 8: 336-338, 2002.

5. Gray, I. C.; Fallowfield, J.; Ford, S.; Nobile, C.; Volpi, E. V.;
Spurr, N. K.: An integrated physical and genetic map spanning chromosome
band 10q24. Genomics 43: 85-88, 1997.

6. Kaczmarek, E.; Koziak, K.; Sevigny, J.; Siegel, J. B.; Anrather,
J.; Beaudoin, A. R.; Bach, F. H.; Robson, S. C.: Identification and
characterization of CD39/vascular ATP diphosphohydrolase. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 33116-33122, 1996.

7. Maliszewski, C. R.; Delespesse, G. L.; Schoenborn, M. A.; Armitage,
R. J.; Fanslow, W. C.; Nakajima, T.; Baker, E.; Sutherland, G. R.;
Poindexter, K.; Birks, C.; Alpert, A.; Friend, D.; Gimpel, S. D.;
Gayle, R. B., III: The CD39 lymphoid cell activation antigen. Molecular
cloning and structural characterization. J. Immun. 153: 3574-3583,
1994.

8. Mizumoto, N.; Kumamoto, T.; Robson, S. C.; Sevigny, J.; Matsue,
H.; Enjyoji, K.; Takashima, A.: CD39 is the dominant Langerhans cell-associated
ecto-NTPDase: modulatory roles in inflammation and immune responsiveness. Nature
Med. 8: 358-365, 2002.

9. Wolff, K,.; Winkelmann, R. K.: Ultrastructural localization of
nucleoside triphosphatase in Langerhans cells. J. Invest. Derm. 48:
50-54, 1967.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/07/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/6/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 10/19/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 7/16/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/11/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/07/2005
joanna: 6/20/2003
alopez: 4/9/2002
carol: 4/11/2001
mgross: 1/14/2000
terry: 1/6/2000
alopez: 10/19/1998
alopez: 11/7/1997
mark: 7/16/1997
alopez: 5/1/1997
alopez: 4/14/1997

604098	TITLE *604098 SUPPRESSOR OF G2 ALLELE OF SKP1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; SUGT1
;;SGT1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kitagawa et al. (1999) identified the S. cerevisiae SGT1 (suppressor of
G2 allele of SKP1) gene, which, like SKP1 (see 601434), is required for
both the G1/S and G2/M transitions in the cell cycle. The SGT1 protein
physically associates with the SKP1 protein and the SCF (SKP1/Cdc53/F
box protein) ubiquitin ligase complex (see 603134) and is required for
kinetochore function, where it serves as an activator of the Ctf13
protein. Kitagawa et al. (1999) also cloned the human homolog of the
yeast SGT1 gene. The yeast and human SGT1 proteins share 26% identity
and 30% similarity. Human SGT1 could perform the essential functions of
SGT1 in budding yeast, indicating that SGT1 function is conserved
throughout eukaryotes.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the SUGT1 gene to chromosome 13q14.3 based on an
alignment of the SUGT1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF132856) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/12/2012.

2. Kitagawa, K.; Skowyra, D.; Elledge, S. J.; Harper, J. W.; Hieter,
P.: SGT1 encodes an essential component of the yeast kinetochore
assembly pathway and a novel subunit of the SCF ubiquitin ligase complex. Molec.
Cell 4: 21-33, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 06/12/2012

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 8/3/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/12/2012
carol: 6/8/2012
mgross: 11/12/2002
mgross: 8/3/1999

173391	TITLE *173391 PLASMINOGEN ACTIVATOR RECEPTOR, UROKINASE-TYPE; PLAUR
;;UPA RECEPTOR; UPAR;;
CD87 ANTIGEN; CD87
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor is a key molecule in
the regulation of cell-surface plasminogen activation and, as such,
plays an important role in many normal as well as pathologic processes.

CLONING

Min et al. (1992) cloned the cDNA for Mo3, an activation antigen
expressed by human monocytes and myelomonocytic cell lines after
stimulation by a variety of agents. Mo3 expression in vivo is associated
predominantly with macrophages in inflammatory sites. It is a highly
glycosylated protein of about 50 kD in monocytes where it is anchored to
the plasma membrane by glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol linkage. The
complete coding sequence of the cDNA was found to encode 335 amino acids
including a predicted signal peptide of 22 residues and a hydrophobic
C-terminal portion. A database search revealed that Mo3 is identical to
the human receptor for the urokinase plasminogen activator (UPA, or
PLAU; 191840).

GENE FUNCTION

Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer and biochemical analysis,
Sitrin et al. (2001) demonstrated that PLAUR is directly associated with
the carbohydrate-binding domain of SELL (153240) in the membrane of
neutrophils, an association analogous to that between PLAUR and beta-2
integrins (see 600065). Spectrofluorometric analysis indicated that
PLAUR-mediated calcium mobilization is SELL dependent.

Foca et al. (2000) demonstrated that UPAR mRNA levels correlated with
the invasive potential of endometrial carcinomas and showed a 33-fold
increase in UPAR mRNA levels in advanced clinical stage endometrial
tumors compared with normal endometrial tissue. Furthermore, the
increase in UPAR mRNA levels correlated linearly with the progression of
disease stage. Memarzadeh et al. (2002) examined whether UPAR protein
expression correlated with (1) the grade and stage of endometrial cancer
and (2) recurrence and mortality rate in patients with endometrial
cancer. Their ultimate goal was to determine whether UPAR protein could
be used as a prognostic marker in patients with endometrial cancer. They
found no expression of UPAR protein in 7 patients with benign neoplasia
of the endometrium. On the other hand, UPAR protein expression highly
correlated with stage of disease in endometrial cancer. Moreover, high
UPAR expression positively correlated with grade of disease. It also
correlated positively with rate of recurrence and mortality in patients
with endometrial cancer. Memarzadeh et al. (2002) concluded that UPAR is
a useful prognostic marker for biologically aggressive forms of
endometrial cancer.

In human coronary artery vascular smooth muscle cells, UPA stimulates
cell migration via a UPAR signaling complex containing TYK2 (176941) and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K; see 601232). Kiian et al. (2003)
showed that association of TYK2 and PI3K with active GTP-bound forms of
both RHOA (ARHA; 165390) and RAC1 (602048), but not CDC42 (116952), as
well as phosphorylation of myosin light chain (see 160781), are
downstream events required for UPA/UPAR-directed migration.

Wang et al. (2004) found that both Klf4 (602253) and Upar were
predominantly expressed in luminal surface epithelial cells of the
colonic crypt in mice. Colon cells from Klf4-null mice showed a dramatic
reduction in Upar protein compared with wildtype mice. Conversely, KLF4
expression in human colon cancer cells increased the amount of UPAR
protein and mRNA. Mobility shift experiments and chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that KLF4 bound multiple regions of the UPAR
promoter.

Park et al. (2009) found that macrophages from Upar -/- mice had
enhanced ability to engulf wildtype neutrophils, but not Upar -/-
neutrophils. The enhanced phagocytic activity of Upar -/- macrophages
could be abrogated by incubation with soluble Upar, arg-gly-asp
peptides, or anti-integrin antibodies. Similarly, wildtype macrophages
showed increased uptake of Upar -/- neutrophils, except in the presence
of soluble Upar or anti-integrin antibodies. Incubation of either Upar
-/- neutrophils or Upar -/- macrophages, but not both, with soluble Upar
enhanced the uptake of Upar -/- neutrophils by Upar -/- macrophages.
Upar expression was reduced on the surface of apoptotic neutrophils
compared with viable neutrophils. Park et al. (2009) concluded that UPAR
is involved in the recognition and clearance of neutrophils.

- Role in Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis

Using quantitative RT-PCR with glomeruli isolated from human kidney
biopsies, Wei et al. (2008) found that expression of UPAR was low in
healthy glomeruli, but it was induced in glomeruli from individuals with
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS; see 603278) and highly induced
in glomeruli from individuals with diabetic nephropathy. In all rat and
mouse models of proteinuria, Upar protein expression was increased in
glomerular cells, including podocytes, compared with controls.
Immunoelectron microscopy detected homogeneous distribution of Upar in
normal rat podocytes and mesangial and endothelial cells. However,
diabetic rats showed increased Upar labeling in all cells of the
glomerular tuft and increased podocyte Upar expression in basal
membranes of the foot process. Mice lacking Upar were protected from
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated proteinuria, but they developed
disease after expression of constitutively active beta-3 integrin
(ITGB3; 173470). Gene transfer studies revealed a prerequisite for Upar
expression in podocytes, but not in endothelial cells, for development
of LPS-mediated proteinuria. Upar was required to activate alpha-V
(ITGAV; 193210)/beta-3 integrin in podocytes, promoting cell motility
and activation of the small GTPases Cdc42 (116952) and Rac1 (602048).
Blockade of alpha-5/beta-3 integrin reduced podocyte motility in vitro
and lowered proteinuria in mice. Wei et al. (2008) concluded that UPAR
has a role in regulating renal permeability.

Wei et al. (2011) identified secreted PLAUR as a circulating factor
responsible for the development of FSGS. Levels of serum soluble PLAUR
were increased in two-thirds of patients with FSGS, but not in patients
with other glomerular disease. A higher serum concentration of PLAUR
before kidney transplantation was associated with an increased risk for
recurrence of FSGS after transplantation. Immunohistochemical studies on
human kidney samples derived from patients with FSGS demonstrated that
soluble PLAUR binds to and activates beta-3 integrin. In mouse models,
Plaur activated podocyte beta-3 integrin in both native and grafted
kidneys, causing foot process effacement, proteinuria, and FSGS-like
glomerulopathy. The findings suggested that renal disease only develops
when Plaur sufficiently activates podocyte beta-3-integrin. Inhibition
of PLAUR resulted in a reduction of beta-integrin activity in podocytes,
and plasmapheresis in humans reduced serum PLAUR concentrations in some
patients with increased levels. Wei et al. (2011) concluded that
pharmacologic modulation of excessive podocyte beta-3 integrin
activation may be a target for management of this form of renal disease.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Huai et al. (2006) reported the crystal structure at 1.9 angstroms of
the urokinase receptor complexed with the urokinase amino-terminal
fragment and antibody against the receptor. The 3 domains of the
urokinase receptor form a concave shape with a central cone-shaped
cavity where the urokinase fragment inserts. Huai et al. (2006)
concluded that the structure provides insight into the flexibility of
the urokinase receptor that enables its interaction with a wide variety
of ligands and a basis for the design of urokinase-urokinase receptor
antagonists.

MAPPING

By hybridization of a cDNA probe to DNAs from a panel of somatic cell
hybrids, Borglum et al. (1991, 1992) mapped the gene for the
urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor to 19q13-qter. Using RFLPs
related to the clone, they did linkage studies in 40 CEPH families and
demonstrated localization in the 19q13.1-q13.2 region. By in situ
hybridization, Vagnarelli et al. (1992) localized the PLAUR gene to
19q13.

ANIMAL MODEL

Powell et al. (2001) reported that Plaur knockout mice (Dewerchin et al.
(1996)) exhibit deficient scatter activity in the forebrain, abnormal
interneuron migration from the ganglionic eminence, and reduced
interneurons in the frontal and parietal cortex. Using immunoblots and
scatter assays, they concluded that the forebrain of Plaur knockout mice
has reduced levels of biologically active HGF (142409).

Stimulation with either gram-negative or gram-positive bacteria induces
upregulation of UPAR on monocytes and neutrophils. In general,
gram-negative bacterial stimuli require the beta-2 integrin CD11B/CD18B
for neutrophil emigration, whereas gram-positive bacteria do not.
Rijneveld et al. (2002) generated mice deficient in Upa or Upar.
Intranasal exposure to a beta-2 integrin-dependent pathogen,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, resulted in locally elevated levels of Upa in
wildtype mouse lungs. In Upar -/- mice, there was less granulocyte
accumulation but more bacteria in lungs, as well as reduced survival,
compared with wildtype mice. In contrast, Upa -/- mice manifested
increased neutrophil influx and fewer pneumococci in the lungs.
Rijneveld et al. (2002) concluded that UPAR is necessary for adequate
neutrophil recruitment into alveoli and lungs during pneumonia caused by
S. pneumoniae.

REFERENCE 1. Borglum, A.; Anette, B.; Roldan, A. L.; Blasi, F.; Bolund, L.;
Kruse, T. A.: Assignment of the gene for urokinase-type plasminogen
activator receptor to chromosome 19q13. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 58: 2016-2017, 1991.

2. Borglum, A. D.; Byskov, A.; Ragno, P.; Roldan, A. L.; Tripputi,
P.; Cassani, G.; Dano, K.; Blasi, F.; Bolund, L.; Kruse, T. A.: Assignment
of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor gene (PLAUR)
to chromosome 19q13.1-q13.2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 492-497, 1992.

3. Dewerchin, M.; Van Nuffelen, A.; Wallays, G.; Bouche, A.; Moons,
L.; Carmeliet, P.; Mulligan, R. C.; Collen, D.: Generation and characterization
of urokinase receptor-deficient mice. J. Clin. Invest. 97: 870-878,
1996.

4. Foca, C.; Moses, E. K.; Quinn, M. A.; Rice, G. E.: Differential
mRNA expression of urokinase-type plasminogen activator, plasminogen
activator receptor and plasminogen activator inhibitor type-2 in normal
human endometria and endometrial carcinomas. Gynec. Oncol. 79: 244-250,
2000.

5. Huai, Q.; Mazar, A. P.; Kuo, A.; Parry, G. C.; Shaw, D. E.; Callahan,
J.; Li, Y.; Yuan, C.; Bian, C.; Chen, L.; Furie, B.; Furie, B. C.;
Cines, D. B.; Huang, M.: Structure of human urokinase plasminogen
activator in complex with its receptor. Science 311: 656-659, 2006.

6. Kiian, I.; Tkachuk, N.; Haller, H.; Dumler, I.: Urokinase-induced
migration of human vascular smooth muscle cells requires coupling
of the small GTPase RhoA and Rac1 to the Tyk2/PI3-K signalling pathway. Thromb.
Haemost. 89: 904-914, 2003.

7. Memarzadeh, S.; Kozak, K. R.; Chang, L.; Natarajan, S.; Shintaku,
P.; Reddy, S. T.; Farias-Eisner, R.: Urokinase plasminogen activator
receptor: prognostic biomarker for endometrial cancer. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 10647-10652, 2002. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 12501 only, 2002.

8. Min, H. Y.; Semnani, R.; Mizukami, I. F.; Watt, K.; Todd, R. F.,
III; Liu, D. Y.: cDNA for Mo3, a monocyte activation antigen, encodes
the human receptor for urokinase plasminogen activator. J. Immun. 148:
3636-3642, 1992.

9. Park, Y.-J.; Liu, G.; Tsuruta, Y.; Lorne, E.; Abraham, E.: Participation
of the urokinase receptor in neutrophil efferocytosis. Blood 114:
860-870, 2009.

10. Powell, E. M.; Mars, W. M.; Levitt, P.: Hepatocyte growth factor/scatter
factor is a motogen for interneurons migrating from the ventral to
dorsal telencephalon. Neuron 30: 79-89, 2001.

11. Rijneveld, A. W.; Levi, M.; Florquin, S.; Speelman, P.; Carmeliet,
P.; van der Poll, T.: Urokinase receptor is necessary for adequate
host defense against pneumococcal pneumonia. J. Immun. 168: 3507-3511,
2002.

12. Sitrin, R. G.; Pan, P. M.; Blackwood, R. A.; Huang, J.; Petty,
H. R.: Cutting edge: evidence for a signaling partnership between
urokinase receptors (CD87) and L-selectin (CD62L) in human polymorphonuclear
neutrophils. J. Immun. 166: 4822-4825, 2001.

13. Vagnarelli, P.; Raimondi, E.; Mazzieri, R.; De Carli, L.; Mignatti,
P.: Assignment of the human urokinase receptor gene (PLAUR) to 19q13. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 60: 197-199, 1992.

14. Wang, H.; Yang, L.; Jamaluddin, M. S.; Boyd, D. D.: The Kruppel-like
KLF4 transcription factor, a novel regulator of urokinase receptor
expression, drives synthesis of this binding site in colonic crypt
luminal surface epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 22674-22683,
2004.

15. Wei, C.; El Hindi, S.; Li, J.; Fornoni, A.; Goes, N.; Sageshima,
J.; Maiguel, D.; Karumanchi, S. A.; Yap, H.-K.; Saleem, M.; Zhang,
Q.; Nikolic, B.; and 16 others: Circulating urokinase receptor
as a cause of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Nature Med. 17:
952-960, 2011.

16. Wei, C.; Moller, C. C.; Altintas, M. M.; Li, J.; Schwarz, K.;
Zacchigna, S.; Xie, L.; Henger, A.; Schmid, H.; Rastaldi, M. P.; Cowan,
P.; Kretzler, M.; Parrilla, R.; Bendayan, M.; Gupta, V.; Nikolic,
B.; Kalluri, R.; Carmeliet, P.; Mundel, P.; Reiser, J.: Modification
of kidney barrier function by the urokinase receptor. Nature Med. 14:
55-63, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/19/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/18/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 6/12/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/2/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/6/1991

EDITED carol: 12/16/2011
ckniffin: 12/15/2011
mgross: 9/14/2010
terry: 9/10/2010
mgross: 5/19/2009
terry: 5/14/2009
mgross: 3/5/2008
alopez: 4/19/2006
terry: 4/19/2006
mgross: 2/18/2005
cwells: 10/1/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
cwells: 6/12/2002
mgross: 5/7/2002
mgross: 11/2/2001
carol: 4/11/1994
carol: 5/11/1993
carol: 7/1/1992
carol: 6/24/1992
carol: 5/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

194558	TITLE *194558 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 83; ZNF83
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

Marine et al. (1994) assigned the ZNF83 gene (also known as HPF1) to
chromosome 19 by screening a human/rodent hybrid panel and localized the
gene further to 19q13.3-q13.4 by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
digital imaging microscopy.

HISTORY

Conserved structural motifs define large families of nucleic acid
binding proteins in eukaryotes. The C2H2-type zinc finger motif,
conferring both specific RNA and DNA binding activities, was first
detected within the amino acid sequence of the Xenopus transcription
factor IIIA (Miller et al., 1985). Thereafter, vertebrate genomes were
shown to encode hundreds of so-called zinc finger proteins (ZFPs).
Subfamilies were defined on the basis of conserved sequence elements
outside the finger repeat, such as the KRAB domain. Several members of
these subfamilies were found to have a clustered genomic organization.

REFERENCE 1. Marine, J.-C.; Bellefroid, E. J.; Bourguignon, C.; Riviere, M.;
Lecoq, P. J.; Poncelet, D. A.; Szpirer, J.; Martial, J. A.; Szpirer,
C.: Assignment of the human ZNF83 (HPF1) zinc finger gene to chromosome
19q13.3-q13.4. Genomics 21: 285-286, 1994.

2. Miller, J.; McLachlan, A. D.; Klug, A.: Repetitive zinc-binding
domains in the protein transcription factor IIIA from Xenopus oocytes. EMBO
J. 4: 1609-1614, 1985.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
jason: 6/17/1994

611432	TITLE *611432 DEDICATOR OF CYTOKINESIS 8; DOCK8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DOCK8 is a member of the DOCK180-related (DOCK1; 601403) protein family
(Ruusala and Aspenstrom, 2004).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using CDC42 (116952) as bait, followed by PCR
of a Daudi cell cDNA library, Ruusala and Aspenstrom (2004) cloned
DOCK8. They identified transcripts encoding a 1,701-amino acid protein
with a calculated molecular mass of 190 kD and a 2,031-amino acid
protein. DOCK8 contains the CZH1 and CZH2 domains characteristic of
DOCK180-related proteins and shares 58% amino acid identity with DOCK7.
Northern blot analysis detected an 8-kb transcript in placenta, lung,
kidney, and pancreas with low expression in heart, brain, and skeletal
muscle and a 9-kb transcript with very low expression in placenta, lung,
and kidney. Immunofluorescence localized transiently transfected and
endogenous DOCK8 to the cytoplasm at cell edges in areas undergoing
lamellipodia formation, which increased when cells were treated with
PDGF (see 190040) or fetal calf serum. Transient transfection of a
C-terminal fragment of DOCK8 resulted in formation of vesicular
structures, which also contained filamentous actin, suggesting that
DOCK8 may play a role in the organization of filamentous actin.

By Northern blot analysis of human adult and fetal tissues, Griggs et
al. (2008) detected expression of an 8.0-kb transcript in all tissues
examined, including adult and fetal brain with variable expression in
specific brain regions tested. RT-PCR analysis detected variable
expression of a splice variant containing exon 13a and 14a and a splice
variant containing exon 13b but lacking exon 16.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Ruusala and Aspenstrom (2004) showed that
DOCK8 interacted with GTP- and GDP-bound forms of CDC42, Rac1 (602048)
mutants L61 and N17, and RHOJ (607653) and RHOQ (605857). None of these
interactions was detected using GST pull-down assay, suggesting that the
interaction between DOCK and Rho GTPases may be too transient to allow
stable interaction in this assay.

By quantitative RT-PCR analysis, Zhang et al. (2009) identified DOCK8
expression in monocytes, B cells, and T cells from healthy blood donors.
High levels were found in activated, expanded primary T-cell cultures
and transformed lymphocyte lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Griggs et al. (2008) determined that the DOCK8 gene contains 47 exons
spanning 190 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Griggs et al. (2008) mapped the DOCK8 gene
to chromosome 9p24.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Dominant Mental Retardation 2

Griggs et al. (2008) reported 2 unrelated patients with mental
retardation and developmental disability (MRD2; 614113) associated with
heterozygous disruption of the DOCK8 gene by deletion and by a
translocation breakpoint, respectively. Mapping of the critical region
shared by the 2 patients showed truncation of the longest isoform of
DOCK8. One patient was a 55-year-old man with profound mental
retardation, no speech, mild dysmorphic features, a history of seizures,
and stooped posture. He had a genomic deletion of approximately 230 kb
in subtelomeric 9p. The second patient was a girl with anhidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia (ED1; 305100) previously reported by MacDermot and
Hulten (1990). She carried a de novo balanced translocation
t(X;9)(q13.1;p24), which also interrupted the EDA gene (300451). She was
reported to have delayed speech and psychomotor development, but
attended a special school.

- Autosomal Recessive Hyper-IgE Recurrent Infection Syndrome

In 11 affected individuals from 8 unrelated families with autosomal
recessive hyper-IgE syndrome with recurrent infections (243700), Zhang
et al. (2009) identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for
deletions or mutations in the DOCK8 gene (see, e.g.,
611432.0001-611432.0005). Patients had recurrent and severe bacterial,
viral, and fungal infections, atopic dermatitis, and food and
environmental allergies. Several developed viral-associated carcinomas.
Laboratory studies showed decreased levels of T cells, variable decrease
in B cells, and increased serum IgE. All the DOCK8 mutations resulted in
loss of protein function. DOCK8 protein was not detected in primary T
cell cultures or transformed lymphocyte lines from all 11 patients
tested. CD8 T cells showed impaired proliferation and activation, with
normal cytotoxic activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, LYS405ARG

In 2 Mexican sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 1214A-G transition in the DOCK8 gene, resulting in a
lys405-to-arg (K405R) substitution. The patients had atopic dermatitis,
recurrent bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, and multiple food and
environmental allergies. One died at age 18 years. Patient T-cell
cultures showed minimal amounts of a mutant protein, and CD8 T cells
showed poor expansion and activation. However, CD8 T cell cytotoxic
function appeared to be normal, and CD4 T cells showed normal
proliferation.

.0002
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, EX10-23, DEL

In a 6-year-old Yemeni girl, born of consanguineous parents, with
autosomal recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous large deletion (921_2765del) in the DOCK8 gene,
resulting in the deletion of exons 10 through 23. She had atopic
dermatitis, recurrent bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, and food
and environmental allergies. Patient T-cell cultures showed minimal
amounts of a truncated mutant protein, and CD8 T cells showed poor
expansion and activation. However, CD8 T cell cytotoxic function
appeared to be normal, and CD4 T cells showed normal proliferation.

.0003
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, EX5-24, DEL

In a Lebanese boy, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous large deletion (426_3017del) in the DOCK8 gene, resulting in
the deletion of exons 5 through 24. He had atopic dermatitis, recurrent
bacterial and viral infections, and multiple food and environmental
allergies. He died of metastatic anal squamous cell carcinoma at age 21
years. The DOCK8 protein was not detected in primary T-cell cultures.

.0004
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, 1-BP DEL, 3290C

In a 13-year-old Caucasian girl with autosomal recessive hyper-IgE
syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygous
frameshift mutations in the DOCK8 gene: a 1-bp deletion (c.3290delC) and
an 8-bp insertion (c.3303_3304insTGGCTGCT; 611432.0005).

.0005
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, 8-BP INS, NT3303

See 611432.0004 and Zhang et al. (2009).

REFERENCE 1. Griggs, B. L.; Ladd, S.; Saul, R. A.; DuPont, B. R.; Srivastava,
A. K.: Dedicator of cytokinesis 8 is disrupted in two patients with
mental retardation and developmental disabilities. Genomics 91:
195-202, 2008.

2. MacDermot, K. D.; Hulten, M.: Female with hypohidrotic ectodermal
dysplasia and de novo (X;9) translocation: clinical documentation
of the AnLy cell line case. Hum. Genet. 84: 577-579, 1990.

3. Ruusala, A.; Aspenstrom, P.: Isolation and characterisation of
DOCK8, a member of the DOCK180-related regulators of cell morphology. FEBS
Lett. 572: 159-166, 2004.

4. Zhang, Q.; Davis, J. C.; Lamborn, I. T.; Freeman, A. F.; Jing,
H.; Favreau, A. J.; Matthews, H. F.; Davis, J.; Turner, M. L.; Uzel,
G.; Holland, S. M.; Su, H. C.: Combined immunodeficiency associated
with DOCK8 mutations. New Eng. J. Med. 361: 2046-2055, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/24/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/8/2008

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/13/2007

EDITED carol: 08/09/2013
tpirozzi: 7/3/2013
ckniffin: 6/24/2013
carol: 7/22/2011
terry: 5/17/2011
wwang: 11/30/2009
ckniffin: 11/23/2009
wwang: 2/20/2008
ckniffin: 2/8/2008
wwang: 9/14/2007

604051	TITLE *604051 ENDO/EXONUCLEASE, ENDOG-LIKE; EXOG
;;ENDONUCLEASE G-LIKE 1; ENDOGL1;;
ENGL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

EXOG is an endonuclease G (ENDOG; 600440)-like mitochondrial
endo/exonuclease that has both endonuclease and 5-prime-to-3-prime
exonuclease activities (Cymerman et al., 2008).

CLONING

By analysis of a 515-kb cloned segment from 3p22-p21.3, a region that is
commonly deleted in various carcinomas, Daigo et al. (1999) identified
10 genes, 4 of which were novel. They designated one of the novel genes
ENGL (endonuclease G-like) because the predicted 368-amino acid ENGL
protein shares 38% identity with endonuclease G (ENDOG; 600440).
Northern blot analysis revealed that ENGL was expressed as a 1.7-kb mRNA
in all tissues tested. An additional 2.1-kb mRNA, designated ENGLb, was
detected in heart, liver, skeletal muscle, and testis. The ENGLb
transcript contained all or part of 4 of the 6 ENGL exons, as well as a
3-prime exon not present in the genomic clone analyzed.

Cymerman et al. (2008) reported that the 368-amino acid EXOG protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 41.1 kD. It contains an N-terminal
mitochondrial leader sequence (MLS), a central catalytic ser-arg-gly-his
(SRGH) motif, and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain. A predicted helical
transmembrane segment is located within the MLS. Confocal
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that EXOG localized to
mitochondria in HeLa cells. Mitochondrial subfractionation, immunogold
electron microscopy, and confocal laser scanning microscopy showed that
EXOG localized specifically to the inner mitochondrial membrane.

GENE FUNCTION

By assaying transfected HEK293 cells, Cymerman et al. (2008) showed that
EXOG had high endonuclease activity against circular single-stranded
DNA. Recombinant EXOG lacking the N-terminal MLS showed a similar
preference for circular single-stranded DNA, but it also cleaved
super-coiled and open circular DNA after prolonged incubation. EXOG
showed 5-prime-to-3-prime exonuclease activity toward single- and
double-stranded DNA and single-stranded RNA. It showed little to no
endonuclease activity on ribosomal RNA substrates. Mutation of the
conserved his140 within the SRGH catalytic motif or removal of the
C-terminal coiled-coil domain abolished EXOG activity. Cymerman et al.
(2008) also found that a naturally occurring SNP resulting in a
gly277-to-val (G277V) substitution inactivated EXOG. Mutation analysis
showed that the transmembrane segment within the N-terminal MLS of EXOG
was required for EXOG mitochondrial localization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Daigo et al. (1999) determined that the EXOG gene contains 6 exons.
Cymerman et al. (2008) found that it spans 28.35 kb.

MAPPING

Daigo et al. (1999) identified the EXOG gene within a 515-kb cloned
segment from 3p22-p21.3. EXOG was the most telomeric gene in the cloned
region and was located next to the ActRIIB (ACVR2B; 602730) gene.
Cymerman et al. (2008) stated that the EXOG gene maps to chromosome
3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Cymerman, I. A.; Chung, I.; Beckmann, B. M.; Bujnicki, J. M.; Meiss,
G.: EXOG, a novel paralog of endonuclease G in higher eukaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 36: 1369-1379, 2008.

2. Daigo, Y.; Isomura, M.; Nishiwaki, T.; Tamari, M.; Ishikawa, S.;
Kai, M.; Murata, Y.; Takeuchi, K.; Yamane, Y.; Hayashi, R.; Minami,
M.; Fujino, M. A.; Hojo, Y.; Uchiyama, I.; Takagi, T.; Nakamura, Y.
: Characterization of a 1200-kb genomic segment of chromosome 3p22-p21.3. DNA
Res. 6: 37-44, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/18/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2011

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/22/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/18/2011
mgross: 3/18/2011
terry: 3/14/2011
carol: 2/21/2011
alopez: 7/22/1999

612730	TITLE *612730 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 9 (SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER), MEMBER 8; SLC9A8
;;SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER 8; NHE8;;
KIAA0939
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sodium-hydrogen exchangers (NHEs), such as SLC9A8, are integral
transmembrane proteins that exchange extracellular Na+ for intracellular
H+. NHEs have multiple functions, including intracellular pH
homeostasis, cell volume regulation, and electroneutral NaCl absorption
in epithelia (Xu et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) obtained a partial SLC9A8 clone, which
they designated KIAA0939. RT-PCR ELISA detected low expression in most
adult tissues and specific brain regions examined. Little to no
expression was detected in adult lung and spleen and in fetal liver and
brain.

By searching databases using rabbit Nhe3 (SLC9A3; 182307) as query,
Goyal et al. (2003) identified human SLC9A8, which they called NHE8. The
full-length protein contains 581 amino acids and shares 96% identity
with mouse Nhe8. NHE8 has an N-terminal hydrophobic domain with 10 to 12
transmembrane segments and a short C-terminal hydrophilic tail. It also
has 4 potential N-glycosylation sites, a PKC-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975)
phosphorylation site, and putative SH2-, SH3-, ERK (see MAPK3; 601795)-,
and type III PDZ-binding domains. Northern blot analysis of mouse
tissues revealed ubiquitous expression, with highest levels in kidney,
testis, skeletal muscle, and liver. Western blot analysis detected Nhe8
in apical membranes purified from rat renal cortex. In situ
hybridization of rat kidney revealed high expression of Nhe8 in proximal
tubules in the outer stripe of the outer medulla, with lower expression
in cortical proximal tubules. No message was detected in glomeruli.

Using Northern blot analysis, Xu et al. (2008) detected 7- and 4-kb NHE8
transcripts in all sections of the human gastrointestinal tract, with
highest expression in stomach, duodenum, and ascending colon. Adult
mouse gastrointestinal tract showed a slightly different distribution of
Nhe8, and Nhe8 expression was much higher in stomach and jejunum of
young mice compared with adult mice.

By immunofluorescence analysis and immunogold electron microscopy of
HeLa cells, Lawrence et al. (2010) found that the majority of NHE8
localized to the trans-Golgi network, with a smaller proportion
localized with multivesicular bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2008) found that rat Nhe8 was a functional NHE with kinetics
and an inhibitor profile that differed from other apically expressed
NHEs.

Lawrence et al. (2010) found that knockdown of NHE8 in HeLa cells, but
not knockdown of any other NHE tested, resulted in endosomal clustering,
increased proportion of dense multivesicular bodies, and elevated EGF
(131530) degradation. Overexpression of an inactive NHE8 mutant resulted
in a similar endosomal phenotype. Depletion of NHE8 had no effect on
perinuclear localization of the trans-Golgi network, rate of protein
secretion, or endosomal pH.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the SLC9A8 gene to chromosome 20q13.13 based on an
alignment of the SLC9A8 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023156) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Goyal, S.; Vanden Heuvel, G.; Aronson, P. S.: Renal expression
of novel Na+/H+ exchanger isoform NHE8. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 284:
F467-F473, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/14/2009.

3. Lawrence, S. P.; Bright, N. A.; Luzio, J. P.; Bowers, K.: The
sodium/proton exchanger NHE8 regulates late endosomal morphology and
function. Molec. Biol. Cell 21: 3540-3551, 2010.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Xu, H.; Chen, H.; Dong, J.; Lynch, R.; Ghishan, F. K.: Gastrointestinal
distribution and kinetic characterization of the sodium-hydrogen exchanger
isoform 8 (NHE8). Cell Physiol. Biochem. 21: 109-116, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/19/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/14/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/19/2011
terry: 12/19/2011
mgross: 4/14/2009

602661	TITLE *602661 TUBULIN, BETA-3; TUBB3
;;TUBB4;;
TUBULIN, BETA, CLASS III
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microtubules are dynamic polymeric structures consisting of heterodimers
of alpha-tubulins (see 602529) and beta-tubulins, such as TUBB3, that
are continuously incorporated and released. Microtubules function in
mitosis, intracellular transport, neuron morphology, and ciliary and
flagellar motility (Leandro-Garcia et al., 2010).

CLONING

Sullivan and Cleveland (1986) isolated a partial TUBB3 cDNA, which they
designated beta-4, from a human placenta cDNA library. Ranganathan et
al. (1998) cloned cDNAs encoding human TUBB3 from a prostate carcinoma
cell line.

Wang et al. (1986) cloned mouse Tubb3, which they called M-beta-3, from
testis and bone marrow cDNA libraries. Northern blot analysis detected
abundant Tubb3 expression in testis, where expression began around
postnatal day 32. Much lower Tubb3 levels were detected in all other
adult mouse tissues examined except brain, where expression was even
lower.

Burgoyne et al. (1988) stated that the mouse homolog of human TUBB3,
M-beta-6, is expressed primarily in neural tissue.

By RT-PCR analysis of a human brain cDNA library, Poirier et al. (2010)
cloned TUBB3, which encodes a 450-amino acid protein. RT-PCR,
immunocytochemical, and Western blot analyses showed that TUBB3 was
significantly expressed in fibroblasts.

Using database analysis, Leandro-Garcia et al. (2010) identified 8 major
beta-tubulins, including TUBB3. Quantitative RT-PCR of 21 normal human
tissues detected highest TUBB3 expression in brain, much lower
expression in small intestine, testis, and placenta, and little to no
expression in other tissues.

MAPPING

Tischfield et al. (2010) noted that the TUBB3 gene maps to chromosome
16q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Antimicrotubule drugs are used in cancer chemotherapy. By RT-PCR and
Western blot analyses, Ranganathan et al. (1998) found that drug
treatment of prostate carcinoma cells selectively increased TUBB3 mRNA
and protein levels. In brain tumor cell lines, the amount of TUBB3
protein was positively correlated with resistance to an antimicrotubule
agent. Ranganathan et al. (1998) suggested that the selective increase
in TUBB3, an isotype that imparts more dynamicity to microtubules, may
provide a way for cells to overcome the effect of antimicrotubule
agents.

Hari et al. (2003) transfected beta III tubulin into Chinese hamster
ovary cells and demonstrated that beta III tubulin diminished
microtubule assembly in a dose-dependent manner and was toxic when
present at high levels. Cells expressing beta III tubulin at moderate
levels were weakly resistant to paclitaxel, a commonly used
chemotherapeutic agent.

Raspaglio et al. (2008) found that hypoxia induced TUBB3 expression in
several human cell lines, but not in a paclitaxel-resistant cell line.
RNA interference revealed that HIF1A (603348) mediated hypoxia-induced
TUBB3 expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
HIF1A bound an HIF1A-binding site in the 5-prime flanking region of the
TUBB3 gene. Methylation of an enhancer in the 3-prime flanking region
abolished hypoxia-induced TUBB3 expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Congenital Fibrosis of Extraocular Muscles 3A

Tischfield et al. (2010) identified 8 different heterozygous mutations
in the TUBB3 gene (see, e.g., 602661.0001-602661.0005) in affected
individuals with autosomal dominant or sporadic congenital fibrosis of
extraocular muscles type 3A with or without extraocular involvement
(CFEOM3A; 600638). In vitro functional expression studies, mutant mouse
studies, and yeast studies showed that all of the mutations resulted in
altered microtubule dynamics and stability, and some showed various loss
of kinesin microtubule interactions. Most affected individuals had
congenital fibrosis of extraocular muscles, but some showed additional
defects, including developmental delay or learning disabilities
associated with dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. Other variable
features included facial weakness and peripheral axonal neuropathy,
sometimes associated with wrist and finger contractures. There were some
genotype/phenotype correlations: those with the E410K (602661.0005) and
D417H (602661.0003) mutations had a severe phenotype with additional
features, including facial weakness and learning disabilities, whereas
those with the D417N (602661.0004) mutation had peripheral neuropathy
and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and those with the common R262C
mutation (602661.0001) had the mildest phenotype. Overall, the findings
were consistent with defects in axonal guidance, suggesting that the
TUBB3 gene is critical for normal microtubule dynamics, axonal guidance,
and brain development.

- Complex Cortical Dysplasia With Other Brain Malformations
1

In affected members of 7 unrelated families with complex cortical
dysplasia with other brain malformations-1 (CDCBM1; 614039), Poirier et
al. (2010) identified 6 different heterozygous missense mutations in the
TUBB3 gene (see, e.g., 602661.0006-602661.0009). In vitro functional
expression studies showed that most of the mutations resulted in
impairment of the tubulin heterodimerization process or caused impaired
microtubule stability. Affected individuals had mild to severe mental
retardation, strabismus, axial hypotonia, and spasticity. Brain imaging
showed variable malformations of cortical development, including
polymicrogyria, gyral disorganization, and fusion of the basal ganglia,
as well as thin corpus callosum, hypoplastic brainstem, and dysplastic
cerebellar vermis. Extraocular muscles were not involved.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Three of the TUBB3 mutations identified by Poirier et al. (2010) in
patients with complex cortical dysplasia and other brain malformations
(G82R, T178M; 602661.0008, and M323V; 602661.0009) were localized to the
surface of the tubulin molecule, on the opposite side of TUBB3 mutations
reported by Tischfield et al. (2010) (R262C; 602661.0001, E410K;
602661.0005, and D417N; 602661.0004), suggesting that these 2 groups of
mutations could impair microtubules and/or their interactions with
proteins critical for microtubule function in different ways. Mutations
associated with different phenotypes might reside in different
functional areas of the protein. However, in the specific case of the
ala302 residue, the nature of the variation seemed to influence the
resulting phenotype, since the A302T (602661.0002) and A302V
(602661.0008) mutations resulted in CFEOM3A and CDCBM syndromes,
respectively.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tischfield et al. (2010) showed that heterozygous mice carrying the
R262C mutation (602661.0001) appeared healthy and had no external eye
phenotypes. Homozygous mice failed to breathe normally and died within
hours of birth. Homozygous mice showed defects in the guidance of
commissural axons and cranial nerves, and some had agenesis of the
corpus callosum; heterozygous mice had thin anterior commissures. Both
homo- and heterozygous R262C mice had decreased levels of Tubb3 protein,
but the Tubb3 protein resulted in increased microtubule stability with
decreased Kif21a (608283) microtubule interactions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ARG262CYS

In affected members of 11 unrelated pedigrees with congenital fibrosis
of extraocular muscles-3A (600638), Tischfield et al. (2010) identified
a heterozygous 784C-T transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting
in an arg262-to-cys (R262C) substitution. Several of the pedigrees had
previously been reported by Doherty et al. (1999), Gillies et al.
(1995), Mackey et al. (2002), and Yamada et al. (2004). The ocular
motility defects ranged from severe to mild. Brain MRI of affected
members in 4 pedigrees showed hypoplasia of the oculomotor nerve and the
muscles innervated by its superior division, the levator palpebrae
superioris and superior rectus, as well as the medial rectus muscle
innervated by its inferior division. The oculomotor nerve also
aberrantly innervated the lateral rectus muscle, normally innervated by
the abducens nerve. The findings were consistent with axon guidance
defects. In addition, affected individuals in some of the families
showed developmental delay or learning disabilities, and some had mild
dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. In vitro studies showed patchy mutant
heterodimer incorporation into microtubules. Further studies showed
decreased polymerization rates and increased depolymerization rates, as
well as altered interaction with kinesins. The mutation was not found in
over 1,700 control chromosomes.

.0002
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ALA302THR

In affected members of 3 unrelated pedigrees with congenital fibrosis of
extraocular muscles-3A (600638), Tischfield et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 904G-A transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting in
an ala302-to-thr (A302T) substitution in a region proposed to mediate
lateral interactions between tubulin heterodimers, which assemble to
form microtubules. Two affected individuals in 1 of the families showed
learning disabilities and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the A302T mutant incorporated
into microtubules, increased the stability of microtubules, and
diminished overall microtubule dynamics. The mutation was not found in
over 1,700 control chromosomes.

Notably, a mutation affecting the same residue, A302V (602661.0008), was
identified as causative of complex cortical dysplasia and other brain
malformations (614039) (Poirier et al., 2010).

.0003
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ASP417HIS

In a mother and 2 sons with CFEOM3A (600638), Tischfield et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous 1249G-C transversion in the TUBB3 gene,
resulting in an asp417-to-his (D417H) substitution in a region on the
external surface of microtubules that mediate interactions with motor
proteins and other proteins. Other clinical features included facial
weakness, wrist and finger contractures, peripheral axonal neuropathy in
2, and developmental delay in 1. Brain imaging was not performed. In
vitro functional expression studies in yeast showed that the mutation
resulted in altered kinesin microtubule interactions. The mutation was
not found in over 1,700 control chromosomes. Another mutation in this
residue was also identified (D417N; 602661.0004).

.0004
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ASP417ASN

In affected members of 4 unrelated pedigrees with CFEOM3A (600638),
Tischfield et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1249G-A transition in
exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting in an asp417-to-asn (D417N)
substitution in a region on the external surface of microtubules that
mediate interactions with motor proteins and other proteins. Affected
members of 2 families had isolated CFEOM, but affected members in the
other 2 families also developed axonal peripheral neuropathy in the
second to third decade. One Belgian family, previously reported by
Abeloos et al. (1990), had 9 affected individuals, 4 of whom also had
developmental delay or learning disabilities. Five mutation carriers in
this family had peripheral neuropathy in the absence of CFEOM. In vitro
functional expression studies in yeast showed that the mutation resulted
in altered kinesin microtubule interactions. The mutation was not found
in over 1,700 control chromosomes. Another mutation in this residue was
also identified (D417H; 602661.0003).

.0005
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, GLU410LYS

In 6 unrelated individuals with sporadic CFEOM3A (600638), Tischfield et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1228G-A transition in exon 4 of the
TUBB3 gene, resulting in a glu410-to-lys (E410K) substitution in a
region on the external surface of microtubules that mediate interactions
with motor proteins and other proteins. All of the mutations appeared to
be de novo. In addition to CFEOM, all individuals had developmental
delay and facial weakness. Some had agenesis of the corpus callosum on
brain MRI. One also had peripheral neuropathy with wrist and finger
contractures. In vitro functional expression studies and yeast studies
showed that the mutation resulted in decreased polymerization rates and
increased depolymerization rates, as well as altered kinesin microtubule
interactions. The mutation was not found in over 1,700 control
chromosomes.

.0006
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, THR178MET

In a patient with complex cortical dysplasia and other brain
malformations-1 (CDCBM1; 614039), Poirier et al. (2010) identified a de
novo heterozygous c.533C-T transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene,
resulting in a thr178-to-met (T178M) substitution in the N-terminal
domain. The mutation was not detected in 360 Caucasian controls. Protein
modeling showed that the mutation localized to the surface of the
alpha-beta tubulin heterodimer. Structural data suggested that the
mutation may influence GTP binding. In vitro functional expression
assays showed that the mutant protein was translated and could form
tubulin heterodimers that were properly incorporated into microtubules,
although the microtubules were less stable than wildtype. The patient
had microcephaly, virtually no psychomotor development, axial hypotonia,
spastic tetraplegia, refractory epilepsy, cortical gyral
disorganization, hypoplasia of the cerebellum and brainstem, agenesis of
the corpus callosum, and fusion of the caudate and putamen.

.0007
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, GLU205LYS

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with complex cortical
dysplasia and other brain malformations-1 (614039), Poirier et al.
(2010) identified a heterozygous c.613G-A transition in exon 4 of the
TUBB3 gene, resulting in a glu205-to-lys (E205K) substitution in the
intermediate domain. The mutation occurred de novo in 1 family and was
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern in the other family. The
mutation was not detected in 360 Caucasian controls. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein did not form tubulin
heterodimers and had a subtle impairment in its ability to incorporate
into the cytoskeleton. Studies of patient fibroblasts showed no major
alterations in the microtubule network, but the microtubules were less
stable than wildtype. The patients had moderate to severe mental
retardation, polymicrogyria, dysplastic cerebellum, hypoplasia of the
brainstem, and fusion of the caudate and putamen.

.0008
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, ALA302VAL

In 4 affected members of a family with complex cortical dysplasia and
other brain malformations-1 (614039), Poirier et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous c.905C-T transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting
in an ala302-to-val (A302V) substitution in the intermediate domain. The
mutation was not detected in 360 Caucasian controls. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein did not form tubulin
heterodimers. The mother had mild mental retardation, gyral
disorganization, and dysplasia of the cerebellar vermis. One of her
daughters was homozygous for the mutation and had a more severe
phenotype with axial hypotonia, gyral disorganization, dysplastic
cerebellar vermis, hypoplastic brainstem, thin corpus callosum, and
fusion of the caudate and putamen.

Notably, a mutation affecting the same residue, A302T (602661.0002), had
been identified as causative of CFEOM3A (600638) (Tischfield et al.,
2010).

.0009
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, MET323VAL

In a father and son with complex cortical dysplasia and other brain
malformations-1 (614039), Poirier et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous c.967A-G transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting
in a met323-to-val (M323V) substitution in intermediate domain. Protein
modeling showed that the mutation localized to the surface of the
alpha-beta tubulin heterodimer. In vitro functional expression assays
showed that the mutant protein was translated, but generated diminished
levels of tubulin heterodimers. The patients had mental retardation,
gyral disorganization, dysplastic cerebellum, hypoplastic brainstem,
thin corpus callosum, and mild fusion of the basal ganglia.

REFERENCE 1. Abeloos, M.-C.; Cordonnier, M.; van Nechel, C.; van Bogaert, P.;
Gerard, J.-M.; van Regemoorter, N.: Fibrose congenitale des muscles
oculaires: un diagnostic pour plusieurs tableaux cliniques. Bull.
Soc. Belge Ophtalmol. 239: 61-74, 1990.

2. Burgoyne, R. D.; Cambray-Deakin, M. A.; Lewis, S. A.; Sarkar, S.;
Cowan, N. J.: Differential distribution of beta-tubulin isotypes
in cerebellum. EMBO J. 7: 2311-2319, 1988.

3. Doherty, E. J.; Macy, M. E.; Wang, S. M.; Dykeman, C. P.; Melanson,
M. T.; Engle, E. C.: CFEOM3: a new extraocular congenital fibrosis
syndrome that maps to 16q24.2-q24.3. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 40:
1687-1694, 1999.

4. Gillies, W. E.; Harris, A. J.; Brooks, A. M. V.; Rivers, M. R.;
Wolfe, R. J. B.: Congenital fibrosis of the vertically acting extraocular
muscles: a new group of dominantly inherited ocular fibrosis with
radiologic findings. Ophthalmology 102: 607-612, 1995.

5. Hari, M.; Yang, H.; Zeng, C.; Canizales, M.; Cabral, F.: Expression
of class III beta-tubulin reduces microtubule assembly and confers
resistance to paclitaxel. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 56: 45-56, 2003.

6. Leandro-Garcia, L. J.; Leskela, S.; Landa, I.; Montero-Conde, C.;
Lopez-Jimenez, E.; Leton, R.; Cascon, A.; Robledo, M.; Rodriguez-Antona,
C.: Tumoral and tissue-specific expression of the major human beta-tubulin
isotypes. Cytoskeleton 67: 214-223, 2010.

7. Mackey, D. A.; Chan, W.-M.; Chan, C.; Gillies, W. E.; Brooks, A.
M. V.; O'Day, J.; Engle, E. C.: Congenital fibrosis of the vertically
acting extraocular muscles maps to the FEOM3 locus. Hum. Genet. 110:
510-512, 2002.

8. Poirier, K.; Saillour, Y.; Bahi-Buisson, N.; Jaglin, X. H.; Fallet-Bianco,
C.; Nabbout, R.; Castelnau-Ptakhine, L.; Roubertie, A.; Attie-Bitach,
T.; Desguerre, I.; Genevieve, D.; Barnerias, C.; Keren, B.; Lebrun,
N.; Boddaert, N.; Encha-Razavi, F.; Chelly, J.: Mutations in the
neuronal beta-tubulin subunit TUBB3 result in malformation of cortical
development and neuronal migration defects. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
4462-4473, 2010.

9. Ranganathan, S; Dexter, D. W.; Benetatos, C. A.; Hudes, G. R.:
Cloning and sequencing of human beta-III-tubulin cDNA: induction of
beta-III isotype in human prostate carcinoma cells by acute exposure
to antimicrotubule agents. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1395: 237-245,
1998.

10. Raspaglio, G.; Filippetti, F.; Prislei, S.; Penci, R.; De Maria,
I.; Cicchillitti, L.; Mozzetti, S.; Scambia, G.; Ferlini, C.: Hypoxia
induces class III beta-tubulin gene expression by HIF-1-alpha binding
to its 3-prime flanking region. Gene 409: 100-108, 2008.

11. Sullivan, K. F.; Cleveland, D. W.: Identification of conserved
isotype-defining variable region sequences for four vertebrate beta
tubulin polypeptide classes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 4327-4331,
1986.

12. Tischfield, M. A.; Baris, H. N.; Wu, C.; Rudolph, G.; Van Maldergem,
L.; He, W.; Chan, W.-M.; Andrews, C.; Demer, J. L.; Robertson, R.
L.; Mackey, D. A.; Ruddle, J. B.; and 37 others: Human TUBB3 mutations
perturb microtubule dynamics, kinesin interactions, and axon guidance. Cell 140:
74-87, 2010.

13. Wang, D.; Villasante, A.; Lewis, S. A.; Cowan, N. J.: The mammalian
beta-tubulin repertoire: hematopoietic expression of a novel, heterologous
beta-tubulin isotype. J. Cell Biol. 103: 1903-1910, 1986.

14. Yamada, K.; Chan, W.-M.; Andrews, C.; Bosley, T. M.; Sener, E.
C.; Zwaan, J. T.; Mullaney, P. B.; Ozturk, B. T.; Akarsu, A. N.; Sabol,
L. J.; Demer, J. L.; Sullivan, T. J.; and 14 others: Identification
of KIF21A mutations as a rare cause of congenital fibrosis of the
extraocular muscles type 3 (CFEOM3). Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 45:
2218-2223, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/14/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/2/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/7/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2004
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/17/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/27/1998

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
ckniffin: 9/16/2013
mgross: 2/28/2013
wwang: 6/28/2011
ckniffin: 6/14/2011
carol: 3/12/2010
carol: 2/4/2010
terry: 2/4/2010
carol: 2/3/2010
ckniffin: 2/2/2010
mgross: 7/9/2009
terry: 7/7/2009
carol: 12/21/2004
joanna: 12/14/2004
joanna: 12/4/2003
psherman: 6/15/1999
alopez: 6/17/1998
alopez: 5/27/1998

191191	TITLE *191191 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY, MEMBER 1B; TNFRSF1B
;;TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR 2; TNFR2;;
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR, BETA RECEPTOR; TNFBR;;
TNFR, 75-KD;;
TNFR, 80-KD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Schall et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA corresponding to TNFR2 using
oligomer probes based on amino acid sequence from the purified protein.
The receptor encodes a predicted 415-amino acid polypeptide with a
single membrane-spanning domain and has an extracellular domain with
sequence similarity to nerve growth factor receptor (162010) and B-cell
activation protein Bp50 (164011). Recombinantly expressed receptor was
shown by Schall et al. (1990) to bind TNF-alpha (191160). Northern blots
showed expression in a variety of cell types.

GENE STRUCTURE

Beltinger et al. (1996) showed that TNFR2 contains 10 exons and spans
about 26 kb of genomic DNA. Most of the functional domains, including
the extracellular cysteine-rich motifs, occur in separate exons.
Overall, the gene structure is similar to that of TNFR1 (191190). On the
basis of a YAC contig for the region, they mapped TNFR2 to within 400 kb
of the marker D1S434 on 1p36.

Santee and Owen-Schaub (1996) characterized the complete gene structure
for human TNFR p75, which spans nearly 43 kb. The gene consists of 10
exons (ranging from 34 bp to 2.5 kb) and 9 introns (343 bp to 19 kb).
Consensus elements for transcription factors involved in T-cell
development and activation were noted in the putative promoter region.

GENE FUNCTION

TNFBR (TNFR75) is the larger of the 2 TNF receptors; see 191190. It is
present on many cell types, especially those of myeloid origin, and is
strongly expressed on stimulated T and B lymphocytes. Beltinger et al.
(1996) noted that TNFR2 is the main TNF receptor found on circulating T
cells and is the major mediator of autoregulatory apoptosis in CD8+
cells. TNFR2 may act with TNFR1 to kill nonlymphoid cells.

Preassembly or self-association of cytokine receptor dimers (e.g., IL1R,
see 147810; IL2R, 147730; and EPOR, 133171) occurs via the same amino
acid contacts that are critical for ligand binding. Chan et al. (2000)
found that, in contrast, the p60 (TNFRSF1A; 191190) and p80 (TNFRSF1B)
TNFA receptors self-assemble through a distinct functional domain in the
TNFR extracellular domain, termed the pre-ligand assembly domain (PLAD),
in the absence of ligand. Deletion of the PLAD results in monomeric
presentation of p60 or p80. Flow cytometric analysis showed that
efficient TNFA binding depends on receptor self-assembly. They also
found that other members of the TNF receptor superfamily, including the
extracellular domains of TRAIL (TNFRSF10A; 603611), CD40 (109535), and
FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637), all self-associate but do not interact with
heterologous receptors.

Using Jurkat T cells, which express TNFR1 but little TNFR2, and Jurkat
cells stably transfected with TNFR2, Li et al. (2002) confirmed that TNF
stimulation, or stimulation with a TNFR2, but not TNFR1, agonist, causes
a loss of TRAF2 (601895) in the TNFR2-expressing cells, but not the
parental cell line, through a ubiquitination- and proteasome-dependent
process. Binding analysis indicated that TRAF2 interacts with CIAP1
(601712) and CIAP2 (601721), which possess E3 ubiquitin ligase (e.g.
UBE3A, 601623) activity. Ubiquitination assays and SDS-PAGE analysis
showed that in the presence of an E2-conjugating enzyme (e.g., UBCH7,
603721), CIAP1, but not CIAP2, induces TRAF2 ubiquitination outside of
its RING domain. Both CIAPs bind but neither ubiquitinates TRAF1
(601711). CIAP1 expression fails to protect TNFR2-expressing cells from
TNF-induced apoptosis, whereas an E3-inactive CIAP1 mutant and wildtype
CIAP2 do protect cells from TRAF2 downregulation and cause a delay in
cell death. Li et al. (2002) concluded that TNFR2 stimulation causes the
ubiquitination of TRAF2 by CIAP1, which can play a proapoptotic role in
TNF signaling.

Tang et al. (2011) reported that PGRN (138945) bound directly to tumor
necrosis factor receptors (TNFR1 and TNRF2) and disturbed the TNFA-TNFR
interaction. Pgrn-deficient mice were susceptible to collagen-induced
arthritis, and administration of PGRN reversed inflammatory arthritis.
Atsttrin, an engineered protein composed of 3 PGRN fragments, exhibited
selective TNFR binding. PGRN and Atsttrin prevented inflammation in
multiple arthritis mouse models and inhibited TNFA-activated
intracellular signaling. Tang et al. (2011) concluded that PGRN is a
ligand of TNFR, an antagonist of TNFA signaling, and plays a critical
role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis in mice.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of human/Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrid
DNA, Milatovich et al. (1991) mapped the TNFR2 gene to 1pter-p32. By in
situ hybridization and Southern blot analysis of a series of human/mouse
hybrid cell lines, Baker et al. (1991) refined the assignment of TNFR2
to 1p36. By nonradioactive in situ hybridization, Kemper et al. (1991)
assigned the gene to 1p36.3-p36.2. Using an SSCP polymorphism of the
TNFR2 gene, Kaufman et al. (1994) demonstrated that TNFR2 is very
closely linked to the pronatriodilatin gene (108780).

White et al. (1995) showed that TNFR2 maps outside the region of
1p36.3-p36.2 thought by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) studies to contain
the neuroblastoma tumor suppressor locus (256700).

By linkage analysis, Santee and Owen Schaub (1996) confirmed the mapping
of the TNFR2 gene to 1p36.3-p36.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Glenn et al. (2000) tested markers in and near the TNFR2 gene for
linkage and association with hypertension (145500) as well as
hypercholesterolemia and plasma levels of the shed soluble receptor
(sTNF-R2). Using sib pair analysis, they reported a sharp, significant
linkage peak centered at TNFRSF1B (multipoint maximum lod score = 2.6
and 3.1 by weighted and unweighted MAPMAKER/SIBS, respectively). In a
case-control study, they demonstrated a possible association of TNFRSF1B
with hypertension by haplotype analysis. Plasma sTNF-R2 was
significantly elevated in hypertensives and showed a correlation with
systolic and diastolic blood pressure. A genotypic effect of TNFRSF1B on
plasma sTNF-R2, as well as total, low, and high density lipoprotein
cholesterol, and diastolic blood pressure was also observed. The authors
proposed a scheme for involvement of TNF and its receptors in
hypertension and hypercholesterolemia.

Geurts et al. (2000) conducted a genomic scan in 18 Dutch familial
combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL; 144250) families and identified several
loci with evidence for linkage. Linear regression analysis using 79
independent sib pairs showed linkage with a quantitative FCHL
discriminant function and the intron 4 (CA)n polymorphism of TNFRSF1B (P
= 0.032), and a case-control study demonstrated an association as well
(P = 0.029). Mutation analysis of exon 6 in 73 FCHL family members
delineated 2 TNFRSF1B alleles, coding for methionine (196M) and arginine
(196R). Complete linkage disequilibrium between CA267, CA271, and CA273
and this polymorphism was detected. In 85 hyperlipidemic FCHL subjects,
an association was demonstrated between soluble TNFRSF1B plasma
concentrations and the CA271-196M haplotype. The authors concluded that
TNFRSF1B is associated with susceptibility to FCHL.

In Japan, Sashio et al. (2002) examined polymorphisms of the tumor
necrosis factor gene (TNFA; 191160) and the TNFRSF1B gene in patients
with inflammatory bowel disease (see IBD1, 266600), including 124 with
Crohn disease and 106 with ulcerative colitis, and 111 unrelated healthy
controls. They studied 2 SNPs: 1466A-G and 1493C-T. They found a
significant difference in carrier frequency for haplotype AT (1466A,
1493T) of the TNFRSF1B gene between Crohn disease patients and the
controls (odds ratio = 2.13). Significance proved to be greater in Crohn
disease patients with both internal and external fistula, and in those
who were poor responders to treatment, which consisted of nutritional,
medical, and surgical therapy.

Peral et al. (2002) evaluated serum soluble TNF receptor-2 levels, and
several common polymorphisms in the TNFRSF1B gene, in women presenting
with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; 184700) or hyperandrogenic
disorders. The 196R alleles of the M196R (676T-G) variant in exon 6 of
TNFRSF1B, which is in linkage disequilibrium with a CA repeat
microsatellite polymorphism in intron 4 of TNFRSF1B, tended to be more
frequent in hyperandrogenic patients than in controls (P = 0.056),
reaching statistical significance when the analysis was restricted to
include only PCOS patients (P less than 0.03). Extended analysis
including another 11 hyperandrogenic patients from Spain and 64 patients
and 29 controls from Italy confirmed the association between 196R
alleles of the M196R variant and hyperandrogenic disorders (P less than
0.05), which was maintained when restricting the analysis to PCOS
patients (P less than 0.02). On the contrary, the 3-prime-untranslated
region (exon 10) variants 1663G-A, 1668T-G, and 1690T-C were not
associated with hyperandrogenism. The authors concluded that the M196R
variant in exon 6 of TNFRSF1B is associated with hyperandrogenism and
PCOS, further suggesting a role for inflammatory cytokines in the
pathogenesis of these disorders.

One of the candidate loci for regulation of hip bone mineral density
(BMD) is on chromosome 1p36 (BMND3; 606928). Albagha et al. (2002)
studied several TNFRSF1B polymorphisms in a population-based cohort
study of 1,240 perimenopausal women from the UK. The authors found no
association between 676T-G (met196-to-arg) alleles and BMD at the spine
or hip. However, subjects homozygous for the A593-T598-C620 haplotype in
the 3-prime UTR region had femoral neck BMD values 5.7% lower than those
who did not carry the haplotype (P less than 0.0001). Regression
analysis showed that the ATC haplotype accounted for 1.2% of the
population variance in hip BMD and was the second strongest predictor
after body weight.

Xu et al. (2005) analyzed the (CA)n polymorphism in intron 4 of the
TNFRSF1B gene and BMD in 1,263 Chinese individuals from 402 nuclear
families composed of both parents and at least 1 daughter. Significant
within-family association was detected between the CA16 allele and BMD
at the lumbar spine (p = 0.005); about 3.14% of lumbar spine BMD
variation could be explained by the CA16 allele.

Fairfax et al. (2011) identified a haplotype marked by a SNP (dbSNP
rs522807) in the TNFR2 promoter that was strongly associated with
reduced tolerance to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The haplotype was
associated with increased expression of TNFR2, and basal TNFR2
expression was associated with secondary TNF release. Fairfax et al.
(2011) reported that the tolerance-associated ancestral allele of dbSNP
rs522807 is present at a frequency of 8% in northern Europeans, is
absent in Asians, and is present at a frequency of approximately 50% in
equatorial Africans.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bruce et al. (1996) used targeted gene disruption to generate mice
lacking either the p55 (TNFR1) or the p75 (TNFR2) TNF receptor; mice
lacking both p55 and p75 were generated from crosses of the singly
deficient mice. The TNFR-deficient (TNFR-KO) mice exhibited no overt
phenotype under unchallenged conditions. Bruce et al. (1996) reported
that damage to neurons caused by focal cerebral ischemia and epileptic
seizures was exacerbated in the TNFR-KO mice, indicating that TNF serves
a neuroprotective function. Their studies indicated that TNF protects
neurons by stimulating antioxidative pathways. Injury-induced microglial
activation was suppressed in TNFR-KO mice. They concluded that drugs
which target TNF signaling pathways may prove beneficial in treating
stroke or traumatic brain injury.

Vielhauer et al. (2005) studied immune complex-mediated
glomerulonephritis in Tnfr1- and Tnfr2-deficient mice. Proteinuria and
renal pathology were initially milder in Tnfr1-deficient mice, but at
later time points were similar to those in wildtype controls, with
excessive renal T-cell accumulation and reduced T-cell apoptosis. In
contrast, Tnfr2-deficient mice were completely protected from
glomerulonephritis at all time points, despite an intact immune system
response. Tnfr2 expression on intrinsic renal cells, but not leukocytes,
was essential for glomerulonephritis and glomerular complement
deposition. Vielhauer et al. (2005) concluded that the proinflammatory
and immunosuppressive properties of TNF segregate at the level of its
receptors, with TNFR1 promoting systemic immune responses and renal
T-cell death and intrinsic renal cell TNFR2 playing a critical role in
complement-dependent tissue injury.

REFERENCE 1. Albagha, O. M. E.; Tasker, P. N.; McGuigan, F. E. A.; Reid, D.
M.; Ralston, S. H.: Linkage disequilibrium between polymorphisms
in the human TNFRSF1B gene and their association with bone mass in
perimenopausal women. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2289-2295, 2002.

2. Baker, E.; Chen, L. Z.; Smith, C. A.; Callen, D. F.; Goodwin, R.;
Sutherland, G. R.: Chromosomal location of the human tumor necrosis
factor receptor genes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 57: 117-118, 1991.

3. Beltinger, C. P.; White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Sulman, E. P.; Jensen,
S. J.; LePaslier, D.; Stallard, B. J.; Goeddel, D. V.; de Sauvage,
F. J.; Brodeur, G. M.: Physical mapping and genomic structure of
the human TNFR2 gene. Genomics 35: 94-100, 1996.

4. Bruce, A. J.; Boling, W.; Kindy, M. S.; Peschon, J.; Kraemer, P.
J.; Carpenter, M. K.; Holtsberg, F. W.; Mattson, M. P.: Altered neuronal
and microglial responses to excitotoxic and ischemic brain injury
in mice lacking TNF receptors. Nature Med. 2: 788-794, 1996.

5. Chan, F. K.-M.; Chun, H. J.; Zheng, L.; Siegel, R. M.; Bui, K.
L.; Lenardo, M. J.: A domain in TNF receptors that mediates ligand-independent
receptor assembly and signaling. Science 288: 2351-2354, 2000.

6. Fairfax, B. P.; Davenport, E. E.; Makino, S.; Hill, A. V. S.; Vannberg,
F. O.; Knight, J. C.: A common haplotype of the TNF receptor 2 gene
modulates endotoxin tolerance. J. Immun. 186: 3058-3065, 2011.

7. Geurts, J. M. W.; Janssen, R. G. J. H.; van Greevenbroek, M. M.
J.; van der Kallen, C. J. H.; Cantor, R. M.; Bu, X.; Aouizerat, B.
E.; Allayee, H.; Rotter, J. I.; de Bruin, T. W. A.: Identification
of TNFRSF1B as a novel modifier gene in familial combined hyperlipidemia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2067-2074, 2000.

8. Glenn, C. L.; Wang, W. Y. S.; Benjafield, A. V.; Morris, B. J.
: Linkage and association of tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 locus
with hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and plasma shed receptor. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 1943-1949, 2000.

9. Kaufman, B. A.; White, P. S.; Steinbrueck, T.; Donis-Keller, H.;
Brodeur, G. M.: Linkage mapping of the tumor necrosis factor receptor
2 (TNFR2) gene to 1p36.2 using the single-strand conformation polymorphism
technique. Hum. Genet. 94: 418-422, 1994.

10. Kemper, O.; Derre, J.; Cherif, D.; Engelmann, H.; Wallach, D.;
Berger, R.: The gene for the type II (p75) tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNF-RII) is localized on band 1p36.2-p36.3. Hum. Genet. 87:
623-624, 1991.

11. Li, X.; Yang, Y.; Ashwell, J. D.: TNF-RII and c-IAP1 mediate
ubiquitination and degradation of TRAF2. Nature 416: 345-349, 2002.

12. Milatovich, A.; Song, K.; Heller, R. A.; Francke, U.: Tumor necrosis
factor receptor genes, TNFR1 and TNFR2, on human chromosomes 12 and
1. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 17: 519-523, 1991.

13. Peral, B.; San Millan, J. L.; Castello, R.; Moghetti, P.; Escobar-Morreale,
H. F.: The methionine 196 arginine polymorphism in exon 6 of the
TNF receptor 2 gene (TNFRSF1B) is associated with the polycystic ovary
syndrome and hyperandrogenism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 3977-3983,
2002.

14. Santee, S. M.; Owen-Schaub, L. B.: Human tumor necrosis factor
receptor p75/80 (CD120b) gene structure and promoter characterization. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 21151-21159, 1996.

15. Sashio, H.; Tamura, K.; Ito, R.; Yamamoto, Y.; Bamba, H.; Kosaka,
T.; Fukui, S.; Sawada, K.; Fukuda, Y.; Tamura, K.; Satomi, M.; Shimoyama,
T.; Furuyama, J.: Polymorphisms of the TNF gene and the TNF receptor
superfamily member 1B gene are associated with susceptibility to ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease, respectively. Immunogenetics 53: 1020-1027,
2002.

16. Schall, T. J.; Lewis, M.; Koller, K. J.; Lee, A.; Rice, G. C.;
Wong, G. H. W.; Gatanaga, T.; Granger, G. A.; Lentz, R.; Raab, H.;
Kohr, W. J.; Goeddel, D. V.: Molecular cloning and expression of
a receptor for human tumor necrosis factor. Cell 61: 361-370, 1990.

17. Tang, W.; Lu, Y.; Tian, Q.-Y.; Zhang, Y.; Guo, F.-J.; Liu, G.-Y.;
Syed, N. M.; Lai, Y.; Lin, E. A.; Kong, L.; Su, J.; Yin, F.; and
10 others: The growth factor progranulin binds to TNF receptors
and is therapeutic against inflammatory arthritis in mice. Science 332:
478-484, 2011.

18. Vielhauer, V.; Stavrakis, G.; Mayadas, T. N.: Renal cell-expressed
TNF receptor 2, not receptor 1, is essential for the development of
glomerulonephritis. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 1199-1209, 2005.

19. White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Beltinger, C.; Sulman, E.; Marshall,
H. N.; Fujimori, M.; Kaufman, B. A.; Biegel, J. A.; Allen, C.; Hilliard,
C.; Valentine, M. B.; Look, A. T.; Enomoto, H.; Sakiyama, S.; Brodeur,
G. M.: A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within
human chromosome 1p36.2-36.3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5520-5524,
1995.

20. Xu, H.; Zhao, L.-J.; Lei, S.-F.; Li, M.-X.; Sun, X.; Deng, F.-Y.;
Jiang, D.-K.; Deng, H.-W.: The (CA)n polymorphism of the TNFR2 gene
is associated with peak bone density in Chinese nuclear families. J.
Hum. Genet. 50: 301-304, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/21/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/30/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/20/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/24/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/20/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/17/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/25/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/29/2000
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 11/13/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/19/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 9/11/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/19/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/11/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
mgross: 5/5/2011
terry: 4/21/2011
carol: 9/21/2009
terry: 2/2/2009
carol: 10/29/2008
carol: 3/16/2007
wwang: 9/7/2006
terry: 8/30/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
wwang: 5/23/2005
terry: 5/20/2005
cwells: 6/24/2003
alopez: 1/28/2003
cwells: 6/4/2002
terry: 5/23/2002
terry: 5/22/2002
alopez: 3/20/2002
mcapotos: 12/4/2000
mcapotos: 11/27/2000
terry: 11/17/2000
mcapotos: 11/1/2000
mcapotos: 10/25/2000
carol: 6/29/2000
carol: 12/21/1998
terry: 6/1/1998
terry: 7/10/1997
jamie: 2/5/1997
jamie: 11/13/1996
terry: 9/20/1996
mark: 9/19/1996
mark: 9/11/1996
mark: 8/27/1996
mark: 6/29/1995
terry: 12/19/1994
carol: 2/5/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 2/18/1992

603844	TITLE *603844 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1, SUBUNIT C1; NDUFC1
DESCRIPTION The multisubunit NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first
enzyme complex in the electron transport chain of mitochondria. See
NDUFA2 (602137). Ton et al. (1997) isolated human heart cDNAs encoding
CI-KFYI (NDUFC1) and 4 other complex I subunits. The predicted protein
contains 76 amino acids.

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mao et al. (1998) mapped the NDUFC1 gene
to 4q28.2-q31.1. By radiation hybrid analysis, Emahazion et al. (1998)
mapped the NDUFC1 gene to 4q28.2-q28.3.

Smeitink and van den Heuvel (1999) reviewed the available molecular data
regarding the human nuclear-encoded complex I subunits.

REFERENCE 1. Emahazion, T.; Beskow, A.; Gyllensten, U.; Brookes, A. J.: Intron
based radiation hybrid mapping of 15 complex I genes of the human
electron transport chain. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 115-119, 1998.

2. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

3. Smeitink, J.; van den Heuvel, L.: Human mitochondrial complex
I in health and disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1505-1510, 1999.

4. Ton, C.; Hwang, D. M.; Dempsey, A. A.; Liew, C.-C.: Identification
and primary structure of five human NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase
subunits. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 241: 589-594, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/25/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/14/1999
mgross: 6/7/1999
alopez: 6/4/1999
alopez: 5/25/1999

601873	TITLE *601873 BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 1; B4GALNT1
;;BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE; GALGT;;
GalNAcT;;
GM2/GD2 SYNTHASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The B4GALNT1 gene encodes beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase-1
(EC 2.4.1.92), an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of complex
gangliosides (G), which are mono- (M), di- (D), and tri- (T) sialic
acid-containing glycosphingolipids generated by sequential
glycosylations. Gangliosides are part of the larger family of
glycosphingolipids and are components of the synaptic plasma membrane
involved in synaptic plasticity, signal transduction, and endocytosis
and then are critical for central nervous system development. B4GALNT1
catalyzes the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine into GM3, GD3, and
globotriaosylceramide by a beta-1,4 linkage (summary by Boukhris et al.,
2013).

CLONING

Nagata et al. (1992) used expression cloning to isolate the cDNA for
beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GalNAcT), or G(M2)/G(D2)
synthase. The cDNA encodes a 561-amino acid polypeptide. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the gene is expressed as 2 differently sized
transcripts in all cells tested that expressed G(MS), G(D2), or both.
These findings indicate that the cDNAs catalyze the transfer of GalNAc
into G(M3) and G(D3) by a beta-1,4 linkage, resulting in the synthesis
of G(M2) and G(D2), respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furukawa et al. (1996) examined the genomic structure of the human
GalNAcT gene and found that it contains more than 11 exons spanning over
8 kb of genomic DNA. They reported that the gene has at least 3 distinct
transcription initiation sites that may be involved in cell
type-specific gene expression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Furukawa et al. (1996) mapped the GALGT gene to 12q13.3. Hamlin
et al. (1998) mapped the GALGT and KIF5A (602821) genes to 12q13 by
FISH. They found that these genes are contained within the same
approximately 200-kb YAC insert as the GLI (165220) and DDIT3 (126337)
genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By exome sequencing of 5 families with autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified 5
different homozygous mutations in the B4GALNT1 gene. The mutations
segregated with the disorder in the families and were not found in large
control databases. Subsequent analysis of this gene identified
pathogenic mutations in 2 of 65 additional probands with a similar
disorder. All mutations were truncating, except for 2 missense mutations
that occurred at highly conserved residues (see, e.g.,
601873.0001-601873.0005). No functional studies were performed. The
phenotype was characterized by onset in the first 2 decades of life of
gait abnormalities due to lower limb spasticity and muscle weakness.
Some patients had upper limb involvement. Additional features included
intellectual disability, peripheral neuropathy, dysarthria, cerebellar
signs, extrapyramidal signs, and cortical atrophy. The disorder was
slowly progressive.

ANIMAL MODEL

Takamiya et al. (1996) found that mice with a disrupted B4galnt1 gene
lacked all complex gangliosides, but did did not show any major
histologic defects in their nervous systems or in gross behavior.
Electrophysiologic studies showed a slight reduction in the neural
conduction velocity from the tibial nerve to the somatosensory cortex,
but not to the lumbar spine. The findings suggested that complex
gangliosides are required in neuronal functions, such as synaptic
transmission, but not in the morphogenesis and organogenesis of the
brain. Higher levels of GM3 and GD3 expressed in the brains of these
mutant mice may have been able to compensate for the lack of complex
gangliosides.

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC; 257220) is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene (607623)
and characterized by intracellular accumulation of cholesterol and
sphingolipids. To determine the relative contribution of ganglioside
accumulation in the neuropathogenesis of Niemann-Pick C disease, Liu et
al. (2000) bred NPC model mice with mice carrying a targeted mutation in
GalNAcT. Unlike the NPC model mice, the double mutant mice did not
exhibit central nervous system accumulation of gangliosides GM2 or of
glycolipids GA1 and GA2. Histologic analysis revealed that the
characteristic neuronal storage pathology of NPC disease was
substantially reduced in the double mutant mice. By contrast, visceral
pathology was similar in the NPC and double mutant mice. Most notably,
the clinical phenotype of the double mutant mice, in the absence of CNS
ganglioside accumulation and associated neuronal pathology, did not
improve. The authors concluded that complex ganglioside storage, while
responsible for much of the neuronal pathology, did not significantly
influence the clinical phenotype of the NPC model.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DEL, 395C

In 3 Spanish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive spastic paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (c.395delC) in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Pro132GlnfsTer7).
The mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in the family and was not present in several large control
databases.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ARG228TER

In 2 Brazilian sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous c.682C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in an arg228-to-ter (R228X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing, was not present in several large control
databases or in 2 unaffected sibs. Three additional sibs were reportedly
affected.

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DUP, 263G

In an Algerian patient, born of consanguineous parents, with SPG26
(609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified a homozygous 1-bp
duplication (c.263dupG), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination (Leu89ProfsTer13). No other family members were available
for study.

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, GLN120TER

In 4 members of a Portuguese family with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.358C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a gln120-to-ter (Q120X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing and was not present in several large
control databases, segregated with the disorder in the family.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ASP433ALA

In 3 German sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified
a homozygous c.1298A-C transversion in the B4GALNT1 gene, resulting in
an asp433-to-ala (D433A) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, was not found in several
large control databases and segregated with the disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Boukhris, A.; Schule, R.; Loureiro, J. L.; Lourenco, C. M.; Mundwiller,
E.; Gonzalez, M. A.; Charles, P.; Gauthier, J.; Rekik, I.; Acosta
Lebrigio, R. F.; Gaussen, M.; Speziani, F.; and 21 others: Alteration
of ganglioside biosynthesis responsible for complex hereditary spastic
paraplegia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 118-123, 2013.

2. Furukawa, K.; Soejima, H.; Niikawa, N.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.
: Genomic organization and chromosomal assignment of the human beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 20836-20844, 1996.

3. Hamlin, P. J.; Jones, P. F.; Leek, J. P.; Bransfield, K.; Lench,
N. J.; Aldersley, M. A.; Howdle, P. D.; Markham, A. F.; Robinson,
P. A.: Assignment of GALGT encoding beta-1,4N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase
(GalNAc-T) and KIF5A encoding neuronal kinesin (D12S1889) to human
chromosome band 12q13 by assignment to ICI YAC 26EG10 and in situ
hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 267-268, 1998.

4. Liu, Y.; Wu, Y.-P.; Wada, R.; Neufeld, E. B.; Mullin, K. A.; Howard,
A. C.; Pentchev, P. G.; Vanier, M. T.; Suzuki, K.; Proia, R. L.:
Alleviation of neuronal ganglioside storage does not improve the clinical
course of the Niemann-Pick C disease mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1087-1092, 2000.

5. Nagata, Y.; Yamashiro, S.; Yodoi, J.; Lloyd, K. O.; Shiku, H.;
Furukawa, K.: Expression cloning of beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
cDNAs that determine the expression of G(M2) and G(D2) gangliosides. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 12082-12089, 1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
269: 7045 only, 1994.

6. Takamiya, K.; Yamamoto, A.; Furukawa, K.; Yamashiro, S.; Shin,
M.; Okada, M.; Fukumoto, S.; Haraguchi, M.; Takeda, N.; Fujimura,
K.; Sakae, M.; Kishikawa, M.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.; Aizawa, S.
: Mice with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides
but exhibit only subtle defects in their nervous system. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 93: 10662-10667, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/18/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/10/1997

EDITED carol: 09/09/2013
carol: 8/6/2013
carol: 8/5/2013
ckniffin: 8/1/2013
carol: 4/3/2013
carol: 6/16/2006
carol: 11/14/2003
carol: 3/13/2003
alopez: 5/12/2000
mgross: 2/25/2000
psherman: 2/18/2000
carol: 6/16/1998
alopez: 1/28/1998

146740	TITLE *146740 Fc FRAGMENT OF IgG, LOW AFFINITY IIIa, RECEPTOR FOR; FCGR3A
;;IMMUNOGLOBULIN G Fc RECEPTOR III-2;;
FCRIII-2;;
CD16A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Fc receptor with low affinity for IgG (FCGR3, or CD16) is encoded by
2 nearly identical genes, FCGR3A and FCGR3B (610665), resulting in
tissue-specific expression of alternative membrane-anchored isoforms.
FCGR3A encodes a transmembrane protein expressed on activated
monocytes/macrophages, natural killer (NK) cells, and a subset of T
cells. In contrast, FCGR3B encodes a glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI)-anchored protein that is expressed constitutively by neutrophils
and after gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) stimulation by eosinophils
(summary by Gessner et al., 1995).

CLONING

By Western blot and flow cytometric analyses, Ravetch and Perussia
(1989) demonstrated differential expression of FCGR3 on
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) and NK cells. The glycoprotein on
NK cells (FCGR3A) had a molecular mass 6 to 10 kD larger than that on
neutrophils (FCGR3B) and was resistant to phosphatidylinositol-specific
phospholipase C. Transcripts derived from FCGR3A and FCGR3B in NK cells
and PMNs, respectively, have multiple single nucleotide differences,
including 1 that converts a termination codon to a codon encoding arg,
thereby extending the cytoplasmic domain by 21 amino acids and
introducing a transmembrane anchor for FCGR3A in NK cells. The deduced
FCGR3A protein contains 254 amino acids, whereas the deduced FCGR3B
protein contains 233 amino acids. Ravetch and Perussia (1989) concluded
that cell type-specific expression of 2 genes encoding alternative FCGR3
proteins has a significant effect on the biologic functions of the
molecules.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gessner et al. (1995) isolated and sequenced genomic clones of FCGR3A
and FCGR3B, located their transcription initiation sites, identified the
different organizations of their 5-prime regions, and demonstrated 4
distinct classes of FCGR3A transcripts compared with a single class of
FCGR3B transcripts. The gene promoters displayed different
tissue-specific transcriptional activities reflecting expression of
FCGR3A in NK cells and FCGR3B in neutrophils.

MAPPING

Le Coniat et al. (1990) mapped the FCGR3A gene to chromosome 1q23 by in
situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Anderson et al. (1990) concluded that CD16 is included in the zeta
natural killer cell receptor complex (CD3Z; 186780).

Some gamma-delta T cells (see TCRG, 186970 and TCRD, 186810) express
CD16. Using flow cytometric analysis, Bodman-Smith et al. (2000)
examined the relative proportions of CD16+ gamma-delta T cells in the
blood and synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300) patients
and the blood of control subjects. There was a significant reduction in
CD16+ gamma-delta T cells in synovial fluid compared with the
circulation. Mitogenic stimulation of circulating gamma-delta T cells
resulted in an increased expression of the HLA-DR activation marker and
a concomitant time-dependent decrease in the expression of CD16.
Bodman-Smith et al. (2000) concluded that CD16 expression is lost in the
synovial compartment as a result of activation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

On the natural killer (NK) cells of a 3-year-old boy who suffered from
recurrent viral respiratory tract infections since birth, de Vries et
al. (1996) found an unusual CD16 phenotype. The child also had severe
clinical problems with BCG vaccination and after Epstein-Barr virus and
varicella-zoster virus infections. His peripheral blood lymphocytes
contained a normal percentage and absolute number of CD3(-)CD7(+) cells,
which were positively stained with CD16 monoclonal antibodies. FCGR3
expression on granulocytes appeared to be normal. Sequence analysis of
the FCGR3A gene, encoding CD16 on NK cells and macrophages, showed a
T-to-A nucleotide substitution at position 230 on both alleles,
predicting a leucine to histidine amino acid change at position 48
(146740.0002).

By cloning and sequencing FCGR3A cDNA from NK cells and macrophages of a
heterozygous donor, de Haas et al. (1996) identified a 230T-G SNP that
resulted in a leu48-to-arg (L48R) substitution in the first
extracellular Ig-like domain and caused a higher electrophoretic
mobility of deglycosylated FCGR3A. PCR and restriction analysis
identified a 230T-A SNP, resulting in a leu48-to-his (L48H)
substitution, in another donor. Genotype analysis revealed a gene
frequency of 86% for 230T (L48), 6% for 230G (R48), and 8% for 230A
(H48) in 93 FCGR3B-positive individuals. In contrast, the frequency of
the 230G allele was significantly higher in 12 FCGR3B-deficient donors.
The H48 and R48 variants exhibited a higher binding capacity for IgG1,
IgG3, and IgG4 than did the common L48 variant. De Haas et al. (1996)
concluded that SNPs at position 230 of FCGR3A influence IgG binding, as
well as reactivity of CD16 monoclonal antibodies.

Koene et al. (1997) used PCR-based restriction analysis to genotype 87
donors for a 559T-G SNP in FCGR3A that results in a phe158-to-val
(F158V) substitution. They found gene frequencies of 57% and 43% for
F158 and V158, respectively. F158 was linked to L48, and V158 was linked
to R48 or H48. Through functional analysis, Koene et al. (1997)
determined that the previously identified differences in IgG binding
among the 3 FCGR3A variants at position 48 are a consequence of the
linked polymorphism at position 158.

Among 1,115 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300) and 654
controls, Robinson et al. (2012) found no significant association
between FCGR3A copy number and disease.

Although nearly all adults have been exposed to herpes simplex virus
(HSV)-1, the clinical course of infection varies remarkably. By
analyzing the contribution of gene families on chromosomes 1, 6, 12, and
19 to susceptibility to HSV-1 infection in 302 individuals, Moraru et
al. (2012) identified no specific susceptibility locus. However, they
found that the risk of suffering clinical HSV-1 infection was modified
by MHC class I allotypes, HLA-C1 (142840) interaction with KIR2DL2
(604937), and the phe/val polymorphism at codon 158 of CD16A.

EVOLUTION

By determining the nature and rate of copy number variation (CNV)
mutation and investigating the global variation of disease-associated
variation at the FCGR locus, Machado et al. (2012) determined that CNV
of the FCGR3 genes is mediated by recurrent nonallelic homologous
recombination between the 2 segmental duplications that carry FCGR3A and
FCGR3B. They showed that pathogen richness, particularly helminth
pathogens, is likely to have influenced the patterns of variation in
FCGRs in humans. Machado et al. (2012) proposed that alterations to IgG
binding in the context of helminth infection have driven positive
selection in FCGR among different mammalian species, linking
evolutionary pressure of helminth infection with autoimmune disease via
adaptation at the genetic level. This model supports the 'hygiene
hypothesis,' which states that in the absence of chronic helminth
infection in modern populations, previously selected alleles respond to
immune system challenges differently and therefore may alter
susceptibility to autoimmune disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pinheiro da Silva et al. (2007) found that Fcrg (FCER1G; 147139) -/-
mice showed reduced mortality in an acute peritonitis model caused by
cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) compared with wildtype mice. The
reduced mortality in Fcrg -/- mice was associated with lower serum and
peritoneal Tnf (191160) and significantly increased capacity of
neutrophils and macrophages to phagocytose E. coli. Fcgr3 -/- mice also
had reduced sepsis after CLP. Fcgr3 bound E. coli, inducing Fcrg
phosphorylation, recruitment of tyrosine phosphatase Shp1 (PTPN6;
176883), and dephosphorylation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K;
see 171834). Decreased Pi3k activity inhibited E. coli phagocytosis and
increased Tnf production through Tlr4 (603030). Confocal microscopy
demonstrated negative regulation of Marco (604870) by Fcrg. Interaction
of E. coli with Fcgr3 induced recruitment of Shp1 to Marco and inhibited
E. coli phagocytosis. Pinheiro da Silva et al. (2007) concluded that
binding of E. coli to FCGR3 triggers an inhibitory FCRG pathway that
impairs MARCO-mediated bacterial clearance and activates TNF secretion.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MOVED TO 610665.0001
.0002
VIRAL INFECTIONS, RECURRENT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
FCGR3A, LEU48HIS

In a 3-year-old boy who had suffered from recurrent viral respiratory
tract infections since birth, de Vries et al. (1996) found an unusual
CD16 phenotype on the natural killer (NK) cells. Sequence analysis of
the IGFR3 gene showed a T-to-A nucleotide substitution at position 230
on both alleles, predicting a leucine-to-histidine amino acid change at
position 48 in the first extracellular Ig-like domain of the FCGR3A
protein. The child had also had severe problems with BCG vaccination and
with Epstein-Barr virus and varicella-zoster virus infections. The
clinical pattern was considered compatible with an in vivo dysfunction
of NK cells. Only 1 patient with absolute NK cell deficiency had been
previously described. Biron et al. (1989) reported the case of an
adolescent with recurrent life-threatening herpesvirus infections, who
completely lacked CD16 and/or CD56 positive cells in vivo and
NK-activity in vitro. In a note added in proof, de Vries et al. (1996)
called attention to the case of homozygosity for a IGFR3 mutation
reported by Jawahar et al. (1996).

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, P.; Caligiuri, M.; O'Brien, C.; Manley, T.; Ritz, J.;
Schlossman, S. F.: Fc-gamma receptor type III (CD16) is included
in the zeta NK receptor complex expressed by human natural killer
cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2274-2278, 1990.

2. Biron, C. A.; Byron, K. S.; Sullivan, J. L.: Severe herpesvirus
infections in an adolescent without natural killer cells. New Eng.
J. Med. 320: 1731-1735, 1989.

3. Bodman-Smith, M. D.; Anand, A.; Durand, V.; Youinou, P. Y.; Lydyard,
P. M.: Decreased expression of Fc-gamma-RIII (CD16) by gamma/delta
T cells in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Immunology 99: 498-503,
2000.

4. de Haas, M.; Koene, H. R.; Kleijer, M.; de Vries, E.; Simsek, S.;
van Tol, M. J. D.; Roos, D.; von dem Borne, A. E. G. K.: A triallelic
Fc-gamma receptor type IIIA polymorphism influences the binding of
human IgG by NK cell Fc-gamma-RIIIa. J. Immun. 156: 2948-2955, 1996.

5. de Vries, E.; Koene, H. R.; Vossen, J. M.; Gratama, J.-W.; von
dem Borne, A. E. G. K.; Waaijer, J. L. M.; Haraldsson, A.; de Haas,
M.; van Tol, M. J. D.: Identification of an unusual Fc-gamma receptor
IIIa (CD16) on natural killer cells in a patient with recurrent infections. Blood 88:
3022-3027, 1996.

6. Gessner, J. E.; Grussenmeyer, T.; Kolanus, W.; Schmidt, R. E.:
The human low affinity immunoglobulin G Fc receptor III-A and III-B
genes: molecular characterization of the promoter regions. J. Biol.
Chem. 270: 1350-1361, 1995.

7. Jawahar, S.; Moody, C.; Chan, M.; Finberg, R.; Geha, R.; Chatila,
T.: Natural Killer (NK) cell deficiency associated with an epitope-deficient
Fc receptor IIIA (CD16-II). Clin. Exp. Immun. 103: 408-413, 1996.

8. Koene, H. R.; Kleijer, M.; Algra, A.; Roos, D.; von dem Borne,
A. E. G. K.; de Haas, M.: Fc-gamma-RIIIa-158V/F polymorphism influences
the binding of IgG by natural killer cell Fc-gamma-RIIIa, independently
of the Fc-gamma-RIIIa-48L/R/H phenotype. Blood 90: 1109-1114, 1997.

9. Le Coniat, M.; Kinet, J.-P.; Berger, R.: The human genes for the
alpha and gamma subunits of the mast cell receptor for immunoglobulin
E are located on human chromosome band 1q23. Immunogenetics 32:
183-186, 1990.

10. Machado, L. R.; Hardwick, R. J.; Bowdrey, J.; Bogle, H.; Knowles,
T. J.; Sironi, M.; Hollox, E. J.: Evolutionary history of copy-number-variable
locus for the low-affinity Fc-gamma receptor: mutation rate, autoimmune
disease, and the legacy of helminth infection. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90:
973-985, 2012.

11. Moraru, M.; Cisneros, E.; Gomez-Lozano, N.; de Pablo, R.; Portero,
F.; Canizares, M.; Vaquero, M.; Roustan, G.; Millan, I.; Lopez-Botet,
M.; Vilches, C.: Host genetic factors in susceptibility to herpes
simplex type 1 virus infection: contribution of polymorphic genes
at the interface of innate and adaptive immunity. J Immun. 188:
4412-4420, 2012.

12. Pinheiro da Silva, F.; Aloulou, M.; Skurnik, D.; Benhamou, M.;
Andremont, A.; Velasco, I. T.; Chiamolera, M.; Verbeek, J. S.; Launay,
P.; Monteiro, R. C.: CD16 promotes Escherichia coli sepsis through
an FcR-gamma inhibitory pathway that prevents phagocytosis and facilitates
inflammation. Nature Med. 13: 1368-1374, 2007.

13. Ravetch, J. V.; Perussia, B.: Alternative membrane forms of Fc-gamma-RIII(CD16)
on human natural killer cells and neutrophils: cell type-specific
expression of two genes that differ in single nucleotide substitutions. J.
Exp. Med. 170: 481-497, 1989.

14. Robinson, J. I.; Carr, I. M.; Cooper, D. L.; Rashid, L. H.; Martin,
S. G.; Emery, P.; Isaacs, J. D.; Barton, A.; BRAGGSS; Wilson, A.
G.; Barrett, J. H.; Morgan, A. W.: Confirmation of association of
FCGR3B but not FCGR3A copy number with susceptibility to autoantibody
positive rheumatoid arthritis. Hum. Mutat. 33: 741-749, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 05/06/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/4/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/9/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/2/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/26/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/16/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/5/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/7/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/31/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/15/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/4/1988

EDITED mgross: 05/06/2013
mgross: 9/4/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
mgross: 8/3/2012
mgross: 8/2/2012
mgross: 7/30/2012
terry: 7/26/2012
alopez: 4/23/2012
terry: 4/17/2012
ckniffin: 4/16/2012
mgross: 9/15/2008
terry: 9/5/2008
mgross: 2/4/2008
terry: 1/7/2008
alopez: 7/31/2000
carol: 6/15/2000
alopez: 6/23/1998
alopez: 7/29/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
jamie: 1/8/1997
terry: 12/18/1996
terry: 12/9/1996
mark: 11/14/1996
terry: 7/10/1995
carol: 7/9/1995
mark: 6/16/1995
carol: 12/14/1993
carol: 12/6/1993
carol: 8/27/1992

612316	TITLE *612316 ATPase FAMILY, AAA DOMAIN-CONTAINING, MEMBER 3A; ATAD3A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATAD3A and ATAD3B (612317) are mitochondrial membrane proteins that
contribute to the stabilization of large mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA)-protein complexes called nucleoids (He et al., 2007).

CLONING

Using mass spectroscopy to identify cell surface antigens on myeloid
cell lines, followed by RT-PCR of promyelocytic cell line RNA, Geuijen
et al. (2005) cloned ATAD3A. Western blot analysis detected ATAD3A at an
apparent molecular mass of 75 kD in transfected human embryonic kidney
(HEK293T) cells. Flow cytometry revealed ATAD3A on the cell surface of a
promyelocytic cell line, on 77% of AML (601626) samples, on half of
monocytes, and on a subpopulation of dendritic cells, but not on other
lymphocytes. ATAD3A was not expressed on the surface of transfected
HEK293T cells.

By searching for sequences similar to rat Atad3, He et al. (2007)
identified human ATAD3A and ATAD3B. In its C-terminal half, the deduced
587-amino acid ATAD3A protein contains Walker A and B motifs, followed
by ATP-binding sensor-1 and sensor-2 motifs. An alpha helix is located
N-terminal to the Walker A motif, and an arginine finger separates the
sensor motifs. An antibody that did not differentiate between ATAD3A and
ATAD3B detected ATAD3 in a punctate pattern within mitochondria of human
osteosarcoma cells. The pattern frequently coincided with
mtDNA-containing nucleoids, but not all nucleoids contained ATAD3.

Bogenhagen et al. (2008) stated that ATAD3A contains a central
transmembrane domain. Using immunofluorescence and protease
susceptibility studies, they found that ATAD3A was embedded in the inner
membrane of HeLa cell mitochondria, with the C-terminal AAA domain
directed toward the matrix and the N terminus exposed to the cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

He et al. (2007) found that depletion of ATAD3 via small interfering RNA
in human osteosarcoma cells led to increased negative supercoiling of
mtDNA, although mitochondria maintained essentially normal morphology.

Bogenhagen et al. (2008) found that, although both ATAD3A and ATAD3B
were present in native HeLa cell nucleoids, neither ATAD3 protein was
crosslinked with mtDNA in isolated formaldehyde crosslinked HeLa cell
nucleoids, indicating that they are unlikely to bind mtDNA. In addition,
protease susceptibility studies suggested that the putative N-terminal
DNA-binding regions of ATAD3A and ATAD3B reside outside the
mitochondrial inner membrane.

MAPPING

Bogenhagen et al. (2008) stated that the ATAD3 locus is tandemly
duplicated in humans, generating 2 paralogs, ATAD3A and ATAD3B. The
ATAD3 genes are located on chromosome 1p36.33 (Schaffrik et al., 2006).

REFERENCE 1. Bogenhagen, D. F.; Rousseau, D.; Burke, S.: The layered structure
of human mitochondrial DNA nucleoids. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 3665-3675,
2008.

2. Geuijen, C. A. W.; Bijl, N.; Smit, C. M.; Cox, F.; Throsby, M.;
Visser, T. J.; Jongeneelen, M. A. C.; Bakker, A. B. H.; Kruisbeek,
A. M.; Goudsmit, J.; de Kruif, J.: A proteomic approach to tumour
target identification using phage display, affinity purification and
mass spectrometry. Europ. J. Cancer 41: 178-187, 2005.

3. He, J.; Mao, C.-C.; Reyes, A.; Sembongi, H.; Di Re, M.; Granycome,
C.; Clippingdale, A. B.; Fearnley, I. M.; Harbour, M.; Robinson, A.
J.; Reichelt, S.; Spelbrink, J. N.; Walker, J. E.; Holt, I. J.: The
AAA+ protein ATAD3 has displacement loop binding properties and is
involved in mitochondrial nucleoid organization. J. Cell Biol. 176:
141-146, 2007.

4. Schaffrik, M.; Mack, B.; Matthias, C.; Rauch, J.; Gires, O.: Molecular
characterization of the tumor-associated antigen AAA-TOB3. Cell.
Molec. Life Sci. 63: 2162-2174, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/24/2008

EDITED mgross: 09/25/2008
mgross: 9/25/2008

164810	TITLE *164810 V-FOS FBJ MURINE OSTEOSARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; FOS
;;ONCOGENE FOS;;
FBJ OSTEOSARCOMA VIRUS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The human oncogene c-fos is homologous to the Finkel-Biskis-Jinkins
(FBJ) murine osteosarcoma virus oncogene. FOS was the first
transcription factor identified that has a critical function in
regulating the development of cells destined to form and maintain the
skeleton. FOS is also a major component of the activator protein-1
(AP-1) transcription factor complex, which includes members of the JUN
family (see also 165160).

CLONING

Van Straaten et al. (1983) determined that the human FOS gene encodes a
predicted 380-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis revealed that
FOS is expressed as a 2.2-kb mRNA in placenta and fetal membranes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van Straaten et al. (1983) reported that the human FOS gene contains 3
introns and spans approximately 4 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Muller et al. (1983) reported that the level of the c-fos gene
transcripts is 100-fold greater in human term fetal membranes than in
other normal human tissues and cells. These levels of c-fos expression
in human amniotic and chorionic cells are close to that of v-fos
expression that results in the induction of osteosarcomas in mice and
transformation of fibroblasts in vitro. The human c-fms gene (164770) is
expressed at high levels in term placenta and trophoblastic cells.
Muller et al. (1983) suggested that the physiologic role of the proteins
encoded by the FOS and FMS genes may be related to these embryo-derived
cells whose primary functions are protection and nourishment of the
human fetus. Using the technique of in situ hybridization, Dony and
Gruss (1987) demonstrated that stage-specific expression of the FOS gene
in mouse embryos is restricted to the perichondrial growth regions of
the cartilaginous skeleton. The possibility of a defect in FOS in a
skeletal dysplasia is raised by these findings.

Visvader et al. (1988) described 2 elements in the FOS promoter that can
mediate the induction of FOS by nerve growth factor (162030).

In studies of the Hayflick phenomenon (Hayflick, 1965), i.e., the finite
life span of cultured nonneoplastic cells, Seshadri and Campisi (1990)
demonstrated loss of FOS inducibility as the result of a specific,
transcriptional block. They interpreted the multiple changes in gene
expression as supporting the view that cellular senescence is a process
of terminal differentiation.

The FOS and JUN oncoproteins form dimeric complexes that stimulate
transcription of genes containing AP-1 regulatory elements. Bakin and
Curran (1999) found, by representational difference analysis, that
expression of DNA 5-methylcytosine transferase (DNMT1; 126375) in
FOS-transformed cells is 3 times the expression in normal fibroblasts
and that FOS-transformed cells contain about 20% more 5-methylcytosine
than normal fibroblasts. Transfection of the DNMT1 gene induced
morphologic transformation, whereas inhibition of DNMT1 expression or
activity resulted in reversion of FOS transformation. Inhibition of
histone deacetylase (601241), which associates with methylated DNA, also
caused reversion. These results suggest that FOS may transform cells
through alterations in DNA methylation and in histone deacetylation.

Grigoriadis et al. (1995) reviewed the role of FOS in bone development
and the relationship to SCF1 (120420) and SRC (190090) which have a role
in osteoclast development.

The POMC gene (176830) is occasionally expressed in nonpituitary tumors
leading to Cushing syndrome (219080). Bronchial carcinoid tumors, one of
the most frequent sources for ectopic ACTH secretion, often display
numerous features of the corticotroph phenotype. To identify new markers
of corticotroph differentiation in these tumors, Le Tallec et al. (2002)
compared the pattern of POMC expression in ACTH-secreting (ACTH+) and
nonsecreting (ACTH-) bronchial carcinoids by differential
display/RT-PCR. In ACTH+ tumors, beside the expected POMC gene, they
identified cFos and KIAA1775, a large expressed sequence tag encoding a
putative protocadherin-related protein. On the other hand, the
tetraspanin TM4SF5 gene (604657) was specifically expressed in ACTH-
tumors. The authors concluded that corticotroph differentiation of
bronchial carcinoid tumors is accompanied by induction and repression of
specific genes.

Hikasa et al. (2003) found p21 (CDKN1A; 116899) downregulation in
conjunction with c-fos upregulation in the lymphocytes of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Phosphorylation of STAT1 (600555) was also
decreased in rheumatoid arthritis lymphocytes. Hikasa et al. (2003)
determined that c-fos overexpression led to downregulated
phosphorylation and dimerization of STAT1, which in turn downregulated
p21 gene expression. They concluded that this regulatory pathway may
enhance the proliferation of lymphocytes in rheumatoid arthritis
patients.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Glover and Harrison (1995) stated that members of the FOS and JUN
families of eukaryotic transcription factors heterodimerize to form
DNA-binding complexes. Each protein contains a bZIP region consisting of
a basic DNA-binding domain and a leucine zipper domain. The authors
determined the crystal structure of a heterodimer of the bZIP domains of
FOS and JUN bound to DNA.

MAPPING

By study of mouse-human cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization,
Barker et al. (1984) assigned the FOS gene to 14q21-q31. Ekstrand and
Zech (1987) mapped the FOS gene to 14q24.3-q31. They pointed to the high
number of neoplasms that have been found to have aberrations in this
chromosome region.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The long bones of transgenic mice overexpressing the FOS protooncogene
show lesions of fibrous dysplasia characterized by intense marrow
fibrosis and increased rates of bone turnover (Ruther et al., 1987). In
all 8 patients with fibrous dysplasia studied by Candeliere et al.
(1995), high levels of FOS expression were detected in the bone lesions.
No expression of FOS was detected in bone specimens from normal subjects
or from specimens of normal bone obtained from patients with fibrous
dysplasia. The cells that expressed FOS in the dysplastic lesions were
fibroblastic and populated the marrow space. A very low level of FOS
expression was detected in the biopsy specimens from the patients with
other bone diseases. One patient with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia had
the arg201-to-cys mutation (139320.0008) and 1 patient with the
McCune-Albright syndrome (174800) had the arg201-to-his mutation
(139320.0009) in the GNAS1 gene. The increased expression of the FOS
oncogene, presumably a consequence of increased adenylate cyclase
activity, may be important in the pathogenesis of the bone lesions in
patients with fibrous dysplasia.

Rogaev et al. (1993) excluded the FOS open reading frame as the site of
the type 3, or chromosome 14-linked, form of familial Alzheimer disease
(607822).

ANIMAL MODEL

Stable expression of c-fos in mice has been demonstrated in developing
bones and teeth, hematopoietic cells, germ cells, and the central
nervous system. The gene product is thought to have an important role in
signal transduction, cell proliferation, and differentiation. Wang et
al. (1991) demonstrated that overexpression of the gene in transgenic
and chimeric mice specifically affects bone, cartilage, and
hematopoietic cell development. Wang et al. (1992) studied the effects
of lack of c-fos by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells. They
reported that mice heterozygous for lack of the gene appeared normal,
although females exhibited a distorted transmission frequency. All
homozygous fos -/- mice were growth-retarded, developed osteopetrosis
with deficiencies in bone remodeling and tooth eruption, and had altered
hematopoiesis. Johnson et al. (1992) found similar results. Homozygous
mutants showed reduced placental and fetal weights and significant loss
of viability at birth. However, approximately 40% of the homozygous
mutants survived and grew at normal rates until severe osteopetrosis,
characterized by foreshortening of the long bones, ossification of the
marrow space, and absence of tooth eruption, began to develop at
approximately 11 days. Among other abnormalities, these mice showed
delayed or absent gametogenesis, lymphopenia, and altered behavior.
Despite these defects, many lived as long as their wildtype or
heterozygous littermates (currently 7 months).

Grigoriadis et al. (1994) found that FOS mutant mice that develop
osteopetrosis have a block in the differentiation of bone-resorbing
osteoclasts that was intrinsic to hematopoietic cells. Bone marrow
transplantation rescued the osteopetrosis, and ectopic FOS expression
overcame the differentiation block. The lack of FOS also caused a
lineage shift between osteoclasts and macrophages that resulted in
increased numbers of bone marrow macrophages. These results indicated
that FOS is a key regulator of osteoclast-macrophage lineage
determination in vivo.

Using the multistep skin carcinogenesis model, Saez et al. (1995) tested
the ability of c-fos-deficient mice to develop cancer. Upon treatment
with a tumor promoter, c-fos knockout mice carrying a v-H-ras transgene
were able to develop benign tumors with similar kinetics and relative
incidence as wildtype animals. However, c-fos-deficient papillomas
quickly became very dry and hyperkeratotic, taking on an elongated,
horny appearance. While wildtype papillomas eventually progressed into
malignant tumors, c-fos-deficient tumors failed to undergo malignant
conversion. Experiments in which v-H-ras-expressing keratinocytes were
grafted onto nude mice suggested that c-fos-deficient cells have an
intrinsic defect that hinders tumorigenesis. The results of Saez et al.
(1995) suggested that a member of the AP-1 family of transcription
factors is required for the development of a malignant tumor.

Excitotoxicity is a process in which glutamate or other excitatory amino
acids induce neuronal cell death. Excitotoxicity may contribute to human
neuronal cell death caused by acute insults and chronic degeneration in
the central nervous system. Evidence suggests that FOS is essential in
regulating neuronal cell survival versus death. Although FOS is induced
by neuronal activity, whether and how FOS is involved in excitotoxicity
was unknown. To address this issue, Zhang et al. (2002) generated a
mouse in which FOS expression was largely eliminated in the hippocampus.
They found that these mutant mice had more severe kainic acid-induced
seizures, increased neuronal excitability, and neuronal cell death,
compared with control mice. Moreover, FOS regulates the expression of
the kainic acid receptor GLUR6 (138244) and brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF; 113505), both in vivo and in vitro. The results suggested
that FOS is a genetic regulator for cellular mechanisms mediating
neuronal excitability and survival.

Using a Drosophila model synapse, Sanyal et al. (2002) analyzed cellular
functions and regulation of the immediate-early transcription factor
AP-1, a heterodimer of the basic leucine zipper proteins FOS and JUN
(165160). They observed that AP-1 positively regulates synaptic strength
and synapse number, thus showing a greater range of influence than CREB
(123810). Observations from genetic epistasis and RNA quantification
experiments indicate that AP-1 acts upstream of CREB, regulates levels
of CREB mRNA, and functions at the top of the hierarchy of transcription
factors known to regulate long-term plasticity. A JUN-kinase signaling
module provided a CREB-independent route for neuronal AP-1 activation;
thus, CREB regulation of AP-1 expression may, in some neurons,
constitute a positive feedback loop rather than the primary step in AP-1
activation.

David et al. (2005) demonstrated that ribosomal protein S6 kinase-2
(RSK2; 300075)-null mice develop progressive osteopenia due to impaired
osteoblast function and normal osteoclast differentiation. They also
observed that c-fos-dependent osteosarcoma formation was impaired in the
absence of Rsk2; the lack of c-fos phosphorylation led to reduced c-fos
protein levels, which were thought to be responsible for the observed
decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of transformed
osteoblasts. David et al. (2005) concluded that Rsk2-dependent
stabilization of c-fos is essential for osteosarcoma formation in mice.

REFERENCE 1. Bakin, A. V.; Curran, T.: Role of DNA 5-methylcytosine transferase
in cell transformation by fos. Science 283: 387-390, 1999.

2. Barker, P. E.; Rabin, M.; Watson, M.; Breg, W. R.; Ruddle, F. H.;
Verma, I. M.: Human c-fos oncogene mapped within chromosomal region
14q21-q31. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 5826-5830, 1984.

3. Candeliere, G. A.; Glorieux, F. H.; Prud'homme, J.; St.-Arnaud,
R.: Increased expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in bone from
patients with fibrous dysplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 1546-1551,
1995.

4. David, J.-P.; Mehic, D.; Bakiri, L.; Schilling, A. F.; Mandic,
V.; Priemel, M.; Idarraga, M. H.; Reschke, M. O.; Hoffmann, O.; Amling,
M.; Wagner, E. F.: Essential role of RSK2 in c-Fos-dependent osteosarcoma
development. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 664-672, 2005.

5. Dony, C.; Gruss, P.: Proto-oncogene c-fos expression in growth
regions of fetal bone and mesodermal web tissue. Nature 328: 711-714,
1987.

6. Ekstrand, A. J.; Zech, L.: Human c-fos proto-oncogene mapped to
chromosome 14, band q24.3-q31: possibilities for oncogene activation
by chromosomal rearrangements in human neoplasms. Exp. Cell Res. 169:
262-266, 1987.

7. Glover, J. N. M.; Harrison, S. C.: Crystal structure of the heterodimeric
bZIP transcription factor c-Fos--c-Jun bound to DNA. Nature 373:
257-261, 1995.

8. Grigoriadis, A. E.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Cecchini, M. G.; Hofstetter, W.;
Felix, R.; Fleisch, H. A.; Wagner, E. F.: c-Fos: a key regulator
of osteoclast-macrophage lineage determination and bone remodeling. Science 266:
443-448, 1994.

9. Grigoriadis, A. E.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Wagner, E. F.: Fos and bone cell
development: lessons from a nuclear oncogene. Trends Genet. 11:
:436-441, 1995.

10. Hayflick, L.: The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid
cell strains. Exp. Cell Res. 37: 614-636, 1965.

11. Hikasa, M.; Yamamoto, E.; Kawasaki, H.; Komai, K.; Shiozawa, K.;
Hashiramoto, A.; Miura, Y.; Shiozawa, S.: p21(waf1/cip1) is down-regulated
in conjunction with up-regulation of c-Fos in the lymphocytes of rheumatoid
arthritis patients. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 304: 143-147,
2003.

12. Johnson, R. S.; Spiegelman, B. M.; Papaioannou, V.: Pleiotropic
effects of a null mutation in the c-fos proto-oncogene. Cell 71:
577-586, 1992.

13. Le Tallec, L. P.; Dulmet, E.; Bertagna, X.; De Keyzer, Y.: Identification
of genes associated with the corticotroph phenotype in bronchial carcinoid
tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 5015-5022, 2002.

14. Muller, R.; Tremblay, J. M.; Adamson, E. D.; Verma, I. M.: Tissue
and cell type-specific expression of two human c-onc genes. Nature 304:
454-456, 1983.

15. Rogaev, E. I.; Lukiw, W. J.; Vaula, G.; Haines, J. L.; Rogaeva,
E. A.; Tsuda, T.; Alexandrova, N.; Liang, Y.; Mortilla, M.; Amaducci,
L.; Bergamini, L.; Bruni, A. C.; Foncin, J.-F.; Macciardi, F.; Montesi,
M. P.; Sorbi, S.; Rainero, I.; Pinessi, L.; Polinsky, R. J.; Frommelt,
P.; Duara, R.; Lopez, R.; Pollen, D.; Gusella, J. F.; Tanzi, R.; Crapper
MacLachlan, D.; St. George-Hyslop, P. H.: Analysis of the c-FOS gene
on chromosome 14 and the promoter of the amyloid precursor protein
gene in familial Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 43: 2275-2279, 1993.

16. Ruther, U.; Garber, C.; Komitowski, D.; Muller, R.; Wagner, E.
F.: Deregulated c-fos expression interferes with normal bone development
in transgenic mice. Nature 325: 412-416, 1987.

17. Saez, E.; Rutberg, S. E.; Mueller, E.; Oppenheim, H.; Smoluk,
J.; Yuspa, S. H.; Spiegelman, B. M.: c-fos is required for malignant
progression of skin tumors. Cell 82: 721-732, 1995.

18. Sanyal, S.; Sandstrom, D. J.; Hoeffer, C. A.; Ramaswami, M.:
AP-1 function upstream of CREB to control synaptic plasticity in Drosophila. Nature 416:
870-874, 2002.

19. Seshadri, T.; Campisi, J.: Repression of c-fos transcription
and an altered genetic program in senescent human fibroblasts. Science 247:
205-209, 1990.

20. van Straaten, F.; Muller, R.; Curran, T.; Van Beveren, C.; Verma,
I. M.: Complete nucleotide sequence of a human c-onc gene: deduced
amino acid sequence of the human c-fos protein. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 80: 3183-3187, 1983.

21. Visvader, J.; Sassone-Corsi, P.; Verma, I. M.: Two adjacent promoter
elements mediate nerve growth factor activation of the c-fos gene
and bind distinct nuclear complexes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 9474-9478,
1988.

22. Wang, Z.-Q.; Grigoriadis, A. E.; Mohle-Steinlein, U.; Wagner,
E. F.: A novel target cell for c-fos-induced oncogenesis: development
of chondrogenic tumours in embryonic stem cell chimeras. EMBO J. 10:
2437-2450, 1991.

23. Wang, Z.-Q.; Ovitt, C.; Grigoriadis, A. E.; Mohle-Steinlein, U.;
Ruther, U.; Wagner, E. F.: Bone and haematopoietic defects in mice
lacking c-fos. Nature 360: 741-745, 1992.

24. Zhang, J.; Zhang, D.; McQuade, J. S.; Behbehani, M.; Tsien, J.
Z.; Xu, M.: c-fos regulates neuronal excitability and survival. Nature
Genet. 30: 416-420, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/30/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/11/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 10/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED wwang: 06/30/2005
tkritzer: 4/11/2005
terry: 4/11/2005
ckniffin: 5/28/2003
cwells: 4/30/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
alopez: 5/9/2002
terry: 5/8/2002
alopez: 4/12/2002
alopez: 3/1/2002
terry: 2/28/2002
alopez: 1/14/1999
joanna: 1/14/1999
alopez: 10/9/1998
mark: 3/4/1996
mark: 2/20/1996
terry: 10/26/1995
mark: 6/8/1995
carol: 11/18/1994
warfield: 4/1/1994
carol: 12/22/1993
carol: 2/17/1993

116951	TITLE *116951 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 11A; CDK11A
;;CELL DIVISION CYCLE 2-LIKE 2; CDC2L2;;
PITSLRE A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

While characterizing the structure of the CDC2L1 (CDK11B; 176873)
candidate tumor suppressor gene located on 1p36, Lahti et al. (1994)
identified a highly related gene within a contiguous 100-kb genomic
region. They referred to CDC2L1 as PITSLRE B, following the convention
of naming CDC2-related kinases by the amino acid sequence of the region
corresponding to the conserved CDC2 PSTAIRE box. The related gene was
designated PITSLRE A, or CDC2L2.

Xiang et al. (1994) isolated multiple, alternatively spliced CDC2L2
mRNAs. The CDC2L2 transcripts encode 5 protein isoforms ranging in size
from 65 to 110 kD. The isoforms vary in the length and sequence of their
N-terminal regions; the protein kinase catalytic and C-terminal domains
are identical. All contain a 30-residue acid blob domain comprised
primarily of glutamic acid. The mRNAs encoding the 3 largest isoforms,
CDC2L2 alpha-2-1, -2-2, and -2-3, contain 2 alternative translation
initiation sites separated by 58 amino acids. In vitro translation of
these mRNAs yields the 90- and 110-kD isoforms observed in extracts of
HeLa cells. Subcellular fractionation studies indicated that the 110-kD
isoforms are primarily localized in the nucleus. The 65-kD isoform was
detected only in cells undergoing apoptosis. Using Northern blot
analysis, Xiang et al. (1994) found that the alpha-2 isoforms are
encoded by 3.5- and 3.7-kb mRNAs that are expressed in most human cell
lines and tissues. The mRNA encoding the 65-kD CDC2L2 alpha-1 isoform
had a more restricted expression pattern. The authors also detected an
antisense transcript corresponding to the 5-prime untranslated region of
the alpha-1 mRNA. The antisense and sense transcripts shared the same
expression pattern.

The CDC2L1 and CDC2L2 genes encode almost identical protein kinases of
110 kD that contain at their C termini the open reading frame of a
smaller isoform of 58 kD. Cornelis et al. (2000) found that 2 PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms, p110 and p58, are translated from a single
transcript by initiation at alternative in-frame AUG codons. p110 is
produced by classic cap-dependent translation, whereas p58 results from
internal initiation of translation controlled by an internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) with unique properties. The IRES element is localized
to the mRNA coding region, and its activity is cell cycle regulated,
permitting translation of p58 in G2/M.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that both CDC2L2 and CDC2L1 can produce a
third isoform, p46, by caspase-dependent proteolysis of either the p110
or p58 isoforms. By immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell
lines, they detected p110 in both nucleoplasm and nuclear speckles.
Western blot analysis showed robust expression of p110 in several human
cell lines and in activated human peripheral blood cells. Only activated
blood cells expressed p58 and p46. Size exclusion chromatography of HeLa
cells revealed that p110 fractionated with protein complexes of about
170 kD to over 1 MDa.

GENE FUNCTION

Advanced-stage neuroblastoma (256700) and tumor-derived cell lines
consistently contain a deletion of 1 allele of the distal short arm of
chromosome 1. The deletion correlates with enhanced metastatic
potential, suggesting that inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene or
genes on 1p may contribute to the pathogenesis of these tumors. Lahti et
al. (1994) demonstrated that 1 allele of the entire CDC2L gene complex
was either deleted or translocated in 18 of 20 neuroblastoma cell lines
investigated. They suggested that the CDC2L gene complex may harbor 1 or
more tumor suppressor genes affected by chromosome 1p36 modifications in
neuroblastoma.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that p110 CDK11 associated with
the alpha and beta isoforms of cyclin L1 (CCNL1; 613384) and L2 (CCNL2;
613482) in a high molecular mass complex that showed splicing activity.
The p58 and p46 CDK11 isoforms interacted more weakly with the cyclin L
alpha isoforms. In vivo splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin
L1-alpha, L1-beta, L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased
intron-splicing activity and altered alternative splice-site selection
in a cyclin L1 and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner. In
contrast with p110 CDK11, p58 and p46 CDK11 reduced splicing activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gururajan et al. (1998) determined the structure of the 140-kb CDC2L
genomic region. This region consists of 2 identical genomic segments
arranged in a tail-to-tail configuration. Each segment contains a CDC2L
gene linked to an MMP gene. See MMP21 (603320). In each case, the most
widely expressed products of the CDC2L gene are derived from a genomic
region that is composed of 20 exons and spans approximately 20 kb. The
authors reported that only 15 amino acids of the 773-786 residues that
encode the multiple CDC2L isoforms are unique to either CDC2L1 or
CDC2L2.

Feng et al. (2004) found that the promoter region of the CDK11A gene is
CG rich and does not contain TATA and CAAT boxes. They identified 2 ETS1
(164720)-binding sites, a cAMP-responsive element (see CREB1; 123810),
and a TCF11 (NFE2L1; 163260)-binding site. Feng et al. (2004) confirmed
binding of ETS1 and CREB1 to the CDK11A promoter region in vitro and in
vivo.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lahti et al. (1994) mapped the
CDC2L2 gene to 1p36.3.

HISTORY

Protein kinase p58 (CDC2L1; 176873) is a human cell division control
(CDC)-related molecule that is structurally and functionally related to
p34 (CDC2; 116940). Whereas the p58 gene is located on 1p36, Eipers et
al. (1991) found by mouse-human somatic cell hybrid studies that a
highly related p58 sequence maps to chromosome 15. Subsequently, the
CDC2L2 gene on chromosome 15 was retired by the HUGO Nomenclature
Committee. The designation CDC2L2 represents a gene on 1p36.

Although Lahti et al. (1994) reported that a third gene, PITSLRE C, was
also present in the region of 1p36 containing the PITSLRE A and PITSLRE
B genes, Gururajan et al. (1998) found that PITSLRE C does not exist.

REFERENCE 1. Cornelis, S.; Bruynooghe, Y.; Denecker, G.; Van Huffel, S.; Tinton,
S.; Beyaert, R.: Identification and characterization of a novel cell
cycle-regulated internal ribosome entry site. Molec. Cell 5: 597-605,
2000.

2. Eipers, P. G.; Barnoski, B. L.; Han, J.; Carroll, A. J.; Kidd,
V. J.: Localization of the expressed human p58 protein kinase chromosomal
gene to chromosome 1p36 and a highly related sequence to chromosome
15. Genomics 11: 621-629, 1991.

3. Feng, Y.; Goulet, A.-C.; Nelson, M. A.: Identification and characterization
of the human Cdc2l2 gene promoter. Gene 330: 75-84, 2004.

4. Gururajan, R.; Grenet, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V. J.: Isolation
and characterization of two novel metalloproteinase genes linked to
the Cdc2L locus on human chromosome 1p36.3. Genomics 52: 101-106,
1998.

5. Gururajan, R.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Gruber, I.;
Ambros, P. F.; Kidd, V. J.: Duplication of a genomic region containing
the Cdc2L1-2 and MMP21-22 genes on human chromosome 1p36.3 and their
linkage to D1Z2. Genome Res. 8: 929-939, 1998.

6. Lahti, J. M.; Valentine, M.; Xiang, J.; Jones, B.; Amann, J.; Grenet,
J.; Richmond, G.; Look, A. T.; Kidd, V. J.: Alterations in the PITSLRE
protein kinase gene complex on chromosome 1p36 in childhood neuroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 7: 370-375, 1994.

7. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

8. Xiang, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Kidd, V. J.:
Molecular cloning and expression of alternatively spliced PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15786-15794, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/1992

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
mgross: 8/7/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
alopez: 11/19/2010
mgross: 6/20/2000
alopez: 11/30/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992

146738	TITLE *146738 INSULIN-LIKE 3; INSL3
;;INSULIN-LIKE PEPTIDE, LEYDIG CELL-SPECIFIC;;
RELAXIN-LIKE FACTOR; RLF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Leydig insulin-like protein belongs to the insulin-like hormone
superfamily (Adham et al., 1993), which comprises insulin (176730),
relaxin (179730), and insulin-like growth factors I (IGF1; 147440) and
II (IGF2; 147470). The members of this family are characterized by a
signal peptide, a B-chain, a connecting C-peptide, and an A-chain.
Burkhardt et al. (1994) reported the isolation and sequencing of the
human Leydig insulin-like protein. The deduced amino acid sequence of
the pro-Leydig insulin-like protein has a primary structure more similar
to that of proinsulin than to pro-IGF1 and pro-IGF2. The protein,
designated INSL3, is expressed exclusively in prenatal and postnatal
Leydig cells.

GENE FUNCTION

To determine the functional region of the mouse Insl3 promoter and
factors controlling Insl3 gene expression, Zimmermann et al. (1998) used
2.1 kb of the 5-prime-flanking region of the mouse Insl3 gene to
generate chimeric constructs with the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) gene. Transient transfections of MA10 Leydig cells, LTK-
fibroblasts, and F9 embryonic cells by a series of 5-prime-deleted mouse
Insl3 promoter-CAT constructs revealed that the sequence between
nucleotides -157 and +4 directed the transcription of the reporter gene
in MA10 but not in LTK- and F9 cells, indicating that the determinants
of Leydig cell-specific expression reside within this region. DNase I
footprint analysis revealed that the sequences designated SF-1/1,
SF-1/2, and SF-1/3 within 3 DNase I-protected regions are homologous to
the consensus binding site of steroidogenic factor-1 (SF1; 184757). The
authors concluded that SF1 plays an essential role in transcriptional
activation of the Insl3 promoter.

Kumagai et al. (2002) noted that, like male mice lacking Insl3, male
mice lacking the Lgr8 gene (606655) show cryptorchidism. Using HEK293
cells transfected with human LGR8, they demonstrated increased cAMP
production following treatment with human, rat, or ovine INSL3.
Crosslinking experiments confirmed direct interaction between INSL3 and
LGR8. Cultured rat gubernacular cells expressed endogenous Lgr8, and
treatment with Insl3 led to a dose-dependent increase in cAMP production
and increased cell proliferation. Kumagai et al. (2002) concluded that
LGR8 is a cellular receptor for INSL3.

Wikstrom et al. (2006) studied changes in INSL3 levels during
spontaneous puberty in healthy boys, boys with aromatase
inhibitor-induced hypergonadotropic hyperandrogenism, and boys with
Leydig cell dysfunction (Klinefelter syndrome). Onset of puberty was
associated with a significant increase in INSL3 levels. Adult INSL3
levels (greater than 0.55 ng/ml) were attained at bone ages of 13 to 14
years. Boys with letrozole-induced hypergonadotropic hyperandrogenism
had, after 12 months of therapy, higher INSL3 levels than did
placebo-treated boys. In Klinefelter syndrome boys during spontaneous
puberty, after an initial increase similar to that in healthy boys, INSL
concentrations leveled off despite hyperstimulation by luteinizing
hormone (LH; see 152780). Positive correlations occurred between serum
INSL3 and LH and between INSL3 and testosterone levels in all 3 groups
(P less than 0.0001). The authors concluded that serum INSL3
concentrations may serve as novel markers for onset and normal
progression of puberty.

GENE STRUCTURE

Burkhardt et al. (1994) reported that the INSL3 gene comprises 2 exons
and 1 intron, and that the organization of the gene is similar to that
of insulin and relaxin. The transcription start site is localized 14 bp
upstream of the translation start site. The human genome contains a
single copy of the INSL3 gene.

MAPPING

By isotopic in situ hybridization, Burkhardt et al. (1994) mapped the
INSL3 gene to 19p13.2-p12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tomboc et al. (2000) used SSCP analysis to screen the coding regions of
the 2-exon INSL3 gene in genomic DNA samples obtained from 145 formerly
cryptorchid patients and 36 adult male controls. Two mutations and
several polymorphisms were identified. Both mutations were located in
the connecting peptide region of the protein. The authors concluded that
the frequency of INSL3 gene mutations as a cause of cryptorchidism is
low, because only 2 of 145 (1.4%) formerly cryptorchid patients were
found to have mutations: arg63 to ter (R63X; 146738.0005), which was
likely to be pathogenetic because it was found in a boy with undescended
right testis and history of incarcerated right inguinal hernia, and
pro93 to leu (P93L; 146738.0002), which was found in an 8-month-old baby
with nonpalpable intraabdominal right testis.

Canto et al. (2003) studied genomic DNA from 150 patients with
idiopathic cryptorchidism. A heterozygous asn86-to-lys mutation (N86K;
146738.0001) in the INSL3 gene was found in 1 patient whose mother was a
heterozygous carrier of the mutation and whose father was homozygous
wildtype.

Ferlin et al. (2003) sequenced the INSL3 and LGR8 genes in a cohort of
87 patients with corrected cryptorchidism and 80 controls and found 3
mutations in the INSL3 gene in 4 patients (e.g., 146738.0002) and 1 LGR8
mutation (T222P; 606655.0001) in 4 patients (8 of 87, 9.2%). The authors
concluded that INSL3-LGR8 mutations are frequently associated with human
cryptorchidism and are maternally inherited.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nef and Parada (1999) showed that mice mutant for Insl3, which is
expressed in the developing testis, are viable, but exhibit bilateral
cryptorchidism due to developmental abnormalities of the gubernaculum,
resulting in abnormal spermatogenesis and infertility. Female
homozygotes have impaired fertility associated with deregulation of the
estrous cycle. The findings revealed roles for INSL3 in the development
of the urogenital tract and in female fertility. INSL3 may act as a
hormone to regulate the growth and differentiation of the gubernaculum,
thereby mediating intraabdominal testicular descent.

Zimmermann et al. (1999) also reported that mice deficient in Insl3
displayed bilateral cryptorchidism and gubernaculum feminization during
embryogenesis. The findings of Nef and Parada (1999) differed from those
of Zimmermann et al. (1999) in 2 respects: first, Nef and Parada (1999)
found that heterozygous mice had partial cryptorchidism, suggesting
dosage sensitivity of Insl3 for testicular descent. In contrast,
Zimmermann et al. (1999) did not observe delays in testicular descent in
heterozygous males. The heterozygous phenotype appeared to resemble most
cases of human cryptorchidism, where partial testicular descent at birth
often self-corrects. In the second place, Zimmermann et al. (1999) found
no effects on the estrous cycle.

Adham et al. (2002) investigated whether in vivo the Insl3-mediated
gubernaculum development is independent of androgens. They generated
transgenic male and female mice that overexpressed Insl3 in the pancreas
during fetal and postnatal life. Expression of the transgenic allele in
the Insl3-deficient mice rescued the cryptorchidism in male mutants,
indicating that the islet beta-cells efficiently processed the Insl3
gene product to the functional hormone. All transgenic females displayed
bilateral inguinal hernia. The processus vaginalis developed containing
intestinal loops. The mullerian derivatives gave rise to oviduct,
uterus, and upper vagina, and wolffian duct derivatives were missing,
indicating the absence of the androgen- and anti-mullerian
hormone-mediated activities in transgenic females. The ovaries descended
into a position over the bladder and attached to the abdominal wall via
the well developed cranial suspensory ligament and the gubernaculum.
Administration of dihydrotestosterone during prenatal development
suppressed formation of the cranial suspensory ligament and thereby
allowed the descent of the ovaries into the processus vaginalis. The
authors concluded that Insl3-mediated activity induces gubernaculum
development and precludes a role of androgen in this process.
Furthermore, they noted that the transgenic females exhibited reduced
fertility, which is due to fetal mortality during midgestation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ASN86LYS

In 1 of 150 patients with idiopathic cryptorchidism (219050), Canto et
al. (2003) found a heterozygous 2560C-G transversion in exon 2 of the
INSL3 gene, resulting in an asn86-to-lys (N86K) substitution in the
A-chain of the protein. The change was considered probably deleterious
because it led to a nonconservative amino acid substitution, changing a
highly conserved residue.

.0002
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, PRO69LEU

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism (219050), Tomboc et al.
(2000) identified a heterozygous 2511C-T transition in the INSL3 gene,
resulting in a pro69-to-leu (P69L) substitution.

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism, Ferlin et al. (2003)
detected the same mutation, which they reported as a heterozygous 278C-T
transition in the INSL3 gene that caused a pro93-to-leu (P93L) change
within an alpha-helix of the insulin-like-3 protein. The mutation was
inherited from the phenotypically normal mother.

.0003
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ARG102CYS

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism (219050) originally reported
by Marin et al. (2001), Ferlin et al. (2003) found a heterozygous 304C-T
transition in the INSL3 gene that caused an arg102-to-cys (R102C) amino
acid change. The mutation was inherited from the mother, whose history
was negative for reproductive dysfunction and any other pathologic
condition.

.0004
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ARG102HIS

In 2 patients with bilateral cryptorchidism (219050) with bilateral
severe testiculopathy, Ferlin et al. (2003) detected a heterozygous
305G-A transition in the INSL3 gene that caused an arg102-to-his (R102H)
change in the insulin-like-3 protein.

.0005
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ARG49TER

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism (219050), Tomboc et al.
(2000) identified a 2450C-T transition in the INSL3 gene, resulting in
an arg49-to-ter (R49X) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Adham, I. M.; Burkhardt, E.; Benahmed, M.; Engel, W.: Cloning
of a cDNA for a novel insulin-like hormone of the testicular Leydig
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 26668-26672, 1993.

2. Adham, I. M.; Steding, G.; Thamm, T.; Bullesbach, E. E.; Schwabe,
C.; Paprotta, I.; Engel, W.: The overexpression of the Insl3 in female
mice causes descent of the ovaries. Molec. Endocr. 16: 244-252,
2002.

3. Burkhardt, E.; Adham, I. M.; Brosig, B.; Gastmann, A.; Mattei,
M.-G.; Engel, W.: Structural organization of the porcine and human
genes coding for a Leydig cell-specific insulin-like peptide (LEY
I-L) and chromosomal localization of the human gene (INSL3). Genomics 20:
13-19, 1994.

4. Canto, P.; Escudero, I.; Soderlund, D.; Nishimura, E.; Carranza-Lira,
S.; Gutierrez, J.; Nava, A.; Mendez, J. P.: A novel mutation of the
insulin-like 3 gene in patients with cryptorchidism. J. Hum. Genet. 48:
86-90, 2003.

5. Ferlin, A.; Simonato, M.; Bartoloni, L.; Rizzo, G.; Bettella, A.;
Dottorini, T.; Dallapiccola, B.; Foresta, C.: The INSL3-LGR8/GREAT
ligand-receptor pair in human cryptorchidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
4273-4279, 2003.

6. Kumagai, J.; Hsu, S. Y.; Matsumi, H.; Roh, J.-S.; Fu, P.; Wade,
J. D.; Bathgate, R. A. D.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: INSL3/leydig insulin-like
peptide activates the LGR8 receptor important in testis descent. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 31283-31286, 2002.

7. Marin, P.; Ferlin, A.; Moro, E.; Rossi, A.; Bartoloni, L.; Rossato,
M.; Foresta, C.: Novel insulin-like 3 (INSL3) gene mutation associated
with human cryptorchidism. Am. J. Med. Genet. 103: 348-349, 2001.

8. Nef, S.; Parada, L. F.: Cryptorchidism in mice mutant for Insl3. Nature
Genet. 22: 295-299, 1999.

9. Tomboc, M.; Lee, P. E.; Mitwally, M. F.; Schneck, F. X.; Bellinger,
M.; Witchel, S. F.: Insulin-like 3/relaxin-like factor gene mutations
are associated with cryptorchidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85:
4013-4018, 2000.

10. Wikstrom, A. M.; Bay, K.; Hero, M.; Andersson, A.-M.; Dunkel,
L.: Serum insulin-like factor 3 levels during puberty in healthy
boys and boys with Klinefelter syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91:
4705-4708, 2006.

11. Zimmermann, S.; Schwarzler, A.; Buth, S.; Engel, W.; Adham, I.
M.: Transcription of the Leydig insulin-like gene is mediated by
steroidogenic factor-1. Molec. Endocr. 12: 706-713, 1998.

12. Zimmermann, S.; Steding, G.; Emmen, J. M.; Brinkmann, A. O.; Nayernia,
K.; Holstein, A. F.; Engel, W.; Adham, I. M.: Targeted disruption
of the Insl3 gene causes bilateral cryptorchidism. Molec. Endocr. 13:
681-691, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/26/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/9/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/10/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/24/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/15/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/6/1994

EDITED carol: 09/13/2012
terry: 9/26/2008
wwang: 1/9/2008
alopez: 10/1/2007
carol: 2/28/2007
alopez: 7/11/2005
carol: 4/2/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
terry: 3/26/2003
mgross: 10/9/2002
alopez: 7/10/2002
mgross: 1/30/2002
cwells: 10/8/2001
cwells: 10/3/2001
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
alopez: 6/29/1999
terry: 6/24/1999
mgross: 4/16/1999
mgross: 4/15/1999
terry: 5/29/1998
carol: 4/6/1994

607292	TITLE *607292 SEMAPHORIN 4A; SEMA4A
;;SEMAPHORIN B; SEMAB; SEMB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SEMA4A is a member of the semaphorin family of soluble and transmembrane
proteins. Semaphorins are involved in guidance of axonal migration
during neuronal development and in immune responses.

CLONING

Using degenerate PCR primers based on motifs conserved in members of the
semaphorin family, Kumanogoh et al. (2002) identified mouse Sema4a,
which was originally identified as SemB (Puschel et al., 1995). RT-PCR
analysis detected prominent expression in adult mouse brain, spleen,
lung, kidney, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis showed expression in
B cells and dendritic cells (DCs) but not in resting T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kumanogoh et al. (2002) showed that activation upregulated expression of
mouse Sema4a in both B and T cells, and proliferation and interleukin-2
(IL2; 147680) production by T cells were enhanced in the presence of
Sema4a. However, Sema4a, unlike CD100 (SEMA4D; 601866), did not enhance
the activation of B cells or DCs. Mice treated with Sema4a had enhanced
priming of antigen-specific T cells secreting both IL4 (147780) and
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). Treatment of mice with anti-Sema4a
early after immunization with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
suppressed the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
In these mice, infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells was
ablated by inhibition of the generation of antigen-specific T cells by
anti-Sema4a. Expression cloning determined that the high-affinity
receptor for Sema4a is Tim2. Sema4a stimulation of cells expressing Tim2
induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Tim2 but not of Tim3 (606652).
Kumanogoh et al. (2002) concluded that Sema4a and CD100 have crucial
roles in the reciprocal stimulation between T cell and
antigen-presenting cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Abid et al. (2006) screened 135 Pakistani patients with retinitis
pigmentosa (RP35; 610282), 25 with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD10; 610283),
and 30 with congenital blindness for mutations in the SEMA4A gene. They
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 substitutions
(607292.0001-607292.0002) in 2 RP and 2 CORD patients and heterozygosity
for another substitution (607292.0003) in 3 patients with RP and 1
patient with congenital blindness. No mutations in SEMA4A were found in
affected members of a Pakistani family with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8;
605549) previously mapped to chromosome 1q12-q24 (Ismail et al., 2006).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, ASP345HIS

In 2 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 2 with
cone-rod dystrophy-10 (610282), Abid et al. (2006) identified compound
heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in codon 345 and a T-to-G
transversion in codon 350 in exon 10 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an
asp345-to-his (D345H) and a phe350-to-cys (F350C; 607292.0002)
substitution in the conserved semaphorin domain, respectively. Sequence
analysis of the unaffected parents of 1 of the CORD patients revealed
that his father was heterozygous for the D345H mutation and his mother
was heterozygous for the F350C mutation. Neither mutation was found in
100 ethnically matched controls.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, PHE350CYS

See 607292.0001 and Abid et al. (2006).

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
SEMA4A, ARG713GLN

In 3 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 1 with
congenital blindness of uncertain phenotype, Abid et al. (2006)
identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition in codon 713 of exon
15 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an arg713-to-gln (R713Q)
substitution in the cytoplasmic tail. Sequence analysis of family
members of 1 of the RP patients confirmed that the R713Q mutation
segregated with the disease phenotype in an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, and the mutation was not found in 100 ethnically matched
controls.

REFERENCE 1. Abid, A.; Ismail, M.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Identification
of novel mutations in the SEMA4A gene associated with retinal degenerative
diseases. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43: 378-381, 2006.

2. Ismail, M.; Abid, A.; Anwar, K.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Refinement
of the locus for autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8) linked
to chromosome 1q23-q24 in a Pakistani family and exclusion of candidate
genes. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 827-831, 2006.

3. Kumanogoh, A.; Marukawa, S.; Suzuki, K.; Takegahara, N.; Watanabe,
C.; Ch'ng, E.; Ishida, I.; Fujimura, H.; Sakoda, S.; Yoshida, K.;
Kikutani, H.: Class IV semaphorin Sema4A enhances T-cell activation
and interacts with Tim-2. Nature 419: 629-633, 2002.

4. Puschel, A. W.; Adams, R. H.; Betz, H.: Murine semaphorin D/collapsin
is a member of a diverse gene family and creates domains inhibitory
for axonal extension. Neuron 14: 941-948, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/27/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/10/2002

EDITED carol: 07/26/2007
wwang: 12/18/2006
carol: 7/28/2006
carol: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/27/2006
mgross: 10/10/2002

605842	TITLE *605842 TRANSDUCIN-BETA-LIKE 2; TBL2
;;WBSCR13
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Meng et al. (1998) constructed a physical map encompassing the 1.5-Mb
region of chromosome 7q11.23 that is commonly deleted in Williams-Beuren
syndrome (WBS; 194050). They identified 3 genes within this region,
including TBL2, which they designated WS-beta-TRP. By EST database
searching, screening of a testis cDNA library, and sequencing, they
cloned a TBL2 cDNA encoding a deduced 426-amino acid protein with 4 WD
(or beta-transducin) repeats. TBL2 shares approximately 40% homology
with a hypothetical C. elegans protein, suggesting that the gene has
been conserved throughout evolution. Northern blot analysis detected a
2.4-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with high expression in
heart, brain, placenta, skeletal muscle, and pancreas.

Perez Jurado et al. (1999) cloned a TBL2 cDNA from a fetal brain cDNA
library and found that it encodes a deduced 447-amino acid protein with
a predicted molecular mass of 49.8 kD. They also cloned the mouse
ortholog, which shares 84% sequence identity with the human protein.
Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected not only the 2.4-kb
transcript, but an approximately 5-kb transcript which was ubiquitously
expressed at lower levels. Perez Jurado et al. (1999) also identified an
alternatively spliced transcript containing an additional exon (exon
2-prime) with an in-frame stop codon that encodes a deduced 75-amino
acid protein with 43 amino acids identical to TBL2 at the N terminus and
no known functional domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Perez Jurado et al. (1999) determined that the TBL2 gene spans 8.9 kb of
genomic DNA and contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Meng et al. (1998) identified the TBL2
gene on chromosome 7q11.23. Perez Jurado et al. (1999) mapped the mouse
Tbl2 gene to chromosome 5 in a region of conserved synteny with human
7q11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Meng, X.; Lu, X.; Li, Z.; Green, E. D.; Massa, H.; Trask, B. J.;
Morris, C. A.; Keating, M. T.: Complete physical map of the common
deletion region in Williams syndrome and identification and characterization
of three novel genes. Hum. Genet. 103: 590-599, 1998.

2. Perez Jurado, L. A.; Wang, Y.-K.; Francke, U.; Cruces, J.: TBL2,
a novel transducin family member in the WBS deletion: characterization
of the complete sequence, genomic structure, transcriptional variants
and the mouse ortholog. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 86: 277-284, 1999.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 4/11/2001

EDITED carol: 02/10/2009
carol: 1/22/2004
mcapotos: 4/12/2001
carol: 4/12/2001

608489	TITLE *608489 STROMALIN 3; STAG3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Pezzi et al. (2000) identified human and mouse EST fragments homologous
to the conserved nuclear stromalin proteins STAG1 (604358) and STAG2
(300826). Using these ESTs to screen testis cDNA libraries, they cloned
human and mouse STAG3 cDNAs encoding deduced proteins of 1,225 and 1,240
amino acids, respectively. Human STAG3 shares 75% sequence identity with
the mouse Stag3 protein and approximately 45% similarity with human
STAG1 and STAG2. STAG3 contains an acidic C-terminal domain, a 28-amino
acid domain conserved among mammalian stromalins, and an 86-amino acid
domain, designated SCD, conserved among all stromalin family members.
Northern blot analysis of human tissues revealed testis-specific
expression of a 4.5-kb STAG3 transcript. In mouse tissues, the highest
level of expression was found in male germ cells undergoing the first
meiotic division. Using immunofluorescence on developing male germline
cells, Pezzi et al. (2000) showed that STAG3 is associated with the
synaptonemal complex, exhibiting high expression in zygotene cells and
moderate expression in pachytene cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pezzi et al. (2000) determined that STAG3 contains 34 exons spanning
more than 30 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Pezzi et
al. (2000) mapped the human STAG3 gene to chromosome 7q22. By
interspecific backcross analysis, they mapped the mouse Stag3 gene to
chromosome 5 in a region of conserved synteny with human 7q22.

By genomic sequence analysis, Pezzi et al. (2000) identified 6 truncated
STAG3-like sequences that also mapped to chromosome 7. Pezzi et al.
(2000) noted that 2 of these sequences map to 7q11.23 and flank
breakpoints commonly associated with Williams-Beuren syndrome (194050).

REFERENCE 1. Pezzi, N.; Prieto, I.; Kremer, L.; Perez Jurado, L. A.; Valero,
C.; Del Mazo, J.; Martinez-A, C.; Barbero, J. L.: STAG3, a novel
gene encoding a protein involved in meiotic chromosome pairing and
location of STAG3-related genes flanking the Williams-Beuren syndrome
deletion. FASEB J. 14: 581-592, 2000.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 2/26/2004

EDITED carol: 11/08/2010
carol: 2/26/2004

