601778	TITLE *601778 POLYMERASE, RNA, MITOCHONDRIAL; POLRMT
;;MTRNAP
POLYMERASE, RNA, NUCLEAR, SINGLE-POLYPEPTIDE, IV, INCLUDED; SPRNAPIV,
INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION Mitochondria of all organisms contain a genome that is distinct from
that of the nucleus. The circular mitochondrial chromosome contains 37
genes that encode the RNA components of the mitochondrial translational
apparatus, i.e., 22 transfer RNAs and 2 ribosomal RNA genes, as well as
13 polypeptide-encoding genes. All 13 polypeptides are essential
components of 4 of the 5 complexes that form the mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway (complexes I, III, IV, and V). However,
gene expression in mitochondria relies upon numerous nuclear genes that
encode protein components required for transcription and translation of
the mtDNA-encoded genes, as well as protein and RNA components required
for replication of mtDNA. In addition, nuclear genes encode factors
controlling the import, assembly, and turnover of OXPHOS complexes, and
proteins acting as general regulators of mitochondrial function.
Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins are synthesized by cytoplasmic
ribosomes, usually as precursors containing an N-terminal extension.
Import into mitochondria is carried out by a complex, ATP-dependent
transport system, followed by cleavage of the leader peptide, which
eventually produces a mature, functional protein. Tiranti et al. (1997)
noted that abnormalities in the nuclear genome repertoire controlling
mitochondrial biogenesis were proposed as the cause of some human
disorders characterized by the presence of mtDNA abnormalities and
mendelian transmission. Both autosomal dominant (157640) and autosomal
recessive (258450) forms of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia
are associated with the accumulation of multiple deletions of mtDNA in
stable tissues. Another example is tissue-specific mtDNA depletion
(251880), an autosomal recessive disorder causing severe organ-specific
syndromes in early infancy. Mendelian inheritance indicates the presence
of transmissible mutations in nuclear genes that can ultimately damage
the structural integrity of the mtDNA molecule or its copy number. Genes
involved in the control of mtDNA replication and expression are
considered attractive candidates for these disorders. The
characterization of the collection of human proteins related to
mitochondria, the so-called human mitochondrial proteome, is important
in the elucidation of fundamental mechanisms of nucleo-mitochondrial
intergenomic signaling, as well as to clinical researchers interested in
mitochondrial disorders.

Tiranti et al. (1997) used a gene cloning strategy based on the
screening of the expressed sequence tags database (dbEST), using
sequences of mitochondrial housekeeping proteins of yeast, to identify
the cDNA encoding the precursor of the human mitochondrial RNA
polymerase. They identified a 3,831-bp human cDNA predicted to encode a
protein of 1,230 amino acid residues. The protein sequence showed
significant homology with sequences corresponding to mitochondrial RNA
polymerases from lower eukaryotes and to RNA polymerases from several
bacteriophages. Mitochondrial RNA polymerase carries out the central
activity of mitochondrial gene expression and, by providing the RNA
primers for initiation of replication, is also implicated in the
maintenance and propagation of the mitochondrial genome. Thus, it is an
attractive candidate for disorders of nucleo-mitochondrial intergenomic
signaling.

Tiranti et al. (1997) assigned the gene (symbolized mt-RPOL by them) to
chromosome 19 by PCR-based screening of a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids; regionalization to 19p13.3 was performed with a second
panel containing different portions of chromosome 19.

Tiranti et al. (1997) referred to 'cyberscreening' of sequence
databases, based on yeast-human cross-species comparison, as a powerful,
simple, rapid, and inexpensive method for the molecular dissection of
the human mitochondrial proteome. Cyberscreening might also be referred
to as 'cloning in silico.'

The term proteome appears first to have been used by Humphery-Smith et
al. (1994) and his colleagues (Wasinger et al., 1995) to refer to the
total protein complement of a genome. (They described methods that
allowed proteins to be identified prior to detection of their respective
genes.)

Fish et al. (2004) reported the discovery of a mitochondrial DNA heavy
strand replication origin at nucleotide position 57 in the
strand-displacement loop (D-loop) of several human cell lines (HeLa,
A549, and 143B.TK-) and immortalized lymphocytes. The nascent chains
starting at this origin, in contrast to those initiated at the
previously described origins (Anderson et al., 1981), did not terminate
prematurely at the 3-prime end of the D-loop but proceeded well beyond
this control point, behaving as 'true' replicating strands. This origin
is mainly responsible for mtDNA maintenance under steady-state
conditions, whereas mtDNA synthesis from the formerly identified D-loop
origins may be more important for recovery after mtDNA depletion and for
accelerating mtDNA replication in response to physiologic demands.

Kravchenko et al. (2005) demonstrated that transcription of some mRNAs
in human and rodents is mediated by a single-polypeptide nuclear RNA
polymerase, which they designated spRNAP-IV. spRNAP-IV is expressed from
an alternative transcript of the mitochondrial RNA polymerase gene
POLRMT. The spRNAP-IV lacks 262 N-terminal amino acids of mitochondrial
RNA polymerase, including the mitochondrial-targeting signal, and
localizes to the nucleus. Transcription by spRNAP-IV is resistant to the
RNA polymerase II (PolII; see 180660) inhibitor alpha-amanitin but is
sensitive to short interfering RNA specific for the POLRMT gene. The
promoters for spRNAP-IV differ substantially from those used by RNA
PolII, do not respond to transcriptional enhancers, and contain a common
functional sequence motif.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ringel et al. (2011) reported the crystal structure of mtRNAP at
2.5-angstrom resolution, which revealed a T7-like catalytic C-terminal
domain, an N-terminal domain that remotely resembles the T7
promoter-binding domain, a novel pentatricopeptide repeat domain, and a
flexible N-terminal extension. The pentatricopeptide repeat domain
sequesters an AT-rich recognition loop, which binds promoter DNA in T7
RNAP, probably explaining the need for TFAM (600438) during promoter
binding. Consistent with this, substitution of a conserved arginine
residue in the AT-rich recognition loop, or release of this loop by
deletion of the N-terminal part of mtRNAP, had no effect on
transcription. The fingers domain and the intercalating hairpin, which
melts DNA in phage RNAPs, are repositioned, explaining the need for
TFB2M (607055) during promoter melting. Ringel et al. (2011) concluded
that their results provided a new venue for the mechanistic analysis of
mitochondrial transcription, and also indicated how an early phage-like
mtRNAP lost functions in promoter binding and melting, which were
provided by initiation factors in trans during evolution, to enable
mitochondrial gene regulation and the adaptation of mitochondrial
function to changes in the environment.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, S.; Bankier, A. T.; Barrell, B. G.; de Bruijn, M. H.
L.; Coulson, A. R.; Drouin, J.; Eperon, I. C.; Nierlich, D. P.; Roe,
B. A.; Sanger, F.; Schreier, P. H.; Smith, A. J. H.; Staden, R.; Young,
I. G.: Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature 290:
457-465, 1981.

2. Fish, J.; Raule, N.; Attardi, G.: Discovery of a major D-loop
replication origin reveals two modes of human mtDNA synthesis. Science 306:
2098-2101, 2004.

3. Humphery-Smith, I.; Guyonnet, F.; Chastel, C.: Polypeptide cartography
of Spiroplasma taiwanense. Electrophoresis 15: 1212-1217, 1994.
Note; Erratum: Electrophoresis 16: 1324 only, 1995.

4. Kravchenko, J. E.; Rogozin, I. B.; Koonin, E. V.; Chumakov, P.
M.: Transcription of mammalian messenger RNAs by a nuclear RNA polymerase
of mitochondrial origin. (Letter) Nature 436: 735-739, 2005.

5. Ringel, R.; Sologub, M.; Morozov, Y. I.; Litonin, D.; Cramer, P.;
Temiakov, D.: Structure of human mitochondrial RNA polymerase. Nature 478:
269-273, 2011.

6. Tiranti, V.; Savoia, A.; Forti, F.; D'Apolito, M.-F.; Centra, M.;
Rocchi, M.; Zeviani, M.: Identification of the gene encoding the
human mitochondrial RNA polymerase (h-mtRPOL) by cyberscreening of
the Expressed Sequence Tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 615-625,
1997.

7. Wasinger, V. C.; Cordwell, S. J.; Cerpa-Poljak, A.; Yan, J. X.;
Gooley, A. A.; Wilkins, M. R.; Duncan, M. W.; Harris, R.; Williams,
K. L.; Humphery-Smith, I.: Progress with gene-product mapping of
the Mollicutes: Mycoplasma genitalium. Electrophoresis 16: 1090-1094,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/25/1997

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
alopez: 11/28/2011
terry: 11/21/2011
terry: 5/27/2010
alopez: 9/14/2005
terry: 9/7/2005
wwang: 2/7/2005
wwang: 2/3/2005
terry: 1/27/2005
alopez: 11/22/1999
mgross: 9/22/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
alopez: 7/11/1997
alopez: 4/30/1997
alopez: 4/29/1997
alopez: 4/25/1997

615189	TITLE *615189 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 55; ANKRD55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ankyrin (see 612641)-like repeats, such as those found in ANKRD55, are
33-residue motifs involved in protein-protein interaction (Alloza et
al., 2012).

CLONING

By database analysis, Alloza et al. (2012) found ANKRD55 expression in
ovary, testis, endometrium, and resting CD4 (186940)-positive T cells.

MAPPING

Alloza et al. (2012) stated that the ANKRD55 gene maps to chromosome
5q11.

REFERENCE 1. Alloza, I.; Otaegui, D.; Lopez de Lapuente, A.; Antiguedad, A.;
Varade, J.; Nunez, C.; Arroyo, R.; Urcelay, E.; Fernandez, O.; Leyva,
L.; Fedetz, M.; Izquierdo, G.; and 10 others: ANKRD55 and DHCR7
are novel multiple sclerosis risk loci. Genes Immunity 13: 253-257,
2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/19/2013

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2013

602943	TITLE *602943 RAR-RELATED ORPHAN RECEPTOR C; RORC
;;RAR-RELATED ORPHAN RECEPTOR GAMMA; RORG;;
RZR-GAMMA; RZRG;;
RETINOIC ACID-BINDING RECEPTOR GAMMA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The nuclear receptor gene superfamily encodes transcriptional regulators
that play critical roles during homeostasis and specific stages of
development. Members of this gene family include the steroid hormone,
thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors, and orphan receptors for which a
ligand has not yet been identified. Most nuclear receptors contain 5
major domains: an N-terminal A/B domain, a highly conserved DNA-binding
(C) domain containing 2 zinc fingers, a hinge (D) region, a
ligand-binding (E) domain, and an F domain at the C terminus. Using
RT-PCR with degenerate primers based on the 2 most conserved regions of
the C domain, Hirose et al. (1994) isolated a partial cDNA from human
pancreas encoding a novel nuclear receptor. They then recovered skeletal
muscle cDNAs containing the remainder of the coding region. By sequence
analysis, Hirose et al. (1994) found that the predicted 560-amino acid
protein, which they called ROR-gamma, belonged to the ROR/RZR nuclear
receptor subfamily. ROR-gamma shares 50 to 51% sequence identity with
RORA (600825) and RORB (601972). Northern blot analysis revealed that
the 3.2-kb ROR-gamma transcript was expressed at the highest levels in
skeletal muscle and at lower levels in various other tissues. Additional
5.2- and 7.2-kb transcripts were observed in thymus. Medvedev et al.
(1997) stated that the amino acid sequences of mouse and human ROR-gamma
are 88% identical.

GENE FUNCTION

Eberl and Littman (2004) showed that intestinal intraepithelial T
lymphocytes (IELs) expressing the alpha-beta T-cell receptor (see
186880) are derived from precursors that express ROR-gamma-t, an orphan
nuclear hormone receptor detected only in immature CD4(+)CD8(+)
thymocytes, fetal lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells, and LTi-like
cells in cryptopatches within the adult intestinal lamina propria. Using
cell fate mapping, the authors found that all intestinal alpha-beta T
cells are progeny of CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes, indicating that the adult
intestine is not a significant site for alpha-beta T cell development.
Eberl and Littman (2004) concluded that intestinal ROR-gamma-t(+) cells
are local organizers of mucosal lymphoid tissue. Rocha (2005) commented
on the paper by Eberl and Littman (2004), finding their experiments
inconclusive and their interpretations inconsistent with previously
published data. Eberl and Littman (2005) responded that while their
findings did not exclude an extrathymic origin for some IELs, in
particular, TCR-gamma-delta T cells, their contribution to the
generation of the intestinal T cell pool is minimal in healthy mice.

Toward a system-level understanding of the transcriptional circuitry
regulating circadian clocks, Ueda et al. (2005) identified
clock-controlled elements on 16 clock and clock-controlled genes in a
comprehensive surveillance of evolutionarily conserved cis elements and
measurement of the transcriptional dynamics. Ueda et al. (2005) found
that E boxes (CACGTG) and E-prime boxes (CACGTT) controlled the
expression of Per1 (602260), Nr1d2 (602304), Per2 (603426), Nr1d1
(602408), Dbp (124097), Bhlhb2 (604256), and Bhlhb3 (606200)
transcription following a repressor-precedes-activator pattern,
resulting in delayed transcriptional activity. RevErbA/ROR-binding
elements regulated the transcriptional activity of Arntl (602550), Npas2
(603347), Nfil3 (605327), Clock (601851), Cry1 (601933), and Rorc
(602943) through a repressor-precedes-activator pattern as well.
DBP/E4BP4-binding elements controlled the expression of Per1, Per2, Per3
(603427), Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Rora, and Rorb through a
repressor-antiphasic-to-activator mechanism, which generates
high-amplitude transcriptional activity. Ueda et al. (2005) suggested
that regulation of E/E-prime boxes is a topologic vulnerability in
mammalian circadian clocks, a concept that had been functionally
verified using in vitro phenotype assay systems.

Silva-Santos et al. (2005) reported that double-positive T cells
regulate the differentiation of early thymocyte progenitors and
gamma-delta cells by a mechanism dependent on the transcription factor
ROR-gamma-t and the lymphotoxin-beta receptor (LTBR; 600979).
Silva-Santos et al. (2005) suggested the finding provokes a revised view
of the thymus, in which lymphoid tissue induction-type processes
coordinate the developmental and functional integration of the two T
cell lineages.

Differentiation of both T(H)17 and T regulatory (Treg) cell types
requires transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB; 190180), but depends on
distinct transcription factors: ROR-gamma-t for T(H)17 cells and FOXP3
(300292) for Treg cells. Zhou et al. (2008) demonstrated that, together
with proinflammatory cytokines, TGFB orchestrates T(H)17 cell
differentiation in a concentration-dependent manner. At low
concentrations, TGFB synergizes with IL6 (147620) and IL21 (605384) to
promote IL23 receptor (IL23R; 607562) expression, favoring T(H)17 cell
differentiation. High concentrations of TGFB repressed IL23R expression
and favored FOXP3-positive Treg cells. ROR-gamma-t and Foxp3 are
coexpressed in naive CD4(+) T cells exposed to TGFB and in a subset of T
cells in the small intestinal lamina propria of the mouse. In vitro,
Tgfb-induced Foxp3 inhibited ROR-gamma-t function, at least in part
through their interaction. Accordingly, lamina propria T cells that
coexpressed both transcription factors produced less interleukin-17
(Il17a; 603149) than those that express ROR-gamma-t alone. Il6, Il21,
and Il23 relieved Foxp3-mediated inhibition of ROR-gamma-t, thereby
promoting T(H)17 cell differentiation. Therefore, Zhou et al. (2008)
concluded that the decision of antigen-stimulated cells to differentiate
into either T(H)17 or Treg cells depends on the cytokine-regulated
balance of ROR-gamma-t and FOXP3.

Ghoreschi et al. (2010) showed that T(H)17 differentiation can occur in
the absence of TGF-beta (190180) signaling. Neither IL6 nor IL23 (see
605580) alone efficiently generated T(H)17 cells; however, these
cytokines in combination with IL1-beta (147720) effectively induced IL17
production in naive precursors, independently of TGF-beta. Epigenetic
modification of the IL17A (603149), IL17F (606496), and RORC promoters
proceeded without TGF-beta-1, allowing the generation of cells that
coexpressed ROR-gamma-t and Tbet (TBX21; 604895).
Tbet+ROR-gamma-t+T(H)17 cells are generated in vivo during experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis, and adoptively transferred T(H)17 cells
generated with IL23 without TGF-beta-1 were pathogenic in this disease
model. Ghoreschi et al. (2010) concluded that their data indicated an
alternative mode for T(H)17 differentiation, and that, consistent with
genetic data linking IL23R with autoimmunity, their findings
reemphasized the importance of IL23 and therefore may have therapeutic
implications.

Lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells initiate the development of lymphoid
tissues through the activation of local stromal cells in a process
similar to inflammation. LTi cells express the nuclear hormone receptor
ROR-gamma-t, which also directs the expression of the proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin-17 in T cells. Sawa et al. (2010) demonstrated that
LTi cells are part of a larger family of proinflammatory
ROR-gamma-t-positive innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) that differentiate
from distinct fetal liver ROR-gamma-t-positive precursors. The fate of
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs is determined by mouse age, and after birth
favors the generation of cells involved in intestinal homeostasis and
defense. Contrary to ROR-gamma-t-positive T cells, however,
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs develop in the absence of microbiota. Sawa et
al. (2010) concluded that ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs evolve to preempt
intestinal colonization by microbial symbionts.

By performing a chemical screen with an insect cell-based reporter
system, Huh et al. (2011) identified the cardiac glycoside digoxin as a
specific inhibitor of ROR-gamma-t transcriptional activity. Digoxin
inhibited murine TH17 cell differentiation without affecting
differentiation of other T cell lineages and was effective in delaying
the onset and reducing the severity of autoimmune disease in mice. At
high concentrations, digoxin is toxic for human cells, but nontoxic
synthetic derivatives 20,22-dihydrodigoxin-21,23-diol and
digoxin-21-salicylidene specifically inhibited induction of IL17 in
human CD4+ T cells. Using these small-molecule compounds, Huh et al.
(2011) demonstrated that ROR-gamma-t is important for the maintenance of
IL17 expression in mouse and human effector T cells, and suggested that
derivatives of digoxin can be used as chemical templates for the
development of ROR-gamma-t-targeted therapeutic agents that attenuate
inflammatory lymphocyte function and autoimmune disease.

Solt et al. (2011) presented SR1001, a high-affinity synthetic
ligand--the first in a new class of compound--that is specific to both
ROR-alpha (600825) and ROR-gamma-t and which inhibits TH17 cell
differentiation and function. SR1001 binds specifically to the
ligand-binding domains of ROR-alpha and ROR-gamma-t, inducing a
conformational change within the ligand-binding domain that encompasses
the repositioning of helix-12 and leads to diminished affinity for
coactivators and increased affinity for corepressors, resulting in
suppression of the receptors' transcriptional activity. SR1001 inhibited
the development of murine TH17 cells, as demonstrated by inhibition of
interleukin-17A gene expression and protein production. Furthermore,
SR1001 inhibited the expression of cytokines when added to
differentiated murine or human TH17 cells. Finally, SR1001 effectively
suppressed the clinical severity of autoimmune disease in mice. Solt et
al. (2011) concluded that their data demonstrated the feasibility of
targeting the orphan receptors ROR-alpha and ROR-gamma-t to inhibit
specifically TH17 cell differentiation and function, and indicated that
this novel class of compound has potential utility in the treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

ILCs expressing the transcription factor ROR-gamma-t induce the
postnatal formation of intestinal lymphoid follicles and regulate
intestinal homeostasis. ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC express the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR; 600253), a highly conserved, ligand-inducible
transcription factor believed to control adaptation of multicellular
organisms to environmental challenges. In mice, Kiss et al. (2011)
showed that Ahr is required for the postnatal expansion of intestinal
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC and the formation of intestinal lymphoid
follicles. Ahr activity within ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC could be induced
by dietary ligands such as those contained in vegetables of the family
Brassicaceae. Ahr-deficient mice were highly susceptible to infection
with Citrobacter rodentium, a mouse model for attaching and effacing
infections. Kiss et al. (2011) concluded that their results established
a molecular link between nutrients and the formation of immune system
components required to maintain intestinal homeostasis and resistance to
infections.

Using predominantly wildtype and Hif1a (603348)-/- mouse T cells, Dang
et al. (2011) showed that Hif1a was specifically required for
differentiation of naive T cells into Th17 cells. Hif1a interacted
directly with Ror-gamma-t and acetyltransferase p300 (EP300; 602700) at
the Il17 promoter, and all 3 factors were required for optimum Il17
expression. Simultaneously, Hif1a downregulated differentiation of naive
T cells into Treg cells by directing proteasomal degradation of the
Treg-dependent transcription factor Foxp3 by a mechanism that was
independent of Hif1a transcriptional activity. Differentiation of Th17
cells and loss of Treg cells was enhanced in cultures subjected to
hypoxic conditions. Knockout of Hif1a in mouse T cells rendered mice
highly resistant to Mog (159465)-induced experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of multiple sclerosis (see 126200).
Dang et al. (2011) concluded that HIF1A has a role in immune responses
by controlling the balance between Th17 and Treg cells.

Santarlasci et al. (2012) noted that Th17 cells have a critical
pathogenic role in chronic inflammatory disorders, but they are rarely
found in inflammatory sites. Santarlasci et al. (2012) found that,
unlike Th1 cells, human CD161 (KLRB1; 602890)-positive Th17 precursor
cells did not proliferate and produce IL2 (147680) in response to
anti-CD3 (see CD3E; 186830)/anti-CD28 (186760) stimulation. Th17 cells
also proliferated poorly in response to IL2, in part due to lower
expression of the transcription factors JUN (165160), FOS (164810), and
NFATC1 (600489) and reduced surface expression of CD3E and CD3Z (CD247;
186780). Microarray and small interfering RNA analyses revealed high
expression of IL4I1 (609742) in Th17 precursor cells and showed that
IL4I1 upregulation was strictly dependent on RORC, the Th17 master
regulatory gene. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that Th17 cells also
exhibited high CD28 expression that was RORC dependent, and stimulation
of CD28 alone induced IL17 production and IL4I1 mRNA upregulation. Th17
cells from synovial fluid of patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(see 604302) also expressed higher levels of IL4I1 and CD28 than did Th1
cells. Santarlasci et al. (2012) concluded that the rarity of human Th17
cells in inflamed tissues results from RORC-dependent mechanisms that
limit their expansion and, therefore, reduce their potential to cause
damage.

Klose et al. (2013) provided evidence that the transcription factor Tbet
(604895) determines the fate of a distinct lineage of CCR6
(601835)-negative ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs. Postnatally emerging
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs upregulated Tbet, and this was controlled by cues
from the commensal microbiota and IL23 (605580). In contrast,
CCR6+ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs, which arise earlier during ontogeny, did not
express Tbet. Tbet instructed the expression of Tbet target genes such
as interferon-gamma (147570) and of the natural cytotoxicity receptor
NKp46 (604530). Mice genetically lacking Tbet showed normal development
of CCR6-ROR-gamma-t innate lymphoid cells, but these cells could not
differentiate into NKp46-expressing ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs (i.e., IL22
(605330)-producing natural killer cells) and failed to produce
interferon-gamma. The production of interferon-gamma by Tbet-expressing
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs was essential for the release of mucus-forming
glycoproteins required to protect the epithelial barrier against
Salmonella enterica infection. Klose et al. (2013) concluded that
coexpression of Tbet and ROR-gamma-t, which is also found in subsets of
IL17-producing T-helper cells, may be an evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional program that originally developed as part of the innate
defense against infections but that also confers an increased risk of
immune-mediated pathology.

GENE STRUCTURE

Medvedev et al. (1997) found that the mouse Rorc gene contains 11 exons
and spans more than 21 kb.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Hirose et al. (1994) mapped the
ROR-gamma gene to human chromosome 1. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Medvedev et al. (1997) refined the map position to 1q21.
These authors mapped the ROR-gamma gene in mouse to band 3F2.1-2.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Most developing thymocytes undergo apoptosis because they do not
interact productively with major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules. A thymus-specific isoform of RORC, termed ROR-gamma-t
(RORGT), inhibits the expression of Fas ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) and IL2
(147680). Sun et al. (2000) generated Rorc-deficient mice and found that
although they were fertile and phenotypically normal, they had reduced
overall as well as double-positive (DP) CD4 (186940)-positive/CD8 (see
186910)-positive and single-positive CD4-positive thymic cell numbers
and did not express Bclxl (see BCL2L1; 600039). The DP cells underwent
spontaneous apoptosis at a more rapid rate than those in wildtype mice.
The Rorc-null mice had reduced amounts of CDKN1B (600778) and
correspondingly greater CDK2 (116953) activity. Expression of Bclxl
restored most aspects of thymocyte development and increased survival.
Although Rorc-deficient mice had normal export of T lymphocytes to the
periphery and normal splenic architecture, they completely lacked lymph
nodes and Peyer patches, possibly due to the absence of Rorc-expressing
CD4-positive/CD45 (151460)-positive progenitor cells.

To identify the physiologic functions of the retinoid-related orphan
receptor gamma, Kurebayashi et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in
ROR-gamma function by targeted disruption. Homozygous-null mice lacked
peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer patches, indicating that
RORC gene expression is indispensable for lymph node organogenesis.
Although the spleen was enlarged, its architecture was normal. The
thymus of Rorc -/- mice contained 74.4% fewer thymocytes than that of
wildtype mice. Rorc -/- thymocytes placed in culture exhibited dramatic
increase in the rate of 'spontaneous' apoptosis. The observations
indicated that ROR-gamma is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and
plays an important regulatory role in thymopoiesis.

Using FACS analysis, Zhang et al. (2003) showed that splenomegaly in
Rorg -/- mice was due to increased numbers of resting B lymphocytes,
with only marginal increases in T cells and macrophages. In contrast,
peripheral blood lymphocyte levels were comparable to those in wildtype
mice. B-lymphocyte development was normal in both bone marrow and
spleens of Rorg -/- mice. Experiments with bone marrow chimeras using
Rorg -/- or Rag2 (179616) -/- mice as recipients and wildtype or Rorg
-/- mice as donors, respectively, showed that there was no defect in
lymphocyte homeostasis in Rorg -/- mice, but they appeared to have a
defect in the exit of lymphocytes from the spleen.

Eberl et al. (2004) generated mice expressing green fluorescent protein
in exon 1 of the gene encoding Rorgt. During fetal life, Rorgt was
expressed exclusively in CD4-positive and CD4-negative lymphoid tissue
inducer (LTi) cells, which are associated with the development of lymph
nodes and Peyer patches. LTi cells provide essential factors, including
lymphotoxin alpha-1 (153440)/beta-2 (600978), for activation of the
mesenchyma in the lymph node and Peyer patch anlagen. Rorgt-deficient
mice lacked all lymph nodes and Peyer patches, as well as LTi cells, a
phenotype similar to that observed in Id2 (600386) -/- mice. However,
unlike Id2 -/- mice, Rorgt -/- mice retained CD45-positive cells, CD11b
(120980)-positive cells, and MHC class II-positive cells.

RORG, which is broadly expressed, and RORGT, which is expressed
exclusively in immune system cells, are both encoded by the RORC gene
through the use of different promoters and differ only in their N
termini. Ivanov et al. (2006) found that a subset of mouse lamina
propria T cells expressed Rorgt and, using mice lacking Rorgt, they
showed that Rorgt was required for expression of Il17 (IL17A; 603149).
Mice lacking Rorgt had 10-fold fewer Il17-positive cells in intestinal
lamina propria compared with wildtype mice. Forced expression of Rorgt
in naive T cells induced expression of Il17 and Il17f (606496). FACS and
RT-PCR analyses of mice lacking Il6 (147620), which have normal T-cell
numbers, defective induction of autoimmunity, and increased
susceptibility to a variety of pathogens, showed that Il6 was required
for expression of both Rorgt and Il17. Rorc -/- mice were less
susceptible to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, as were
Rag2-deficient mice that received adoptively transferred cells from Rorc
-/- mice. Ivanov et al. (2006) concluded that RORGT is the transcription
factor that directs differentiation of inflammatory Th17 cells.

REFERENCE 1. Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Yang, H.-Y.; Jinasena, D.; Yu, H.; Zheng,
Y.; Bordman, Z.; Fu, J.; Kim, Y.; Yen, H.-R.; Luo, W.; Zeller, K.;
Shimoda, L.; Topalian, S. L.; Semenza, G. L.; Dang, C. V.; Pardoll,
D. M.; Pan, F.: Control of TH17/T-reg balance by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Cell 146: 772-784, 2011.

2. Eberl, G.; Littman, D. R.: Thymic origin of intestinal alpha-beta
T cells revealed by fate mapping of ROR-gamma-t(+) cells. Science 305:
248-251, 2004.

3. Eberl, G.; Littman, D. R.: Response to comment on 'Thymic Origin
of Intestinal alpha-beta T Cells Revealed by Fate Mapping of ROR-gamma-delta+
Cells.' (Commentary) Science 308: 1553 only, 2005.

4. Eberl, G.; Marmon, S.; Sunshine, M.-J.; Rennert, P. D.; Choi, Y.;
Littman, D. R.: An essential function for the nuclear receptor ROR-gamma-t
in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells. Nature
Immun. 5: 64-73, 2004.

5. Ghoreschi, K.; Laurence, A.; Yang, X.-P.; Tato, C. M.; McGeachy,
M. J.; Konkel, J. E.; Ramos, H. L.; Wei, L.; Davidson, T. S.; Bouladoux,
N.; Grainger, J. R.; Chen, Q.; and 9 others: Generation of pathogenic
T(H)17 cells in the absence of TGF-beta signalling. Nature 467:
967-971, 2010.

6. Hirose, T.; Smith, R. J.; Jetten, A. M.: ROR-gamma: the third
member of ROR/RZR orphan receptor subfamily that is highly expressed
in skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 205: 1976-1983,
1994.

7. Huh, J. R.; Leung, M. W. L.; Huang, P.; Ryan, D. A.; Krout, M.
R.; Malapaka, R. R. V.; Chow, J.; Manel, N.; Ciofani, M.; Kim, S.
V.; Cuesta, A.; Santori, F. R.; Lafaille, J. J.; Xu, H. E.; Gin, D.
Y.; Rastinejad, F.; Littman, D. R.: Digoxin and its derivatives suppress
TH17 cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR-gamma-t activity. Nature 472:
486-490, 2011.

8. Ivanov, I. I.; McKenzie, B. S.; Zhou, L.; Tadokoro, C. E.; Lepelley,
A.; Lafaille, J. J.; Cua, D. J.; Littman, D. R.: The orphan nuclear
receptor ROR-gamma-t directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory
IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 126: 1121-1133, 2006.

9. Kiss, E. A.; Vonarbourg, C.; Kopfmann, S.; Hobeika, E.; Finke,
D.; Esser, C.; Diefenbach, A.: Natural aryl hydrocarbon receptor
ligands control organogenesis of intestinal lymphoid follicles. Science 334:
1561-1565, 2011.

10. Klose, C. S. N.; Kiss, E. A.; Schwierzeck, V.; Ebert, K.; Hoyler,
T.; d'Hargues, Y.; Goppert, N.; Croxford, A. L.; Waisman, A.; Tanriver,
Y.; Diefenbach, A.: A T-bet gradient controls the fate and function
of CCR6(-)ROR-gamma-t(+) innate lymphoid cells. Nature 494: 261-265,
2013.

11. Kurebayashi, S.; Ueda, E.; Sakaue, M.; Patel, D. D.; Medvedev,
A.; Zhang, F.; Jetten, A. M.: Retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma
(ROR-gamma) is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and controls apoptosis
during thymopoiesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10132-10137, 2000.

12. Medvedev, A.; Chistokhina, A.; Hirose, T.; Jetten, A. M.: Genomic
structure and chromosomal mapping of the nuclear orphan receptor ROR-gamma
(RORC) gene. Genomics 46: 93-102, 1997.

13. Rocha, B.: Comment on 'Thymic Origin of Intestinal alpha-beta
T Cells Revealed by Fate Mapping of ROR-gamma-delta+ Cells.' (Commentary) Science 308:
1553 only, 2005.

14. Santarlasci, V.; Maggi, L.; Capone, M.; Querci, V.; Beltrame,
L.; Cavalieri, D.; D'Aiuto, E.; Cimaz, R.; Nebbioso, A.; Liotta, F.;
De Palma, R.; Maggi, E.; Cosmi, L.; Romagnani, S.; Annunziato, F.
: Rarity of human T helper 17 cells is due to retinoic acid orphan
receptor-dependent mechanisms that limit their expression. Immunity 36:
201-214, 2012.

15. Sawa, S.; Cherrier, M.; Lochner, M.; Satoh-Takayama, N.; Fehling,
H. J.; Langa, F.; Di Santo, J. P.; Eberl, G.: Lineage relationship
analysis of ROR-gamma-t+ innate lymphoid cells. Science 330: 665-669,
2010.

16. Silva-Santos, B.; Pennington, D. J.; Hayday, A. C.: Lymphotoxin-mediated
regulation of gamma-delta cell differentiation by alpha-beta T cell
progenitors. Science 307: 925-928, 2005.

17. Solt, L. A.; Kumar, N.; Nuhant, P.; Wang, Y.; Lauer, J. L.; Liu,
J.; Istrate, M. A.; Kamenecka, T. M.; Roush, W. R.; Vidovic, D.; Schurer,
S. C.; Xu, J.; Wagoner, G.; Drew, P. D.; Griffin, P. R.; Burris, T.
P.: Suppression of TH17 differentiation and autoimmunity by a synthetic
ROR ligand. Nature 472: 491-494, 2011.

18. Sun, Z.; Unutmaz, D.; Zou, Y.-R.; Sunshine, M. J.; Pierani, A.;
Brenner-Morton, S.; Mebius, R. E.; Littman, D. R.: Requirement for
ROR-gamma in thymocyte survival and lymphoid organ development. Science 288:
2369-2373, 2000.

19. Ueda, H. R.; Hayashi, S.; Chen, W.; Sano, M.; Machida, M.; Shigeyoshi,
Y.; Iino, M.; Hashimoto, S.: System-level identification of transcriptional
circuits underlying mammalian circadian clocks. Nature Genet. 37:
187-192, 2005.

20. Zhang, N.; Guo, J.; He, Y.-W.: Lymphocyte accumulation in the
spleen of retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor gamma-deficient
mice. J. Immun. 171: 1667-1675, 2003.

21. Zhou, L.; Lopes, J. E.; Chong, M. M. W.; Ivanov, I. I.; Min, R.;
Victora, G. D.; Shen, Y.; Du, J.; Rubtsov, Y. P.; Rudensky, A. Y.;
Ziegler, S. F.; Littman, D. R.: TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H)17
cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR-gamma-t function. Nature 453:
236-240, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/12/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/23/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/22/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/29/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/6/1998

EDITED mgross: 03/19/2013
terry: 3/12/2013
alopez: 3/5/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
mgross: 9/26/2012
terry: 9/21/2012
alopez: 2/29/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
alopez: 6/21/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
alopez: 1/4/2011
alopez: 11/29/2010
terry: 11/23/2010
alopez: 6/17/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 1/2/2007
terry: 12/22/2006
mgross: 6/1/2006
terry: 5/15/2006
alopez: 2/17/2006
terry: 2/10/2006
alopez: 2/3/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
terry: 7/29/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 8/26/2004
terry: 8/25/2004
mgross: 6/2/2004
terry: 10/11/2000
carol: 6/29/2000
dkim: 10/16/1998
alopez: 8/6/1998

610603	TITLE *610603 AlkB, E. COLI, HOMOLOG OF, 3; ALKBH3
;;PROSTATE CANCER ANTIGEN 1; PCA1;;
DEPC1;;
ABH3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Escherichia coli AlkB protein protects against the cytotoxicity of
methylating agents by repair of the specific DNA lesions generated in
single-stranded DNA. ALKBH2 (610602) and ALKBH3 are E. coli AlkB
homologs that catalyze the removal of 1-methyladenine and
3-methylcytosine (Duncan et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching human genomic and cDNA databases with ALKBH1 (605345) as
query, Duncan et al. (2002) obtained a full-length cDNA of ALKBH3. The
deduced protein shares 23.1% amino acid identity over the core region
with E. coli AlkB and shares similarity to
alpha-ketoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenases in the C-terminal
region. It has a predicted tertiary structure with high similarity to
the crystal structure of known dioxygenases. Northern blot analysis
detected ALKBH3 expression in all tissues examined, as well as several
carcinoma cell lines, with highest expression in spleen, prostate,
bladder and colon. Immunofluorescence studies localized ALKBH3 to the
nucleus in a diffuse pattern and to the cytoplasm.

Using fluorescent differential display analysis to identify genes
upregulated in prostate cancer, followed by RT-PCR and 5-prime RACE,
Konishi et al. (2005) cloned ALKBH3, which they called PCA1. The deduced
286-amino acid protein has an N-terminal signal sequence and a
C-terminal 2-oxoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase domain.
Quantitative real-time PCR detected PCA1 in all tissues examined, with
highest expression in pancreas and testis. Western blot analysis of
prostate cancer cell lines detected PCA1 at an apparent molecular mass
of about 40 kD. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 90% (63 of
70) prostate cancer specimens were positive for PCA1. Staining was
confined to cancerous cells in the prostate tissue sample and was most
often exhibited by atypical epithelia in high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasias. Little to no staining was seen in adjacent
normal epithelium, in benign prostatic hyperplasia, or in several other
cancers tested.

Using quantitative real-time PCR, Tsujikawa et al. (2007) found variable
ABH3 expression in all 16 tissues examined, with highest expression in
pancreas, followed by ovary, liver, and testis. Fluorescence-tagged ABH3
was expressed diffusely in the cytoplasm and more strongly in the
nucleus of transfected HeLa cells

GENE FUNCTION

Using purified GST- and histidine-tagged ALKBH3 overexpressed in E.
coli, Duncan et al. (2002) showed that ALKBH3 catalyzed the removal of
both 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine from methylated
polynucleotides. ALKBH3 directly reverted 3-methylcytosine to cytosine
and can also repair ethylated DNA bases through a mechanism similar to
E. coli AlkB activity.

By examining PCA1-transfected and control COS-7 cells, Konishi et al.
(2005) demonstrated that PCA1 conferred resistance against methylmethane
sulfonate-induced cell damage, indicative of demethylation activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Konishi et al. (2005) determined that the ALKBH3 gene contains at least
10 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Duncan et al. (2002) mapped the ALKBH3
gene to chromosome 11q11. By genomic sequence analysis, Konishi et al.
(2005) mapped the ALKBH3 gene to chromosome 11p11.12.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ringvoll et al. (2006) generated mice with targeted disruption of Abh2
(ALKBH2; 610602), Abh3, and Abh2/Abh3 double-knockout mice. Both single-
and double-knockout mice were viable and appeared normal into adulthood.
Using genomic DNA isolated from liver samples, the authors showed that
Abh2-null mice displayed an increased accumulation of 1-methyladenine
compared to wildtype and Abh3-null mice. Embryonic fibroblasts derived
from Abh2-null mice exhibited a decreased ability to remove methyl
methane sulfate (MMS)-induced 1-methyladenine from genomic DNA compared
to fibroblasts from both wildtype and Abh3-null mice. Ringvoll et al.
(2006) concluded that Abh2 and Abh3 have different roles in repair of
DNA damage caused by alkylating agents with Abh2 being the primary
oxidative demethylase for repair of 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine
in double-stranded DNA.

REFERENCE 1. Duncan, T.; Trewick, S.; Koivisto, P.; Bates, P. A.; Lindahl, T.;
Sedgwick, B.: Reversal of DNA alkylation damage by two human dioxygenases. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 16660-16665, 2002.

2. Konishi, N.; Nakamura, M.; Ishida, E.; Shimada, K.; Mitsui, E.;
Yoshikawa, R.; Yamamoto, H.; Tsujikawa, K.: High expression of a
new parker PCA-1 in human prostate carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 11:
5090-5097, 2005.

3. Ringvoll, J.; Nordstrand, L. M.; Vagbo, C. B.; Talstad, V.; Reite,
K.; Aas, P. A.; Lauritzen, K. H.; Liabakk, N. B.; Bjork, A.; Doughty,
R. W.; Falnes, P. O.; Krokan, H. E.; Klungland, A.: Repair deficient
mice reveal mABH2 as the primary oxidative demethylase for repairing
1meA and 3meC lesions in DNA. EMBO J. 25: 2189-2198, 2006.

4. Tsujikawa, K.; Koike, K.; Kitae, K.; Shinkawa, A.; Arima, H.; Suzuki,
T.; Tsuchiya, M.; Makino, Y.; Furukawa, T.; Konishi, N.; Yamamoto,
H.: Expression and sub-cellular localization of human ABH family
molecules. J. Cell. Molec. Med. 11: 1105-1116, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/12/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2006

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 11/27/2006

EDITED mgross: 03/12/2010
alopez: 6/2/2008
terry: 5/23/2008
wwang: 11/29/2006
wwang: 11/28/2006

602443	TITLE *602443 X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE 1; XPNPEP1
;;X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE-LIKE; XPNPEPL;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P-LIKE;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, SOLUBLE; SAMP;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, CYTOSOLIC;;
APP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

X-prolyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.9) is a proline-specific
metalloaminopeptidase that specifically catalyzes the removal of any
unsubstituted N-terminal amino acid that is adjacent to a penultimate
proline residue. Because of its specificity toward proline, it has been
suggested that X-prolyl aminopeptidase is important in the maturation
and degradation of peptide hormones, neuropeptides, and tachykinins, as
well as in the digestion of otherwise resistant dietary protein
fragments, thereby complementing the pancreatic peptidases. Deficiency
of X-prolyl aminopeptidase results in excretion of large amounts of
imino-oligopeptides in urine (Blau et al., 1988).

CLONING

X-prolyl aminopeptidase has been isolated from different tissues and
species. Vergas Romero et al. (1995) reported the complete amino acid
sequence of the pig kidney enzyme. The nucleotide sequences of the
X-prolyl aminopeptidase-encoding genes (pepP) from several
microorganisms have been reported. By RT-PCR of
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocyte mRNA, Vanhoof et al. (1997)
isolated a novel human cDNA, named XPNPEPL, that encodes a 623-amino
acid protein exhibiting 44% sequence identity and 62% sequence
similarity to pig kidney X-prolyl aminopeptidase and high sequence
homology to proteins in S. pombe and S. cerevisiae. Northern blot
analysis indicated ubiquitous expression of XPNPEPL as a 2.7-kb
transcript, with the highest expression in pancreas, followed by heart
and muscle.

Sprinkle et al. (2000) cloned XPNPEPL, which they termed soluble
aminopeptidase P (SAMP), or XPNPEP1. They noted the presence of 4 blocks
of sequences homologous to E. coli methionine aminopeptidase, which is
part of the 'pita-bread fold' family. Like the bacteria enzyme, XPNPEPL
contains a putative proton shuttle (residue 395) and 5 divalent metal
ligands (residues 415, 426, 485, 523, and 537). Sprinkle et al. (2000)
proposed that the enzyme inactivates bradykinin and is part of an
intracellular kallikrein-kinin system, possibly in secretory vesicles.

Cottrell et al. (2000) cloned and characterized XPNPEPL, which they
designated cytosolic APP. They identified an arg residue at position 332
instead of the pro residue reported by Vanhoof et al. (1997) and
determined that the cytosolic protein is 43% identical to membrane
aminopeptidase P (XPNPEP2; 300145). The cytosolic enzyme lacks the
hydrophobic signal sequences for an N-terminal signal peptide and a
C-terminal GPI anchor found in the membrane-bound enzyme. Immunoblot
analysis showed expression of a 71-kD homodimer protein capable of
hydrolyzing bradykinin in a divalent cation-dependent manner, similar to
XPNPEP2. The principal metal in the purified recombinant protein was
manganese, at an approximately 1:1 molar ratio.

Using RT-PCR, Ersahin et al. (2005) detected APP1 expression in all
human tissues examined with high expression in pancreas, liver, kidney,
and testis. There was fairly uniform expression in T cells, B cells, and
monocytes. APP1 functions as a soluble cytosolic homodimer of about 70
kD and exhibits broad substrate specificity.

GENE FUNCTION

Oh et al. (2004) described a hypothesis-driven, systems biology approach
to identifying a small subset of proteins induced at the tissue-blood
interface that are inherently accessible to antibodies injected
intravenously. They used subcellular fractionation, subtractive
proteomics, and bioinformatics to identify endothelial cell surface
proteins exhibiting restricted tissue distribution and apparent tissue
modulation. Expression profiling and gamma-scintigraphic imaging with
antibodies established 2 of these proteins, aminopeptidase-P and annexin
A1 (151690), as selective in vivo targets for antibodies in lung and
solid tumors, respectively. Radioimmunotherapy to annexin A1 destroyed
tumors and increased animal survival.

MAPPING

Using FISH and somatic hybrid analysis, Sprinkle et al. (2000) mapped
the XPNPEPL gene to chromosome 10q25.3, distinct from the Xq25
localization of XPNPEP2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

To identify loci contributing to susceptibility to biliary atresia
(210500), characterized by the progressive fibrosclerosing obliteration
of the extrahepatic biliary system during the first few weeks of life,
Garcia-Barcelo et al. (2010) carried out a genomewide association study
(GWAS) using nearly 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
200 Chinese biliary atresia patients and 481 ethnically matched control
subjects. The 10 most associated SNPs from the GWAS were genotyped in an
independent set of 124 BA and 90 control subjects. The strongest overall
association was found for dbSNP rs17095355 on chromosome 10q24, 68 kb
downstream from XPNPEP1.

REFERENCE 1. Blau, N.; Niederwieser, A.; Shmerling, D. H.: Peptiduria presumably
caused by aminopeptidase-P deficiency: a new inborn error of metabolism. J.
Inherit. Metab. Dis. 11 (suppl): 240-242, 1988.

2. Cottrell, G. S.; Hooper, N. M.; Turner, A. J.: Cloning, expression,
and characterization of human cytosolic aminopeptidase P: a single
manganese(II)-dependent enzyme. Biochemistry 39: 15121-15128, 2000.

3. Ersahin, C.; Szpaderska, A. M.; Orawski, A. T.; Simmons, W. H.
: Aminopeptidase P isozyme expression in human tissues and peripheral
blood mononuclear cell fractions. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 435: 303-310,
2005.

4. Garcia-Barcelo, M.-M.; Yeung, M.-Y.; Miao, X.-P.; Tang, C. S.-M.;
Chen, G.; So, M.-T.; Ngan, E. S.-W.; Lui, V. C.-H.; Chen, Y.; Liu,
X.-L.; Hui, K.-J. W. S.; Li, L.; and 13 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies a susceptibility locus for biliary atresia on 10q24.2. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2917-2925, 2010.

5. Oh, P.; Li, Y.; Yu, J.; Durr, E.; Krasinska, K. M.; Carver, L.
A.; Testa, J. E.; Schnitzer, J. E.: Subtractive proteomic mapping
of the endothelial surface in lung and solid tumours for tissue-specific
therapy. Nature 429: 629-635, 2004.

6. Sprinkle, T. J.; Caldwell, C.; Ryan, J. W.: Cloning, chromosomal
sublocalization of the human soluble aminopeptidase P gene (XPNPEP1)
to 10q25.3 and conservation of the putative proton shuttle and metal
ligand binding sites with XPNPEP2. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 378:
51-56, 2000.

7. Vanhoof, G.; Goossens, F.; Juliano, M. A.; Juliano, L.; Hendriks,
D.; Schatteman, K.; Lin, A. H.; Scharpe, S.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of a human cDNA clone (XPNPEPL) homologous to X-prolyl aminopeptidase
(aminopeptidase P). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 275-280, 1997.

8. Vergas Romero, C.; Neudorfer, I.; Mann, K.; Schafer, W.: Purification
and amino acid sequence of aminopeptidase P from pig kidney. Europ.
J. Biochem. 229: 262-269, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/06/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/24/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/06/2013
wwang: 9/7/2010
alopez: 7/26/2004
terry: 7/26/2004
alopez: 11/3/2003
mgross: 6/24/2002
mgross: 6/21/2002
dholmes: 4/1/1998
psherman: 3/16/1998

613524	TITLE *613524 SEROLOGICALLY DEFINED COLON CANCER ANTIGEN 8; SDCCAG8
;;CENTROSOMAL COLON CANCER AUTOANTIGEN PROTEIN; CCCAP;;
NY-CO-8;;
SLSN7 GENE;;
NPHP10 GENE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kenedy et al. (2003) cloned an SDCCAG8 cDNA, which they called CCCAP
(centrosomal colon cancer autoantigen protein), from a human placenta
cDNA library. By sequence analysis they discovered that a fragment of
CCCAP had been identified as colon cancer autoantigen NY-CO-8 by Scanlan
et al. (1998). Kenedy et al. (2003) found at least 3 alternatively
spliced CCCAP transcripts, including a full-length transcript encoding a
deduced 713-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 82.5 kD. Kenedy
et al. (2003) cloned the mouse CCCAP cDNA from a spleen cDNA library.
The human and mouse proteins share 71% identity and have the same
predicted secondary structure consisting of a predicted N-terminal
globular domain and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain. Human and mouse
CCCAP transcripts were found to be ubiquitously expressed but at very
low copy number (Kenedy et al., 2003). Endogenous mouse BALB/c 3T3
fibroblasts and ectopic human CCCAP in U2-osteosarcoma cells localized
to centrosomes during interphase and mitosis.

Otto et al. (2010) determined that the SDCCAG8 gene comprises 18 exons.

MAPPING

Kenedy et al. (2003) stated that the CCCAP gene maps to chromosome
1q43-q44.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on the centrosomal localization of human and mouse CCCAP and the
ability of mouse CCCAP to homo-oligomerize, Kenedy et al. (2003)
suggested that CCCAP is a stable centrosomal component with a structural
role in the centrosomal architecture or the microtubule organizing
activities of the centrosome matrix.

In a mammalian renal epithelial cell line, Otto et al. (2010) found that
Sdccag8 localizes to centrosomes, but at a distance from centrioles and
from distal centrosomal appendages. There was colocalization with ninein
(608684), a marker of centrosomal appendages, and with NPHP5 (609237)
and OFD1 (300170). Sdccag8 also localized to cell-cell junctions.
Further cellular studies led Otto et al. (2010) to conclude that SDCCAG8
is located at the distal ends of both centrioles and that it colocalizes
to centrosomes throughout the cell cycle. Human SDCCAG8 was also found
in human retinal pigment epithelial cells, where it localized in the
vicinity of centrosomes. Yeast 2-hybrid screening studies showed that
SDCCAG8 interacts directly with OFD1, and studies in mouse photoreceptor
cells showed that Sdccag8 colocalized with Nphp5 in the transition zone.

Chaki et al. (2012) found that NPHP10 colocalized with the DNA damage
response proteins TIP60 (KAT5; 601409), SC35 (SRSF2; 600813), CEP164
(614848), and ZNF423 (604557) at nuclear foci in immortalized human
retinal pigment epithelial cells. This noncentrosomal localization of
NPHP10 suggested a role for this protein in DNA damage repair. Chaki et
al. (2012) suggested that defects in DNA repair may play a role in
nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies, such as Senior-Loken syndrome
(SLSN7; 613615).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Otto et al. (2010) used homozygosity mapping followed by exon capture
and massively parallel sequencing to identify a homozygous truncating
mutation in the SDCCAG8 gene (613524.0001) in 2 sibs with Senior-Loken
syndrome 7 (SLSN7; 613615), who were born of consanguineous parents from
Reunion Island. Both patients had biopsy-confirmed nephronophthisis and
retinal degeneration, leading to blindness in 1. Analysis of additional
families found 11 different truncating mutations (see, e.g.,
613524.0002-613524.0005) in 9 families with SLSN. Some of the families
had additional features, such as obesity and mild mental retardation,
that were suggestive of the ciliopathy Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900);
however, none of the patients had polydactyly. Recessive SDCCAG8
mutations accounted for 3.3% (6 of 182) cases from a worldwide SLSN
cohort.

ANIMAL MODEL

Otto et al. (2010) demonstrated that knockout of the Sdccag8 gene in
zebrafish resulted in multiple developmental defects, including abnormal
body axis curvature, shortened and broadened tails, kidney cysts at 72
hours post fertilization, and hydrocephalus. Knockdown of murine Sdccag8
in renal epithelial cells resulted in the formation of spheroids with
architectural defects characterized by disturbed localization of
beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) at the basolateral membrane, fewer tight
junctions, and an irregular lumen. These findings were consistent with a
defect in cell polarity and lumen formation, which may reflect the renal
tubular defects found in individuals with a congenital SDCCAG8 mutation.
Increased intracellular cAMP caused a dose-dependent loss of Sdccag8
from cell-cell junctions compared to controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, 1-BP DEL, 1420G

In 2 sibs with Senior-Loken syndrome 7 (SLSN7; 613615), born of
consanguineous parents from Reunion Island, Otto et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (1420delG) in exon 12 of the
SDCCAG8 gene, resulting in frameshift and premature termination
(Glu474fsTer493). The mutation was found by homozygosity mapping
followed by exon capture and massively parallel sequencing. One patient
had onset of nephronophthisis at age 4 years and retinal degeneration at
age 14 years, whereas the other was blind by age 7 years and had onset
of renal disease at age 14 years. The mutation was not found in 270
control individuals.

.0002
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, 1-BP INS, 1339G

In 2 affected members of a consanguineous Algerian family with SLSN7
(613615), Otto et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1-bp insertion
(1339insG) in exon 11 of the SDCCAG8 gene, resulting in frameshift and
premature termination (Glu447fsTer463). Onset of nephronophthisis
occurred at ages 7 and 4 years, respectively, and flat
electroretinograms were observed at ages 13 and 6 years, respectively.
One of the patients had mild mental retardation. The mutation was not
found in 270 control individuals.

.0003
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, 4-BP DEL, 1946GTGT

By direct exon sequencing of 118 families with Senior-Loken syndrome,
Otto et al. (2010) found a homozygous truncating mutation in the SDCCAG8
gene in 1 family, consistent with SLSN7 (613615). The mutation was a
4-bp deletion (1946delGTGT) in exon 16, resulting in frameshift and
premature termination (Cys649fsTer658). The patient had retinal
degeneration, and nephronophthisis was confirmed by renal biopsy at age
22 years. The mutation was not found in 270 control individuals.

.0004
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, IVS7, C-T

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous Gypsy family with SLSN7
(613615), Otto et al. (2010) identified a homozygous deep intronic
mutation (c.740+356C-T) in intron 7 of the SDCCAG8 gene, predicted to
cause loss of an exonic splice enhancer site, with the result of
aberrant splicing introducing an in-frame stop codon. RT-PCR and
immunoblotting studies showed almost complete absence of the full-length
product. All patients had NPHP and retinal degeneration, as well as some
features of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; 209900), such as mild mental
retardation and obesity, although none had polydactyly. One of the
patients had relatively late onset of renal and retinal disease in the
twenties, which may have been due to some residual protein function. The
mutation was not found in 270 control individuals.

.0005
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, LYS227TER

In 2 affected members of a consanguineous family with SLSN7 (613615),
Otto et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 679A-T transversion in exon 7
of the SDCCAG8 gene, resulting in a lys227-to-ter (K227X) substitution.
Both individuals had NPHP and retinal degeneration, as well as some
features of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), such as mild mental
retardation, obesity, and hypogenitalism, although neither had
polydactyly. The mutation was not found in 270 control individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Chaki, M.; Airik, R.; Ghosh, A. K.; Giles, R. H.; Chen, R.; Slaats,
G. G.; Wang, H.; Hurd, T. W.; Zhou, W.; Cluckey, A.; Gee, H. Y.; Ramaswami,
G.; and 61 others: Exome capture reveals ZNF423 and CEP164 mutations,
linking renal ciliopathies to DNA damage response signaling. Cell 150:
533-548, 2012.

2. Kenedy, A. A.; Cohen, K. J.; Loveys, D. A.; Kato, g. J.; Dang,
C. V.: Identification and characterization of the novel centrosome-associated
protein CCCAP. Gene 303: 35-46, 2003.

3. Otto, E. A.; Hurd, T. W.; Airik, R.; Chaki, M.; Zhou, W.; Stoetzel,
C.; Patil, S. B.; Levy, S.; Ghosh, A. K.; Murga-Zamalloa, C. A.; van
Reeuwijk, J.; Letteboer, S. J. F.; and 43 others: Candidate exome
capture identifies mutation of SDCCAG8 as the cause of a retinal-renal
ciliopathy. Nature Genet. 42: 840-850, 2010.

4. Scanlan, M. J.; Chen, Y.-T.; Williamson, B.; Gure, A. O.; Stockert,
E.; Gordan, J. D.; Tureci, O.; Sahin, U.; Pfreundschuh, M.; Old, L.
J.: Characterization of human colon cancer antigens recognized by
autologous antibodies. Int. J. Cancer 76: 652-658, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/29/2010

CREATED Joanna S. Amberger: 9/2/2010

EDITED carol: 10/03/2013
terry: 10/8/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
ckniffin: 10/4/2012
alopez: 3/1/2011
terry: 12/10/2010
alopez: 11/3/2010
ckniffin: 10/29/2010
carol: 9/3/2010

603845	TITLE *603845 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1, SUBUNIT C2; NDUFC2
DESCRIPTION The multisubunit NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first
enzyme complex in the electron transport chain of mitochondria. See
NDUFA2 (602137). By a combination of EST database searching and PCR,
Loeffen et al. (1998) isolated human cDNAs encoding NDUFC2 and 7 other
complex I subunits. The predicted 119-amino acid human protein is 74%
identical to B14.5B, the bovine homolog.

REFERENCE 1. Loeffen, J. L. C. M.; Triepels, R. H.; van den Heuvel, L. P.; Schuelke,
M.; Buskens, C. A. F.; Smeets, R. J. P.; Trijbels, J. M. F.; Smeitink,
J. A. M.: cDNA of eight nuclear encoded subunits of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase: human complex I cDNA characterization completed. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 415-422, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/25/1999

EDITED alopez: 05/25/1999

605880	TITLE *605880 LYSINE ACETYLTRANSFERASE 6B; KAT6B
;;HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASE MYST4; MYST4;;
MONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA ZINC FINGER PROTEIN-RELATED FACTOR; MORF
MORF/CBF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Champagne et al. (1999) identified and characterized monocytic leukemia
zinc finger protein-related factor (MORF), a novel human histone
acetyltransferase. MORF is a 1,781-residue protein that is ubiquitously
expressed in adult human tissues. MORF also contains a strong
transcriptional repression domain at its N terminus and a highly potent
activation domain at its C terminus, and may be involved in both
positive and negative regulation of transcription.

Using immunohistochemistry on mice of various developmental ages,
Campeau et al. (2012) demonstrated expression of Myst4 in the
telencephalic vesicles, trigeminal ganglion, spinal cord, dorsal root
ganglia, digestive tract, pancreas, liver, and ribs of developing
embryo; after birth, it is strongly expressed in the diaphysis of the
long bones, the kidney, and the patella, among other organs.

- MORF/CBP Fusion Gene

Panagopoulos et al. (2001) reported a novel t(10;16)(q22;p13)
chromosomal translocation in a childhood acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML-M5a) leading to a MORF-CBP (600140) chimera. RT-PCR experiments
yielded in-frame MORF-CBP and CBP-MORF fusion transcripts. Genomic
analyses revealed that the breaks were close to Alu elements in intron
16 of MORF and intron 2 of CBP and that duplications had occurred near
the breakpoints. The authors constructed an exon/intron map of the MORF
gene. The MORF-CBP protein retained the zinc fingers, 2 nuclear
localization signals, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, a
portion of the acidic domain of MORF, and the CBP protein downstream of
codon 29. The part of CBP encoding the RARA-binding domain, the
CREB-binding domain, the 3 cys/his-rich regions, the bromodomain, the
HAT domain and the glu-rich domains was present. In the reciprocal
CBP-MORF, part of the acidic domain, and the C-terminal ser- and
met-rich regions of MORF may be driven by the CBP promoter.

MAPPING

Champagne et al. (1999) mapped the MORF gene to chromosome 10q22 by
FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) studied a cohort of 19 individuals with a
presumed diagnosis of the Ohdo syndrome SBBYS variant (SBBYSS; 603736).
Twelve individuals were considered to have typical features of the
syndrome, 2 had suggestive but milder features, and 5 were classified as
atypical. By whole-exome sequencing in 4 individuals with typical
features, Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified heterozygous mutations
in the KAT6B gene: a nonsense mutation (E1357X; 605880.0004) in
individual 4, a 1-bp insertion (605880.0001) in individual 1, and a 2-bp
deletion (605880.0002) in individual 2. Subsequently, all 19 individuals
with an SBBYSS or an SBBYSS-like phenotype were sequenced for the entire
KAT6B coding region by classic Sanger sequencing. Truncating mutations
in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene were confirmed in 12 individuals, and
individual 3 was found to have a heterozygous frameshift mutation in
exon 15 (605880.0003), which had not been detected on whole-exome
sequencing. When parental samples were available, the mutations were
shown to have occurred de novo. Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) suggested
that mutations of protein-protein interaction domains in exon 18 result
in a more complex phenotype than the phenotype due to simple
haploinsufficiency of KAT6B and raised the possibility that exon 18
mutations are activating or have a dominant-negative effect.

In 6 patients with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified 5 different heterozygous de novo truncating
mutations in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0005-605880.0009), all of
which were predicted to result in loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. Campeau et al. (2012) noted that
SBBYSS, also caused by mutation in KAT6B, is a disorder with features
overlapping those of genitopatellar syndrome, but with clinical
differences.

Simpson et al. (2012) identified mutations in the KAT6B gene in 5
unrelated patients with genitopatellar syndrome (see, e.g., 605880.0006
and 605880.0010); they stated that the form of Ohdo syndrome (SBBYSS) in
which mutations in KAT6B had been found is phenotypically distinct from
genitopatellar syndrome.

In 2 children with clinical features of SBBYSS, including a 4-year-old
girl previously reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified different de novo truncating mutations in the distal
region of exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0011-605880.0012).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Szakszon et al. (2013) noted that truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18
between positions c.3018 and c.3892 had been shown to cause GTPTS,
whereas truncating mutations distal to position c.4069 in the same exon
cause SBBYSS (with one exception, a c.4360_4368delins mutation in a
patient with GTPTS; see 605880.0005). They stated that their finding of
truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18 at positions c.5064_5071
(605880.0011) and c.5389 (605880.0012) in patients with SBBYSS confirmed
this genotype-phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) examined mice carrying a gene trap insertion
in the mouse ortholog Kat6b (Qkf/Myst4/Morf) that produces approximately
5% of the normal amount of Kat6b mRNA. The Qkf gt/gt hypomorphic mutant
displayed a number of defects that mirror SBBYSS syndrome, although the
phenotype in the mice is milder. Mice are of normal size at birth but
fail to thrive and have brain developmental defects as well as
craniofacial defects. Observed abnormalities include short and narrow
palpebral fissures, low set ears, and malocclusion. Qkf mRNA is strongly
expressed in the eyelids and teeth primordia during development. Similar
to individuals with SBBYSS, the Qkf gt/gt mice have long, slender feet
and disproportionately long first digits.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP INS, NT4405

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 1) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
1-bp insertion at nucleotide 4405 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0002
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, NT5370

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 2) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
2-bp deletion at nucleotide 5370 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0003
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP DEL, NT3018

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 3) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a 1-bp deletion at
nucleotide 3018 in exon 15 of the KAT6B gene, which resulted in a
frameshift. The mutation was not initially detected on whole-exome
sequencing. The parents did not have the mutation. The patient also had
a 1q21 duplication, which the authors considered to be incidental.

.0004
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLU1357TER

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 4) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous 4069G-T transversion in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
resulting in a glu1357-to-ter (E1357X) substitution. The parents did not
have the mutation.

.0005
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, DEL/INS, NT4360

In a male patient with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006) ('patient 2'), Campeau
et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo deletion/insertion
(4360_4368delinsAAAAACCAAAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to
result in premature termination and loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. The mutation was not found in the
patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0006
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, 3769TCTA

In 2 unrelated male patients with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), 1 of
whom was originally reported by Lifchez et al. (2003), Campeau et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion
(3769delTCTA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

In an unrelated 7-month-old girl and 3-month-old boy with genitopatellar
syndrome (606170), Simpson et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for
the 3769delTCTA mutation in the KAT6B gene, which was not present in
their unaffected parents, in the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control
exome profiles. Quantitative assessment of global H3/H4 acetylation of
extracted histones in primary skin fibroblasts from the infant girl
demonstrated a significant reduction in H3 and H4 acetylation compared
to control fibroblasts.

.0007
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, 3788AA

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 2-bp deletion
(3788delAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0008
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1298TER

In an African American girl with genitopatellar syndrome (606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006), Campeau et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a 3892G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. DNA from the patient's
parents was unavailable; however, the mutation was not found in the
Exome Variant Server.

.0009
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1268TER

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Lammer and Abrams (2002), Campeau et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 3802G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. The mutation was not
found in the patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant
Server.

.0010
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, NT1227

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Reardon (2002), Simpson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion (3680_3695del) in exon 18 of
the KAT6B gene. The mutation was not found in her unaffected parents, in
the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control exome profiles.

.0011
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 8-BP DEL/4-BP INS, NT5064

In a child of Sicilian ancestry with SBBYSS (603736), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous, de novo, complex insertion/deletion
mutation, c.5064_5071delTACTATGGinsCACA, in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
leading to a net loss of 4 bp, a frameshift, and a premature stop codon
(met1690glufs*24).

.0012
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, ARG1797TER

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 13) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous de novo
c.5389C-T transition in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, resulting in an
arg1797-to-ter (R1797X) substitution. The parents did not have the
mutation.

In a child of Hungarian ancestry with typical SBBYSS, previously
reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al. (2013) identified de
novo heterozygosity for the same R2797X mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; La, T. H.; Kwan, A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Barsh,
G. S.; Enns, G. M.; Hudgins, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding
the phenotype and excluding mutations in LMX1B and TBX4. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 140A: 1567-1572, 2006.

2. Campeau, P. M.; Kim, J. C.; Lu, J. T.; Schwartzentruber, J. A.;
Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Murdock, D. M.; Jiang, M.-M.;
Lammer, E. J.; Enns, G. M.; Rhead, W. J.; Rowland, J.; and 9 others
: Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause
genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 282-289, 2012.

3. Champagne, N.; Bertos, N. R.; Pelletier, N.; Wang, A. H.; Vezmar,
M.; Yang,Y.; Heng, H. H.; Yang, X. J.: Identification of a human
histone acetyltransferase related to monocytic leukemia zinc finger
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 28528-28536, 1999.

4. Clayton-Smith, J.; O'Sullivan, J.; Daly, S.; Bhaskar, S.; Day,
R.; Anderson, B.; Voss, A. K.; Thomas, T.; Biesecker, L. G.; Smith,
P.; Fryer, A.; Chandler, K. E.; and 13 others: Whole-exome-sequencing
identifies mutations in histone acetyltransferase gene KAT6B in individuals
with the Say-Barber-Biesecker variant of Ohdo syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 89: 675-681, 2011.

5. Lammer, E. J.; Abrams, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: delineating
the anomalies of female genitalia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 111: 316-318,
2002.

6. Lifchez, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Leuthner, S. R.; Lubinsky, M. S.
: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 122A:
80-83, 2003.

7. Panagopoulos, I.; Fioretos, T.; Isaksson, M.; Samuelsson, U.; Billstrom,
R.; Strombeck, B.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion of the MORF
and CBP genes in acute myeloid leukemia with the t(10;16)(q22;p13). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 395-404, 2001.

8. Reardon, W.: Genitopatellar syndrome: a recognizable phenotype. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 111: 313-315, 2002.

9. Simpson, M. A.; Deshpande, C.; Dafou, D.; Vissers, L. E. L. M.;
Woollard, W. J.; Holder, S. E.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Derks, R.;
White, S. M.; Cohen-Snuijf, R.; Kant, S. G.; Hoefsloot, L. H.; Reardon,
W.; Brunner, H. G.; Bongers, E. M. H. F.; Trembath, R. C.: De novo
mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B
cause genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 290-294, 2012.

10. Szakszon, K.; Berenyi, E.; Jakab, A.; Bessenyei, B.; Balogh, E.;
Kobling, T.; Szilvassy, J.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.: Blepharophimosis
mental retardation syndrome Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson type:
new findings with neuroimaging. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 634-637,
2011.

11. Szakszon, K.; Salpietro, C.; Kakar, N.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.;
Dallapiccola, B.; Borck, G.: De novo mutations of the gene encoding
the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B in two patients with Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 161A: 884-888, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 5/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/10/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 12/13/2011

CREATED George E. Tiller: 4/26/2001

EDITED carol: 08/29/2013
carol: 5/14/2013
carol: 4/24/2012
carol: 4/10/2012
terry: 4/10/2012
carol: 12/13/2011
carol: 12/12/2011
mgross: 2/21/2006
cwells: 5/2/2001
cwells: 4/26/2001

609825	TITLE *609825 COQ2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; COQ2
;;PARAHYDROXYBENZOATE-POLYPRENYLTRANSFERASE, MITOCHONDRIAL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CoQ (ubiquinone) serves as a redox carrier in the mitochondrial
respiratory chain and is a lipid-soluble antioxidant. COQ2, or
parahydroxybenzoate-polyprenyltransferase (EC 2.5.1.39), catalyzes one
of the final reactions in the biosynthesis of CoQ, the prenylation of
parahydroxybenzoate with an all-trans polyprenyl group (Forsgren et al.,
2004).

CLONING

By database analysis, followed by RT-PCR and RACE of human liver and
skeletal muscle cDNA libraries, Forsgren et al. (2004) cloned COQ2. The
deduced 421-amino acid protein contains a central polyprenyl
diphosphate-binding site, followed by 6 C-terminal transmembrane
regions. COQ2 was predicted to localize to mitochondria. Northern blot
analysis detected abundant expression of a 1.8-kb transcript in skeletal
muscle. RNA dot-blot analysis detected COQ2 in all adult and fetal
tissues examined, with highest levels in skeletal muscle, adrenal gland,
and heart.

GENE FUNCTION

Forsgren et al. (2004) found that human COQ2 rescued the growth of
Coq2-null yeast cells and restored CoQ biosynthesis. CoQ formed when
cells were incubated with labeled decaprenyl pyrophosphate and
nonaprenyl pyrophosphate, indicating that human COQ2 participates in the
biosynthesis of CoQ.

GENE STRUCTURE

Forsgren et al. (2004) determined that the COQ2 gene contains 7 exons
and spans more than 20.7 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Forsgren et al. (2004) mapped the COQ2
gene to chromosome 4q21-q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency 1

Using homozygosity mapping and sequence analysis, Quinzii et al. (2006)
detected a homozygous A-to-G transition at nucleotide 890 of the COQ2
gene in a patient with coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1 (COQ10D1; 607486). The
mutation was predicted to change amino acid 297 from tyrosine to
cysteine (Y297C; 609825.0001) in the third of 6 predicted transmembrane
domains of the COQ2 protein. The transition was heterozygous in both
parents and absent in healthy individuals.

Mollet et al. (2007) reported a French family with COQ10 deficiency that
manifested as fatal infantile multiorgan disease. Enzymologic analysis
showed low quinone-dependent oxidative phosphorylation activity, and
COQ10 deficiency was confirmed by restoration of oxidative
phosphorylation activity after quinone addition. In the affected family
members, Mollet et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion in
the COQ2 gene that resulted in a frameshift (609825.0002).
Transformation of yeast lacking Coq2 with human COQ2 containing the
mutation resulted in defective growth on respiratory medium.

Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007) reported 2 patients with COQ10 deficiency
who had primarily renal involvement. The first patient presented with
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome at the age of 18 months with no
extrarenal symptoms, and the second patient presented at 5 days of life
with oliguria and developed end-stage renal disease to which he
succumbed at 6 months of age after a course complicated by progressive
epileptic encephalopathy. Both patients carried 2 mutations in the COQ2
gene. The mutations (609825.0003, 609825.0004, and 609825.0005) were all
missense mutations occurring in residues highly conserved from yeast to
human.

- Susceptibility to Multiple System Atrophy 1

In affected members of 2 unrelated Japanese families with multiple
system atrophy-1 (MSA1; 146500), The Multiple-System Atrophy Research
Collaboration (2013) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in the COQ2 gene (609825.0006-609825.0008). The mutations were
found in the first family by linkage analysis combined by whole-genome
sequencing. Subsequent sequencing of the COQ2 gene in 363 Japanese
patients with sporadic MSA and 2 sets of controls (520 individuals and
2,383 individuals) identified putative heterozygous or biallelic
pathogenic variants in 33 patients (see, e.g., 609825.0009). The most
common variant was V343A (609825.0007), which was also found in
heterozygous state in 17 Japanese controls. Statistical analysis in the
Japanese population yielded an odds ratio for disease development of
2.23 (p = 6.0 x 10(-5)) in COQ2 carriers. Rare pathogenic variants were
also found in 4 of 223 European patients with sporadic disease and in 1
of 172 North American patients with sporadic disease. None of 315
European controls carried a variant, but 1 of 294 North American
controls carried a variant. In vitro functional expression assays in
yeast Coq2-null strains demonstrated that the mutations caused variable
growth defects and variably low COQ2 activities in patient cell lines.
The findings suggested that mutations in the COQ2 gene may cause
susceptibility to the disorder. Patients with COQ2 mutations had
increased frequency of the cerebellar variant compared to the
parkinsonism variant. Four additional families with MSA, including a
German family reported by Wullner et al. (2009), did not have COQ2
mutations, indicating genetic heterogeneity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, TYR297CYS

In a boy, born of consanguineous parents, with infantile
encephalomyopathy, nephropathy, and primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1
(COQ10D1; 607426), originally reported by Salviati et al. (2005),
Quinzii et al. (2006) identified a homozygous 890A-G transition in the
COQ2 gene, changing a highly conserved tyrosine to cysteine at amino
acid 297 (Y297C) within a predicted transmembrane domain of the protein.
He had a deficiency of CoQ10 in muscle and fibroblasts (22% of
controls), and fibroblasts showed about 36% residual COQ2 enzymatic
activity. His younger sister, who had only proteinuria and coenzyme Q
deficiency in fibroblasts, carried the same homozygous mutation.

Lopez-Martin et al. (2007) showed that the Y297C-mutant protein could
not functionally complement Coq2-defective yeast. An equivalent mutation
introduced into the wildtype yeast Coq2 gene decreased CoQ10 levels and
impaired growth in respiratory-chain dependent medium, consistent with a
loss of function. Growth was restored by CoQ10 supplementation. The
CoQ10 deficiency was also found to impair de novo pyrimidine synthesis,
which may contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease.

Quinzii et al. (2010) studied fibroblasts carrying a homozygous Y297C
mutation. CoQ10 levels were decreased to 42.7% of normal, and the cells
showed decreased ATP synthesis and increased oxidative stress-induced
death. The results suggested that partial CoQ10 deficiency can cause
oxidative stress that is toxic to the cells.

.0002
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, 1-BP DEL, 1198T

Mollet et al. (2007) reported a French family with coenzyme Q10
deficiency-1 (607426) in which a son and daughter died shortly after
birth due to anemia, liver failure, and renal insufficiency. The healthy
parents were from the same region and shared a patronymic but no known
ancestry. In 1 of the affected children, Mollet et al. (2007) identified
a homozygous 1-bp deletion (T) at nucleotide 1198 in exon 7 of the COQ2
gene, resulting in a premature stop codon. The parents were heterozygous
for the mutation, which was absent in controls.

.0003
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, ARG197HIS

In a patient with coenzyme Q10 deficiency (607426) who presented with
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome at age 18 months, Diomedi-Camassei
et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
COQ2 gene: a 590G-A transition resulting in an arg197-to-his (R197H)
substitution on the maternal allele, and a 683A-G transition resulting
in an asn228-to-ser (N228S; 609825.0004) substitution on the paternal
allele. Neither mutation was found in 500 control chromosomes.

Quinzii et al. (2010) studied fibroblasts carrying the compound
heterozygous R197H/N228S mutations. CoQ10 levels were decreased to 36%
of normal, and the cells showed impaired respiratory-dependent growth
after 48 hours, decreased ATP levels, increased oxidative stress
markers, and increased cell death. The results suggested that partial
CoQ10 deficiency can cause both impaired bioenergetics and oxidative
stress that is toxic to the cells.

.0004
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, ASN228SER

See 609825.0003 and Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007).

.0005
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, SER146ASN

In an Italian child with coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1 (607426),
Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a 437G-A
transition in the COQ2 gene, resulting in a ser146-to-asn (S146N)
substitution. Both parents were shown to be carriers and the mutation
was not identified in 500 control chromosomes. The child presented with
severe renal disease in the newborn period characterized as severe
crescentic glomerulonephritis on biopsy at 10 days of age, developed
intractable seizures and end-stage renal disease, and died at 6 months
of age.

.0006
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, MET78VAL

In 2 Japanese sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with multiple system
atrophy-1 (MSA1; 146500), originally reported by Hara et al. (2007), The
Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration (2013) identified a
homozygous met78-to-val (M78V) substitution in the COQ2 gene. The
mutation, which was found by linkage analysis combined with whole-genome
sequencing, was not found in a large control database or in 360 control
Japanese alleles. Each sib also carried a homozygous val343-to-ala
(V343A; 609825.0007) substitution that was found in heterozygous state
in 5 of 360 control Japanese alleles. An unaffected sib did not carry
either variant, and family history indicated that the parents, each of
whom was an obligate carrier of both variants, showed no signs of the
disorder. In vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null
strains demonstrated that the M78V variant showed severely decreased
growth similar to the null strain. Patient cerebellar tissue from a
homozygous carrier showed severely decreased intracellular levels of
COQ2.

.0007
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, VAL343ALA

The Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration (2013) found that a
val343-to-ala (V343A) variant in the COQ2 gene was associated with
multiple system atrophy-1 (146500) in Japanese patients. V343A was
present in homozygous state with another pathogenic homozygous mutation
(M78V; 609825.0006) in 2 Japanese sibs with the disorder. It was also
found in compound heterozygosity with R337X (609825.0008) in 2
additional Japanese sibs from another family with the disorder. Among
363 Japanese patients with sporadic MSA1, homozygous V343A was found in
2 patients and none of 520 controls, and heterozygous V343A was found in
31 patients and 17 controls; 2 heterozygous carriers were compound
heterozygous with another potentially pathogenic COQ2 variant. The
allele frequency was 4.8% in Japanese patients and 1.6% in Japanese
controls (odds ratio (OR) for MSA1 of 3.05, p = 1.5 x 10(-4)).
Genotyping in a second series of 2,383 Japanese controls showed that the
V343A variant had an allele frequency of 2.2%, yielding an OR of 2.23 (p
= 6.0 x 10(-5)). Two patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) who
were found to carry a homozygous V343A mutation did not show any signs
of parkinsonism, cerebellar ataxia, or autonomic dysfunction. Otherwise,
the V343A variant appeared to be specific for MSA. V343A was not found
in 395 patients or 609 controls from European/North American cohorts. In
vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null strains showed
that the V343A variant could restore growth similar to wildtype, but
showed somewhat decreased COQ2 activities in cell lines derived from
patients with MSA.

.0008
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, ARG337TER

In 2 Japanese sibs with MSA1 (146500), The Multiple-System Atrophy
Research Collaboration (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
variants in the COQ2 gene: an arg337-to-ter (R337X) substitution, and
V343A (609825.0007). V343A was present in 5 of 360 control Japanese
alleles, but R337X was not found in controls. Their unaffected mother
was heterozygous for V343A and another unaffected sib was heterozygous
for R337X. In vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null
strains showed that the R337X variant resulted in severely impaired
growth similar to the null strain, and COQ2 activity levels in patient
cells was decreased compared to wildtype.

.0009
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, ARG337GLN

In a Japanese patient with sporadic MSA1 (146500), The Multiple-System
Atrophy Research Collaboration (2013) identified compound heterozygosity
for 2 variants in the COQ2 gene: arg337-to-gln (R337Q) and V343A
(609825.0007). In vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null
strains showed that the R337Q variant resulted in severely impaired
growth similar to the null strain, and COQ2 activity levels in patient
cells was decreased compared to wildtype.

REFERENCE 1. Diomedi-Camassei, F.; Di Giandomenico, S.; Santorelli, F. M.; Caridi,
G.; Piemonte, F.; Montini, G.; Ghiggeri, G. M.; Murer, L.; Barisoni,
L.; Pastore, A.; Muda, A. O.; Valente, M. L.; Bertini, E.; Emma, F.
: COQ2 nephropathy: a newly described inherited mitochondriopathy
with primary renal involvement. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 18: 2773-2780,
2007.

2. Forsgren, M.; Attersand, A.; Lake, S.; Grunler, J.; Swiezewska,
E.; Dallner, G.; Climent, I.: Isolation and functional expression
of human COQ2, a gene encoding a polyprenyl transferase involved in
the synthesis of CoQ. Biochem. J. 382: 519-526, 2004.

3. Hara, K.; Momose, Y.; Tokiguchi, S.; Shimohata, M.; Terajima, K.;
Onodera, O.; Kakita, A.; Yamada, M.; Takahashi, H.; Hirasawa, M.;
Mizuno, Y.; Ogata, K.; Goto, J.; Kanazawa, I.; Nishizawa, M.; Tsuji,
S.: Multiplex families with multiple system atrophy. Arch. Neurol. 64:
545-551, 2007.

4. Lopez-Martin, J. M.; Salviati, L.; Trevisson, E.; Montini, G.;
DiMauro, S.; Quinzii, C.; Hirano, M.; Rodriguez-Hernandez, A.; Cordero,
M. D.; Sanchez-Alcazar, J. A.; Santos-Ocana, C.; Navas, P.: Missense
mutation of the COQ2 gene causes defects of bioenergetics and de novo
pyrimidine synthesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1091-1097, 2007.

5. Mollet, J.; Giurgea, I.; Schlemmer, D.; Dallner, G.; Chretien,
D.; Delahodde, A.; Bacq, D.; de Lonlay, P.; Munnich, A.; Rotig, A.
: Prenyldiphosphate synthase, subunit 1 (PDSS1) and OH-benzoate polyprenyltransferase
(COQ2) mutations in ubiquinone deficiency and oxidative phosphorylation
disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 765-772, 2007.

6. Quinzii, C.; Naini, A.; Salviati, L.; Trevisson, E.; Navas, P.;
DiMauro, S.; Hirano, M.: A mutation in Para-hydroxybenzoate-polyprenyl
transferase (COQ2) causes primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 78: 345-349, 2006.

7. Quinzii, C. M.; Lopez, L. C.; Gilkerson, R. W.; Dorado, B.; Coku,
J.; Naini, A. B.; Lagier-Tourenne, C.; Schuelke, M.; Salviati, L.;
Carrozzo, R.; Santorelli, F.; Rahman, S.; Tazir, M.; Koenig, M.; DiMauro,
S.; Hirano, M.: Reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, and cell
death correlate with level of CoQ10 deficiency. FASEB J. 24: 3733-3743,
2010.

8. Salviati, L.; Sacconi, S.; Murer, L.; Zacchello, G.; Franceschini,
L.; Laverda, A. M.; Basso, G.; Quinzii, C.; Angelini, C.; Hirano,
M.; Naini, A. B.; Navas, P.; DiMauro, S.; Montini, G.: Infantile
encephalomyopathy and nephropathy with CoQ10 deficiency: a CoQ10-responsive
condition. Neurology 65: 606-608, 2005.

9. The Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration: Mutations
in COQ2 in familial and sporadic multiple-system atrophy. New Eng.
J. Med. 369: 233-244, 2013.

10. Wullner, U.; Schmitt, I.; Kammal, M.; Kretzschmar, H. A.; Neumann,
M.: Definite multiple system atrophy in a German family. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg.  Psych. 80: 449-450, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/6/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/17/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/17/2006

EDITED carol: 08/06/2013
ckniffin: 8/6/2013
alopez: 3/15/2013
ckniffin: 3/13/2013
carol: 5/24/2012
ckniffin: 5/23/2012
wwang: 2/23/2010
ckniffin: 2/19/2010
alopez: 10/9/2009
terry: 10/7/2009
terry: 8/6/2007
mgross: 5/17/2007
alopez: 2/2/2006
alopez: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/23/2006
mgross: 1/18/2006
mgross: 1/17/2006

605995	TITLE *605995 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 1B; KIF1B
;;KIAA0591
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nangaku et al. (1994) cloned a member of the mouse kinesin superfamily,
Kif1b, which encodes an N-terminal-type motor protein. Kif1b was
expressed in all tissues tested. In situ hybridization revealed that
Kif1b was expressed abundantly in differentiated nerve cells.

Zhao et al. (2001) identified an isoform of mouse Kif1b, which they
called Kif1b-beta, that is distinct from Kif1b-alpha (Nangaku et al.,
1994) in its cargo-binding domain.

Yang et al. (2001) identified the KIF1B gene in a homozygously deleted
region of chromosome 1p36.2 in a neuroblastoma cell line. They reported
results suggesting that the gene is not a candidate for tumor suppressor
gene of neuroblastoma. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that human
KIF1B has at least 2 isoforms. The long isoform (KIF1B-beta) was
expressed in a wide variety of tissues, while the short isoform
(KIF1B-alpha) was detected only in adult testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schlisio et al. (2008) stated that the KIF1B gene contains 46 coding
exons.

MAPPING

By STS analysis, Gong et al. (1996) mapped the human KIF1B gene to
chromosome 1p36. They mapped the mouse Kif1b gene to chromosome 4.

Zuchner et al. (2004) stated that the KIF1B gene maps to chromosome
1p36.2, about 1.65 Mb telomeric to the MFN2 gene (608507), which is
mutant in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-2A2 (CMT2A2; 609260).

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF1B belongs to the
kinesin-3 family.

GENE FUNCTION

Nangaku et al. (1994) found that mouse Kif1b works as a monomer, having
a microtubule plus-end-directed motility. Rotary shadowing electron
microscopy revealed mostly single globular structures.
Immunocytochemically, Kif1b was colocalized with mitochondria in vivo. A
subcellular fractionation study showed that Kif1b was concentrated in
the mitochondrial fraction, and purified Kif1b could transport
mitochondria along microtubules in vitro. These data suggested that
Kif1b works as a monomeric motor for anterograde transport of
mitochondria.

Schlisio et al. (2008) found that apoptosis caused by NGF (see NGFB;
162030) withdrawal from cultured neuronal cells was mediated by EGLN3
(606426) and its downstream effector, KIF1B-beta.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease 2A1

In all affected members of a family with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-2A1
(CMT2A1; 118210), Zhao et al. (2001) identified a loss-of-function
mutation in the KIF1B gene (605995.0001).

- Role in Cancer

In 1 medulloblastoma (155255), 3 neuroblastomas (NBLST1; 256700), and 2
pheochromocytoma (171300) tumor samples, Schlisio et al. (2008)
identified 6 different missense mutations in the KIF1B gene. In 3 tumors
there was loss of the wildtype allele and in 3 there was retention,
including 1 in which there was low-level amplification of the mutant
allele. In the 4 cases in which corresponding germline DNA samples from
the respective patients were available, the mutations were also present
(605995.0002-605995.0005). Functional studies in primary rat sympathetic
neurons revealed that induction of apoptosis was impaired with all of
the KIF1B variants compared to wildtype.

- Other Disease Associations

For discussion of an association between variation in the KIF1B gene and
multiple sclerosis, see MS4 (612596).

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhao et al. (2001) generated Kif1b knockout mice by gene targeting.
Kif1b knockout mice died at birth from apnea due to nervous system
defects. Death of knockout neurons in culture could be rescued by
expression of the Kif1b-beta isoform. The Kif1b heterozygotes had a
defect in transporting synaptic vesicle precursors and suffered from
progressive muscle weakness similar to human neuropathies.

Lyons et al. (2009) identified a mutation in the zebrafish Kif1b gene
that disrupted localization of Mbp (159430) mRNA in the central nervous
system (CNS) and outgrowth of the posterior lateral line nerve in the
peripheral nervous system (PNS). Using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to block translation of individual Kif1b isoforms, they
found that the phenotype was due to loss of Kif1b-beta rather than
Kif1b-alpha, even though the mutation occurred in the common region
shared by both isoforms. Examination of the zebrafish mutants revealed
that Kif1b was required to localize myelin mRNA to oligodendrocyte
processes, to elaborate the correct amount of myelin around axons, and
to prevent ectopic production of myelin-like membrane. Normal Kif1b
function was also required for development of certain axons in the CNS
and PNS.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2A1
KIF1B, GLN98LEU

In all affected individuals of a Japanese family (family 694) with
autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A1 (CMT2A1; 118210)
reported by Saito et al. (1997), Zhao et al. (2001) identified an A-to-T
transversion in the KIF1B gene, resulting in a gln98-to-leu (Q98L)
substitution. The Q98L mutation was not identified in 95 healthy,
unrelated Japanese controls. The mutation occurred in the middle of the
P loop, the consensus ATP-binding site, and was predicted to disrupt the
function of this mechanochemical enzyme. Zhao et al. (2001) tested the
motor activity of recombinant mouse Kif1b with the Q98L mutation. The
microtubule-activated ATP turnover rates were reduced in the mutant
protein. Furthermore, the Q98L mutant protein remained and aggregated in
the perinuclear region, while the wildtype Kif1b protein accumulated at
the cell periphery. These data suggested that the Q98L mutation resulted
in a functional loss of motor activity.

.0002
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, GLU656VAL

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified an A-T
transversion in exon 20 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a glu646-to-val
(E646V) substitution. There was loss of the wildtype allele in the tumor
sample, and MYCN (164840) amplification was present.

.0003
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, THR827ILE

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a C-T
transition in exon 24 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a thr827-to-ile
(T827I) substitution. The wildtype allele was retained in the tumor
sample; no amplification of MYCN (164840) was present, but low-level
(2-fold) amplification of the mutant allele was detected.

.0004
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, PRO1217SER

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a C-T
transition in exon 33 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a pro1217-to-ser
(P1217S) substitution. There was loss of the wildtype allele in the
tumor sample, and no MYCN (164840) amplification was present.

.0005
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1, INCLUDED
KIF1B, SER1481ASN

In a pheochromocytoma (171300) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a 4442G-A
transition in exon 41 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a ser1481-to-asn
(S1481N) substitution. The wildtype allele was retained in the tumor
sample. The proband was a 28-year-old female who presented at 17 months
of age with a neuroblastoma (256700) and in adulthood developed a mature
ganglioneuroma and bilateral pheochromocytoma. Her paternal grandfather
harbored the mutant S1481N allele and also developed bilateral
pheochromocytoma. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein was deficient in the ability to induce apoptosis of
sympathetic precursor cells in response to growth factor withdrawal
compared to wildtype KIF1B.

Yeh et al. (2008) reported further analysis of the family reported by
Schlisio et al. (2008). The proband developed a leiomyosarcoma, and her
father, who also carried the S1481N mutation, developed adenocarcinoma
of the lung (211980). Analysis of tumor tissue revealed that all 4
neural crest tumors and the leiomyosarcoma retained both KIF1B alleles
and showed no loss of heterozygosity (LOH), consistent with a
haploinsufficiency mechanism. Yeh et al. (2008) postulated that the
leiomyosarcoma may have evolved secondary to the proband's childhood
treatment for neuroblastoma. In contrast, about 45% of cells from the
lung tumor showed LOH at this locus, suggesting a possible role for gene
dosage in development of this nonneural tumor.

REFERENCE 1. Gong, T.-W. L.; Burmeister, M.; Lomax, M. I.: The novel gene D4Mil1e
maps to mouse chromosome 4 and human chromosome 1p36. Mammalian Genome 7:
790-791, 1996.

2. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

3. Lyons, D. A.; Naylor, S. G.; Scholze, A.; Talbot, W. S.: Kif1b
is essential for mRNA localization in oligodendrocytes and development
of myelinated axons. Nature Genet. 41: 854-858, 2009.

4. Nangaku, M.; Sato-Yoshitake, R.; Okada, Y.; Noda, Y.; Takemura,
R.; Yamazaki, H.; Hirokawa, N.: KIF1B, a novel microtubule plus end-directed
monomeric motor protein for transport of mitochondria. Cell 79:
1209-1220, 1994.

5. Saito, M.; Hayashi, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Tanaka, H.; Hozumi, I.; Tsuji,
S.: Linkage mapping of the gene for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type
2 to chromosome 1p (CMT2A) and the clinical features of CMT2A. Neurology 49:
1630-1635, 1997.

6. Schlisio, S.; Kenchappa, R. S.; Vredeveld, L. C. W.; George, R.
E.; Stewart, R.; Greulich, H.; Shahriari, K.; Nguyen, N. V.; Pigny,
P.; Dahia, P. L.; Pomeroy, S. L.; Maris, J. M.; Look, A. T.; Meyerson,
M.; Peeper, D. S.; Carter, B. D.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: The kinesin
KIF1B-beta (sic) acts downstream from EglN3 to induce apoptosis and
is a potential 1p36 tumor suppressor. Genes Dev. 22: 884-893, 2008.

7. Yang, H. W.; Chen, Y. Z.; Takita, J.; Soeda, E.; Piao, H. Y.; Hayashi,
Y.: Genomic structure and mutational analysis of the human KIF1B
gene which is homozygously deleted in neuroblastoma at chromosome
1p36.2. Oncogene 20: 5075-5083, 2001.

8. Yeh, I.-T.; Lenci, R. E.; Qin, Y.; Buddavarapu, K.; Ligon, A. H.;
Leteurtre, E.; Do Cao, C.; Cardot-Bauters, C.; Pigny, P.; Dahia, P.
L. M.: A germline mutation of the KIF1B gene on 1p36 in a family
with neural and nonneural tumors. Hum. Genet. 124: 279-285, 2008.

9. Zhao, C.; Takita, J.; Tanaka, Y.; Setou, M.; Nakagawa, T.; Takeda,
S.; Yang, H. W.; Terada, S.; Nakata, T.; Takei, Y.; Saito, M.; Tsuji,
S.; Hayashi, Y.; Hirokawa, N.: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A
caused by mutation in a microtubule motor KIF1B-beta. Cell 105:
587-597, 2001. Note: Erratum: Cell 106: 127 only, 2001.

10. Zuchner, S.; Mersiyanova, I. V.; Muglia, M.; Bissar-Tadmouri,
N.; Rochelle, J.; Dadali, E. L.; Zappia, M.; Nelis, E.; Patitucci,
A.; Senderek, J.; Parman, Y.; Evgrafov, O.; and 10 others: Mutations
in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy type 2A. Nature Genet. 36: 449-451, 2004. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 36: 660 only, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/21/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/6/2001

EDITED terry: 10/10/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
mgross: 6/21/2012
ckniffin: 9/24/2009
ckniffin: 9/18/2009
mgross: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
wwang: 4/10/2009
ckniffin: 3/30/2009
wwang: 2/13/2009
ckniffin: 2/9/2009
alopez: 12/5/2008
wwang: 7/8/2008
mgross: 5/30/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
mgross: 3/15/2005
ckniffin: 3/4/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
carol: 4/29/2003
ckniffin: 4/23/2003
mcapotos: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/4/2001
mgross: 11/16/2001
mgross: 6/6/2001

164015	TITLE *164015 MATRIN 3; MATR3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Stuurman et al. (1990) showed that nuclear matrins, a group of proteins
in the nuclear matrix, are present in cultured cells from a variety of
tissues and are probably common to mammalian cells. Stuurman et al.
(1990) differentiated 2 nuclear matrix fractions: the peripheral nuclear
matrix (matrix proteins that remain insoluble after reduction), and the
internal nuclear matrix (matrix proteins released by reduction).

Nakayasu and Berezney (1991) identified several novel nuclear matrins
from a rat liver nuclear matrix and characterized them by peptide maps,
polyclonal antibodies generated against the individual matrins, and
indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. They designated the proteins
matrins 3, 4, D-G, 12, and 13.

Belgrader et al. (1991) cloned a full-length rat insulinoma cDNA that
encodes an acidic internal matrix protein designated matrin-3. The
deduced 845-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
approximately 95 kD. Its primary structure consists of 33% charged
residues and is generally hydrophilic. Like the lamins (see 150330),
matrin-3 has a positively charged N terminus that contains a large
number of amino acids with free hydroxyl groups. A highly acidic domain
near the C terminus, in which 32% of the amino acids are acidic, is a
characteristic found in other nuclear proteins.

Nagase et al. (1998) cloned and sequenced matrin-3, which they called
KIAA0723, from human brain cDNA libraries. The deduced protein contains
847 amino acids.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MATR3
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP WI-15469).

Using genomic sequence analysis, Senderek et al. (2009) mapped the MATR3
gene to chromosome 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 unrelated families with a form of distal myopathy that included
vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness (MPD2; 606070), Senderek et al.
(2009) identified the same missense mutation in the MATR3 gene (S85C;
164015.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY, DISTAL, 2
MATR3, SER85CYS

In affected members of a North American family originally reported by
Feit et al. (1998) and in an unrelated Bulgarian family with distal
myopathy with vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness (MPD2; 606070),
Senderek et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 254 in exon 2 of the MATR3 gene that resulted
in a change from serine to cysteine at codon 85 (S85C).

REFERENCE 1. Belgrader, P.; Dey, R.; Berezney, R.: Molecular cloning of matrin
3: a 125-kilodalton protein of the nuclear matrix contains an extensive
acidic domain. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 9893-9899, 1991.

2. Feit, H.; Silbergleit, A.; Schneider, L. B.; Gutierrez, J. A.;
Fitoussi, R.-P.; Reyes, C.; Rouleau, G. A.; Brais, B.; Jackson, C.
E.; Beckmann, J. S.; Seboun, E.: Vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness
with autosomal dominant distal myopathy: clinical description and
gene localization to 5q31. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1732-1742, 1998.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

4. Nakayasu, H.; Berezney, R.: Nuclear matrins: identification of
the major nuclear matrix proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10312-10316,
1991.

5. Senderek, J.; Garvey, S. M.; Krieger, M.; Guergueltcheva, V.; Urtizberea,
A.; Roos, A.; Elbracht, M.; Stendel, C.; Tournev, I.; Mihailova, V.;
Feit, H.; Tramonte, J.; and 11 others: Autosomal-dominant distal
myopathy associated with a recurrent missense mutation in the gene
encoding the nuclear matrix protein, matrin 3. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84:
511-518, 2009.

6. Stuurman, N.; Meijne, A. M. L.; van der Pol, A. J.; de Jong, L.;
van Driel, R.; van Renswoude, J.: The nuclear matrix from cells of
different origin: evidence for a common set of matrix proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 265: 5460-5465, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 10/20/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1991

EDITED wwang: 07/01/2011
alopez: 10/20/2009
carol: 5/4/2007
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/27/1991

603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

614625	TITLE *614625 DIFFERENTIATION-ANTAGONIZING NONCODING RNA; DANCR
;;ANTI-DIFFERENTIATION NONCODING RNA; ANCR;;
KIAA0114
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated KG-1 immature
myeloid cell line, Nagase et al. (1995) cloned DANCR, which they
designated KIAA0114. Northern blot analysis detected variable DANCR
expression in all human tissues and cell lines examined, with highest
expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and kidney.

By sequencing long noncoding RNAs expressed in undifferentiated human
epidermal progenitor cells, Kretz et al. (2012) cloned DANCR, which they
called ANCR. The mature transcript is 855 bases long. ANCR was variably
expressed in several primary human cell cultures and cell lines, with
highest expression in embryonic stem cells and K562 leukemia cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kretz et al. (2012) found that ANCR expression was downregulated upon
terminal differentiation in cultured human keratinocytes, adipocytes,
and osteoblasts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kretz et al. (2012) determined that the DANCR gene contains 3 exons and
harbors the genes for MIR4449 (614627) and SNORA26 (614626) in introns 1
and 2, respectively.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the DANCR gene
to chromosome 4. Hartz (2012) mapped the DANCR gene to chromosome 4q12
based on an alignment of the DANCR sequence (GenBank GENBANK D28589)
with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/8/2012.

2. Kretz, M.; Webster, D. E.; Flockhart, R. J.; Lee, C. S.; Zehnder,
A.; Lopez-Pajares, V.; Qu, K.; Zheng, G. X. Y.; Chow, J.; Kim, G.
E.; Rinn, J. L.; Chang, H. Y.; Siprashvili, Z.; Khavari, P. A.: Suppression
of progenitor differentiation requires the long noncoding RNA ANCR. Genes
Dev. 26: 338-343, 2012.

3. Nagase, T; Miyajima, N; Tanaka, A.; Sazuka, T.; Seki, N.; Sato,
S.; Tabata, S.; Ishikawa, K.; Kawarabayashi, Y.; Kotani, H.; Nomura,
N.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
III. The coding sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0081-KIAA0120) deduced
by analysis of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2:
37-43, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2012

EDITED mgross: 05/09/2012
mgross: 5/9/2012

604769	TITLE *604769 PEROXIREDOXIN 3; PRDX3
;;PRX3;;
ANTIOXIDANT PROTEIN 1; AOP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Peroxiredoxins inactivate H2O2 by oxidizing a key cysteine residue in
their catalytic center, which is subsequently reduced by thioredoxins
(see 187700). The thioredoxins are subsequently reduced by electrons
from NADPH via thioredoxin reductases (see TXNRD1; 601112). PRDX3 is
localized exclusively in mitochondria (summary by Chiribau et al.,
2008).

CLONING

The mouse Aop1 protein, also called Mer5, may promote early events in
the differentiation of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells (Nemoto et
al., 1990). Tsuji et al. (1995) found that mouse Aop1 shares 38% amino
acid sequence identity with the C22 subunit of Salmonella typhimurium
alkylhydroperoxide reductase.

By screening a human leukemia cell line cDNA library with a mouse Aop1
cDNA, Tsuji et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA encoding human AOP1. The
deduced 256-amino acid human AOP1 protein shares 86% amino acid sequence
similarity with mouse Aop1, and significant similarity with both the
human proliferation-associated gene A product (PAGA; 176763) and the
mouse stress-induced peritoneal macrophage protein Msp23. AOP1 also
shows sequence similarity to the S. cerevisiae thiol-specific
antioxidant protein TSA; a surface antigen of Entamoeba histolytica,
which is a pathogenic protozoan that causes diarrhea and organ abscess
formation; and a protein of H. pylori, which is a causative agent in
gastritis, ulcers, and gastric adenocarcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Tsuji et al. (1995) demonstrated that recombinant mouse Aop1 could
complement an alkylhydroperoxide reductase mutation in E. coli,
suggesting that Aop1 functions as an antioxidant protein.

Shih et al. (2001) determined that AOP1 interacts with Abrin A-chain
(ABRA), which inhibits protein synthesis and can induce apoptosis. By
immunolocalization studies, they determined that both AOP1 and ABRA
colocalize within the mitochondria. By assays of thiol-dependent
antioxidant activity, they determined that ABRA can attenuate AOP1
activity in a dose-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of AOP1 also
blocked the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria and inhibited
apoptosis in ABRA-treated cells.

Deregulated expression of the MYC transcription factor (190080) is found
in a wide variety of human tumors. The primary transforming activity of
MYC is thought to arise through transcriptional regulation of numerous
target genes. Wonsey et al. (2002) showed that PRDX3, which encodes a
mitochondrial protein of the peroxiredoxin gene family, is such a
target. Expression of PRDX3 is induced by MYC and is reduced in c-myc
-/- cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis spanning the entire
PRDX3 genomic sequence revealed that MYC binds preferentially to a
930-bp region surrounding exon 1. Wonsey et al. (2002) showed that PRDX3
is required for MYC-mediated proliferation, transformation, and
apoptosis after glucose withdrawal. Results using mitochondria-specific
fluorescent probes demonstrated that PRDX3 is essential for maintaining
mitochondrial mass and membrane potential in transformed rat and human
cells. These data provided evidence that PRDX3 is a MYC target gene that
is required to maintain normal mitochondrial function.

Chiribau et al. (2008) found that the forkhead box transcription factor
FOXO3A (602681) was required for basal expression of PRX3 in human
cardiac fibroblasts. They identified 2 FOXO regulatory sequences in the
promoter region of PRX3 and showed that binding of FOXO3A to both
regulatory sequences was required for FOXO3A-mediated activation of a
PRX3 reporter plasmid. Chiribau et al. (2008) concluded that FOXO3A
mediates PRX3 expression and suggested that this regulation may play a
critical role in the resistance to oxidative stress in cardiac
fibroblasts.

MAPPING

By FISH, Tsuji et al. (1995) mapped the human AOP1 gene, also known as
PRDX3, to 10q25-q26. They mapped the mouse Aop1 gene to the distal
region of chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Chiribau, C. B.; Cheng, L.; Cucoranu, I. C.; Yu, Y.-S.; Clempus,
R. E.; Sorescu, D.: FOXO3A regulates peroxiredoxin III expression
in human cardiac fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 8211-8217, 2008.

2. Nemoto, Y.; Yamamoto, T.; Takada, S.; Matsui, Y.; Obinata, M.:
Antisense RNA of the latent period gene (MER5) inhibits the differentiation
of murine erythroleukemia cells. Gene 91: 261-265, 1990.

3. Shih, S.-F.; Wu, Y.-H.; Hung, C.-H.; Yang, H.-Y.; Lin, J.-Y.:
Abrin triggers cell death by inactivating a thiol-specific antioxidant
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 21870-21877, 2001.

4. Tsuji, K.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Obinata, M.: Mammalian
antioxidant protein complements alkylhydroperoxide reductase (ahpC)
mutation in Escherichia coli. Biochem. J. 307: 377-381, 1995.

5. Wonsey, D. R.; Zeller, K. I.; Dang, C. V.: The c-Myc target gene
PRDX3 is required for mitochondrial homeostasis and neoplastic transformation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 6649-6654, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/29/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/14/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/13/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/30/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/02/2010
mgross: 2/2/2010
terry: 1/29/2010
cwells: 7/1/2002
cwells: 6/27/2002
terry: 6/14/2002
carol: 5/13/2002
alopez: 8/1/2000
mcapotos: 4/12/2000
psherman: 3/30/2000

601442	TITLE *601442 COFILIN 1; CFL1
;;COFILIN, NONMUSCLE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cofilin is a widely distributed intracellular actin-modulating protein
that binds and depolymerizes filamentous F-actin and inhibits the
polymerization of monomeric G-actin in a pH-dependent manner. It is
involved in the translocation of actin-cofilin complex from cytoplasm to
nucleus (summary by Gillett et al., 1996).

CLONING

Two cofilin isoforms have been identified in mouse: muscle, or M-type
(601443) and nonmuscle, or NM-type (Ono et al., 1994). The mouse M-type
cofilin is expressed in heart, skeletal muscle, and testis, whereas the
NM-type is found in a wide variety of tissues, including heart and
testis. NM-type cofilin expression is minimal in mature mammalian
skeletal muscle. Ogawa et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA encoding a
placentally expressed cofilin. Gillett et al. (1996) cloned CFL1, a
nonmuscle-type cofilin, from a human promyelocytic cDNA library. The
cDNA encodes a 166-amino acid polypeptide with a molecular mass of
approximately 18.5 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Cofilin exhibits actin-depolymerizing activity that is inhibited as a
result of its phosphorylation by LIM kinase (see 601329). Maekawa et al.
(1999) demonstrated that cofilin was phosphorylated during
lysophosphatidic acid-induced, Rho-mediated neurite retraction. This
phosphorylation was sensitive to Y-27632, a specific inhibitor of the
Rho-associated kinase ROCK (601702). ROCK, which is a downstream
effector of Rho, did not phosphorylate cofilin directly but
phosphorylated LIM kinase, which in turn was activated to phosphorylate
cofilin. Maekawa et al. (1999) concluded that phosphorylation of LIM
kinase by ROCK and, consequently, increased phosphorylation of cofilin
by LIM kinase, contribute to Rho-induced reorganization of the actin
cytoskeleton.

Kuhn et al. (2000) reviewed evidence from studies of several avian and
mammalian primary neural cultures and neuronal cell lines that showed a
role for ADF and cofilin in neurite outgrowth.

To study the in vivo biochemical action of cofilin and the subsequent
cellular response, Ghosh et al. (2004) used a general caging method for
proteins that are regulated by phosphorylation. By acute and local
activation of a chemically engineered, light-sensitive phosphocofilin
mimic, they demonstrated that cofilin polymerizes actin, generates
protrusions, and determines the direction of cell migration. Ghosh et
al. (2004) proposed a role for cofilin that is distinct from its role as
an actin-depolymerizing factor.

MAPPING

Gillett et al. (1996) mapped CFL1 to 11q12-q13.3 by analysis of somatic
cell hybrids and to 11q13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Fernandes et al. (1998) used FISH and mouse/hamster somatic cell hybrid
analysis to map the Cfl1 gene to mouse chromosome 19.

Courseaux et al. (1996) used a combination of methods to refine maps of
the approximately 5-Mb region of 11q13 that includes the MEN1 locus
(131100). They proposed the following gene order:
cen--PTA--FTH1--UGB--AHNAK--ROM1--MDU1--CHRM1--COX8--EMK1--FKBP2--PLCB3--[PYGM,
ZFM1]--FAU--CAPN1-- [MLK3, RELA]--FOSL1--SEA--CFL1--tel.

ANIMAL MODEL

Because deletion of n-cofilin results in embryonic lethality in mice,
Bellenchi et al. (2007) used a conditional knockout approach to examine
the role of n-cofilin in brain development. Homozygous mutant pups were
obtained at the expected mendelian frequency, but more than 90% died
within the first 3 postnatal days. The few that survived up to 30 days
showed growth retardation, ataxia, and signs of epileptic seizures.
Gross analysis of mutant brains revealed an overall normal organization,
but the cerebral cortex had a translucent appearance and enlarged
ventricles. Golgi staining of coronal sections showed that cortical
layers II to IV and parts of layer V were missing in mutant brains.
Studies performed on cultured cortical neuronal progenitors revealed
that loss of n-cofilin impaired their radial migration. Neuronal
progenitors in the ventricular zone showed increased cell cycle exit and
exaggerated neuronal differentiation, leading to depletion of the
neuronal progenitor pool.

REFERENCE 1. Bellenchi, G. C.; Gurniak, C. B.; Perlas, E.; Middei, S.; Ammassari-Teule,
M.; Witke, W.: N-cofilin is associated with neuronal migration disorders
and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex. Genes Dev. 21: 2347-2357,
2007.

2. Courseaux, A.; Grosgeorge, J.; Gaudray, P.; Pannett, A. A. J.;
Forbes, S. A.; Williamson, C.; Bassett, D.; Thakker, R. V.; Teh, B.
T.; Farnebo, F.; Shepherd, J.; Skogseid, B.; Larsson, C.; Giraud,
S.; Zhang, C. X.; Salandre, J.; Calender, A.: Definition of the minimal
MEN1 candidate area based on a 5-Mb integrated map of proximal 11q13. Genomics 37:
354-365, 1996.

3. Fernandes, M.; Poirier, C.; Lespinasse, F.; Carle, G. F.: The
mouse homologs of human GIF, DDB1, and CFL1 genes are located on chromosome
19. Mammalian Genome 9: 339-342, 1998.

4. Ghosh, M.; Song, X.; Mouneimne, G.; Sidani, M.; Lawrence, D. S.;
Condeelis, J. S.: Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines
the direction of cell motility. Science 304: 743-746, 2004.

5. Gillett, G. T.; Fox, M. F.; Rowe, P. S. N.; Casimir, C. M.; Povey,
S.: Mapping of human non-muscle type cofilin (CFL1) to chromosome
11q13 and muscle-type cofilin (CFL2) to chromosome 14. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 60: 201-211, 1996.

6. Kuhn, T. B.; Meberg, P. J.; Brown, M. D.; Bernstein, B. W.; Minamide,
L. S.; Jensen, J. R.; Okada, K.; Soda, E. A.; Bamburg, J. R.: Regulating
actin dynamics in neuronal growth cones by ADF/cofilin and Rho family
GTPases. J. Neurobiol. 44: 126-144, 2000.

7. Maekawa, M.; Ishizaki, T.; Boku, S.; Watanabe, N.; Fujita, A.;
Iwamatsu, A.; Obinata, T.; Ohashi, K.; Mizuno, K.; Narumiya, S.:
Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases
ROCK and LIM-kinase. Science 285: 895-898, 1999.

8. Ogawa, K.; Tashima, M.; Yumoto, Y.; Okuda, T.; Sawada, H.; Okuma,
M.; Maruyama, Y.: Coding sequence of human placenta cofilin cDNA. Nucleic
Acids Res. 18: 7169 only, 1990.

9. Ono, S.; Minami, N.; Abe, H.; Obinata, T.: Characterization of
a novel cofilin isoform that is predominantly expressed in mammalian
skeletal muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15280-15286, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/16/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/10/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 12/2/1996

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 9/23/1996

EDITED carol: 04/22/2011
terry: 4/20/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
wwang: 4/30/2008
terry: 4/25/2008
mgross: 10/17/2007
terry: 10/16/2007
alopez: 5/7/2004
terry: 5/7/2004
mgross: 10/22/2003
alopez: 8/5/1999
carol: 9/3/1998
terry: 8/5/1997
terry: 7/29/1997
alopez: 6/27/1997
mark: 4/10/1997
joanna: 4/9/1997
joanna: 12/2/1996
mark: 9/23/1996

606549	TITLE *606549 MEMBRANE-SPANNING 4-DOMAINS, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 8B; MS4A8B
DESCRIPTION MS4A family proteins share structural similarity, amino acid sequence
homology, and chromosomal location. They contain 4 highly conserved
transmembrane domains, flanked by N- and C-terminal cytoplasmic regions.

CLONING

By database searching for homologs of CD20 (MS4A1; 112210), Liang and
Tedder (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding MS4A8B. The predicted 250-amino
acid protein is 63% identical to its mouse homolog. PCR analysis
detected weak expression of MS4A8B in cDNA from 3 B-cell lines.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liang and Tedder (2001) mapped the MS4A8B
gene to chromosome 11q12-q13, in the same region as MS4A2 (147138) and
MS4A3 (606498).

REFERENCE 1. Liang, Y.; Tedder, T. F.: Identification of a CD20-, Fc-epsilon-RI-beta-related
gene family: sixteen new MS4A family members expressed in human and
mouse. Genomics 72: 119-127, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/11/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/11/2001

116952	TITLE *116952 CELL DIVISION CYCLE 42; CDC42
;;GTP-BINDING PROTEIN, 25-KD; G25K
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CDC42 is a Ras (see 190020)-related GTP-binding protein. It is
implicated in a variety of biologic activities, including establishment
of cell polarity in yeast, regulation of cell morphology, motility, and
cell cycle progression in mammalian cells, and induction of malignant
transformation (summary by Wu et al., 2000).

CLONING

Shinjo et al. (1990) isolated cDNA clones that code for cdc42, a low
molecular weight GTP-binding protein originally designated G(p) and also
called G25K, from a human placenta library. The predicted amino acid
sequence of the protein was very similar to those of various members of
the RAS superfamily of low molecular weight GTP-binding proteins,
including NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, and the RHO proteins. The highest degree of
sequence identity (80%) was found with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell
division cycle protein CDC42. The human placental gene complemented a
cdc42 mutation in S. cerevisiae. Munemitsu et al. (1990) presented
further evidence that G25K is the human homolog of the CDC42 gene
product.

Marks and Kwiatkowski (1996) identified 2 isoforms of mouse Cdc42. They
demonstrated that the 2 murine isoforms arise from a single gene by
alternative splicing. Although one is expressed in a wide variety of
tissues, the second isoform appeared to be expressed exclusively in
brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Erickson et al. (1996) used cell fractionation and immunofluorescence to
show that cdc42 is localized to the Golgi apparatus of mammalian cells.
It colocalizes with the nonclathrin coat proteins ARF3 (103190) and COPB
(600959) and its Golgi localization is disrupted by the drug brefeldin
A. Based on their findings, Erickson et al. (1996) suggested that cdc42
may be involved in the delivery of newly synthesized proteins and lipids
to the plasma membrane and that the GTP-binding/GTPase cycle may dictate
its subcellular localization.

By screening rat brain cytosol for proteins that interacted with
Ras-related GTPases, or p21 proteins, of the Rho (RHOA; 165390)
subfamily, Manser et al. (1994) identified 3 proteins, designated PAKs
(see PAK1; 602590) that interacted with the GTP-bound forms of human
CDC42 and RAC1 (602048), but not RHOA. Brown et al. (1996) found that
activity of human PAK1 was induced by coexpression with RAC1 or CDC42.

Zheng et al. (1996) reported that the FGD1 protein (305400) acts as a
cdc42-specific GDP-GTP exchange factor. Cells expressing a fragment of
the FGD1 protein encompassing the pleckstrin and Dbl homology domains
activated 2 elements downstream of cdc42, namely, Jun kinase (165160)
and p70 S6 kinase.

Manser et al. (1993) identified ACK1 (606994) as a binding partner and
inhibitor of the GTP-bound form of CDC42. Interaction between GTP-CDC42
and ACK1 inhibited both the intrinsic and GAP-stimulated GTPase activity
of CDC42.

CDC42 can regulate the actin cytoskeleton through activation of WASP
family members (see 301000). Activation relieves an autoinhibitory
contact between the GTPase-binding domain and the C-terminal region of
WASP proteins. Kim et al. (2000) reported the autoinhibited structure of
the GTPase-binding domain of WASP, which can be induced by the
C-terminal region or by organic cosolvents. In the autoinhibited
complex, intramolecular interactions with the GTPase-binding domain
occlude residues of the C terminus that regulate the Arp2/3
actin-nucleating complex (see 604221). Binding of CDC42 to the
GTPase-binding domain causes a dramatic conformational change, resulting
in disruption of the hydrophobic core and release of the C terminus,
enabling its interaction with the actin regulatory machinery.

Wu et al. (2000) identified a CDC42 mutant, Cdc42F28L, that binds GTP in
the absence of a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, but still
hydrolyzes GTP with a turnover number identical to that for wildtype
CDC42. Expression of this mutant in fibroblasts causes cellular
transformation, mimicking many of the characteristics of cells
transformed by the DBL oncoprotein (311030), a known guanine nucleotide
exchange factor for CDC42. Wu et al. (2000) searched for new CDC42
targets in an effort to understand how CDC42 mediates cellular
transformation. They identified the gamma-subunit of the coatomer
complex (gamma-COP; 604355) as a specific binding partner for activated
CDC42. The binding of CDC42 to gamma-COP is essential for a transforming
signal distinct from those elicited by Ras.

Dendritic cells (DCs) developmentally regulate antigen uptake by
controlling their endocytic capacity. Immature DCs actively internalize
antigen. Mature DCs, however, are poorly endocytic, functioning instead
to present antigens to T cells. Garrett et al. (2000) found that
endocytic downregulation reflects a decrease in endocytic activity
controlled by RHO family GTPases, especially CDC42. Blocking CDC42
function by toxin B treatment or injection of dominant-negative
inhibitors of CDC42 abrogated endocytosis in immature DCs. In mature
DCs, injection of constitutively active CDC42 or microbial delivery of a
CDC42 nucleotide exchange factor reactivated endocytosis. DCs regulated
endogenous levels of CDC42-GTP with activated CDC42 detectable only in
immature cells. Garrett et al. (2000) concluded that DCs developmentally
regulate endocytosis at least in part by controlling levels of activated
CDC42.

Using Mardin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells expressing Cdc42 mutants
defective in nucleotide binding or hydrolysis, Musch et al. (2001)
showed that Cdc42 differentially regulated the exit of apical and
basolateral proteins from the trans-Golgi network (TGN).
GTPase-deficient Cdc42 accelerated the exit of an apical marker from the
TGN and inhibited the release of basolateral proteins. Basolateral
protein transport by Cdc42 with an activating mutation was accompanied
by changes in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton.

Sin et al. (2002) used in vivo time-lapse imaging of optic tectal cells
in Xenopus laevis tadpoles to demonstrate that enhanced visual activity
driven by a light stimulus promotes dendritic arbor growth. The
stimulus-induced dendritic arbor growth requires glutamate receptor (see
138249)-mediated synaptic transmission, decreased RhoA (165390)
activity, and increased RAC and CDC42 activity. Sin et al. (2002)
concluded that their results delineated a role for Rho GTPases in the
structural plasticity driven by visual stimulation in vivo.

Morphologic changes in dendritic spines are believed to be caused by
dynamic regulation of actin polymerization. Irie and Yamaguchi (2002)
found that the EphB2 receptor tyrosine kinase (600997) physically
associates with the guanine nucleotide exchange factor intersectin-1
(602442) in cooperation with the actin-regulating protein N-WASP
(605056), which in turn activates Cdc42 and spine morphogenesis.

In higher eukaryotes, the small GTPase CDC42, acting through a
PAR6-atypical protein kinase C (see PKC-zeta, 176982) complex, is
required to establish cellular asymmetry during epithelial
morphogenesis, asymmetric cell division, and directed cell migration.
Etienne-Manneville and Hall (2003) used primary rat astrocytes in a cell
migration assay to demonstrate that PAR6-PKC-zeta interacts directly
with and regulates glycogen synthase kinase-3-beta (GSK3-beta; 605004)
to promote polarization of the centrosome and to control the direction
of cell protrusion. CDC42-dependent phosphorylation of GSK3-beta occurs
specifically at the leading edge of migrating cells, and induces the
interaction of APC (611731) protein with the plus ends of microtubules.
The association of APC with microtubules is essential for cell
polarization. Etienne-Manneville and Hall (2003) concluded that CDC42
regulates cell polarity through the spatial regulation of GSK3-beta and
APC.

Wu et al. (2003) presented evidence that activation of CDC42 protects
EGF receptor (EGFR; 131550) from the negative regulatory activity of CBL
(165360), a ubiquitin ligase.

Yasuda et al. (2004) demonstrated that Cdc42 and mDia3 (DIAPH2; 300108)
regulate microtubule attachment to kinetochores.

Nalbant et al. (2004) reported the development of a biosensor capable of
visualizing the changing activation of endogenous unlabeled Cdc42 in
living cells. With the use of a dye that reports protein interactions,
the biosensor revealed localized activation in the trans-Golgi
apparatus, microtubule-dependent Cdc42 activation at the cell periphery,
and activation kinetics precisely coordinated with cell extension and
retraction.

By electroporating genes into chicken presomitic mesenchymal cells,
Nakaya et al. (2004) demonstrated that Cdc42 and Rac1 play different
roles in mesenchymal-epithelial transition. Different levels of Cdc42
appeared to affect the binary decision between epithelial and
mesenchymal states. Proper levels of Rac1 were also necessary for
somitic epithelialization, since cells with either activated or
inhibited Rac1 failed to undergo correct epithelialization.

Using functional and proteomic screens to identify regulators of Cdc42,
Wells et al. (2006) identified a network of proteins that centered on
Rich1 (ARHGAP17; 608293) and organized apical polarity in canine kidney
epithelial cells. Rich1 bound the coiled-coil domain of Amot (300410)
and was thereby targeted to a complex at tight junctions containing the
PDZ domain-containing proteins Pals1 (MPP5; 606958), Patj (INADL;
603199), and Par3 (PARD3; 606745). Regulation of Cdc42 by Rich1 was
required for maintenance of tight junctions. The coiled-coil domain of
Amot was required for its localization to apical membranes and for Amot
to relocalize Pals1 and Par3 to internal puncta. Wells et al. (2006)
proposed that RICH1 and AMOT maintain tight junction integrity by
coordinated regulation of CDC42 and by linking specific components of
the tight junction to intracellular protein trafficking.

Formation of the apical surface and lumen is a fundamental step in
epithelial organ development. Martin-Belmonte et al. (2007) showed that
Pten (601728) localized to the apical plasma membrane during epithelial
morphogenesis to mediate enrichment of phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) at this domain during cyst development
in a 3-dimensional Madin-Darby canine kidney cell system. Ectopic
PtdIns(4,5)P2 at the basolateral surface caused apical proteins to
relocalize to the basolateral surface. Annexin-2 (ANX2; 151740) bound
PtdIns(4,5)P2 and was recruited to the apical surface. Anx2 bound Cdc42
and recruited it to the apical surface, and Cdc42 in turn recruited the
Par6 (607484)/atypical protein kinase C (aPKC; see 176982) complex to
the apical surface. Loss of function of Pten, Anx2, Cdc42, or aPKC
prevented normal development of the apical surface and lumen.
Martin-Belmonte et al. (2007) concluded that PTEN, PtdIns(4,5)P2, ANX2,
CDC42, and aPKC control apical plasma membrane and lumen formation.

Hamann et al. (2007) found that both ASEF1 and ASEF2 were guanine
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for CDC42, but not for RAC1 or RHOA.
ASEF2 required the lipid-modified form of CDC42. Using deletion mutants,
Hamann et al. (2007) showed that the tandem N-terminal ABR and SH3
domain (ABRSH3) of the ASEF proteins was required to bind the armadillo
repeat region of APC. ABRSH3 also functioned in an autoinhibitory
reaction by binding the C-terminal tails of ASEF1 and ASEF2 and
inhibiting their GEF activities. Deletion of ABRSH3 or coexpression of
the APC armadillo repeat sequence with full-length ASEF2 stimulated
filopodia formation in transfected HeLa cells. Hamann et al. (2007)
concluded that activation of ASEF1 and ASEF2 involves binding of APC to
ABRSH3, which disrupts the autoinhibitory interaction of ABRSH3 with the
ASEF C-terminal tail and allows GDP/GTP exchange on CDC42.

Kawasaki et al. (2007) found that ASEF2 was a GEF for both CDC42 and
RAC1 in MDCK and HeLa cells. Overexpression of ASEF2 increased membrane
ruffling and CDC42-mediated filopodia formation in HeLa cells.

Shen et al. (2008) showed that Nudel (NDEL1; 607538) colocalized with
Cdc42gap (ARHGAP1; 602732) at the leading edge of migrating NIH3T3 mouse
fibroblasts. This localization of Nudel required its phosphorylation by
Erk1 (MAPK3; 601795)/Erk2 (MAPK1; 176948). Shen et al. (2008) found that
Nudel competed with Cdc42 for binding Cdc42gap. Consequently, Nudel
inhibited Cdc42gap-mediated inactivation of Cdc42 in a dose-dependent
manner. Depletion of Nudel by RNA interference or overexpression of a
nonphosphorylatable Nudel mutant abolished Cdc42 activation and cell
migration. Shen et al. (2008) concluded that NUDEL facilitates cell
migration by sequestering CDC42GAP at the leading edge to stabilize
active CDC42 in response to extracellular stimuli.

Kang et al. (2008) performed a global characterization of rat neural
palmitoyl proteomes and identified most of the known neural palmitoyl
proteins, 68 in total, plus more than 200 novel palmitoyl protein
candidates, with further testing confirming palmitoylation for 21 of
these candidates. The novel palmitoyl proteins included neurotransmitter
receptors, transporters, adhesion molecules, scaffolding proteins, as
well as SNAREs and other vesicular trafficking proteins. Of particular
interest was the finding of palmitoylation for a brain-specific Cdc42
splice variant. The palmitoylated Cdc42 isoform (Cdc42-palm) differs
from the canonical, prenylated form (Cdc42-prenyl), with regard to both
localization and function: Cdc42-palm concentrates in dendritic spines
and has a special role in inducing these postsynaptic structures.
Furthermore, assessing palmitoylation dynamics in drug-induced activity
models identified rapidly induced changes for Cdc42 as well as for other
synaptic palmitoyl proteins, suggesting that palmitoylation may
participate broadly in the activity-driven changes that shape synapse
morphology and brain function.

Machacek et al. (2009) examined GTPase coordination in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts both through simultaneous visualization of 2 GTPase
biosensors and using a 'computational multiplexing' approach capable of
defining the relationships between multiple protein activities
visualized in separate experiments. They found that RhoA (165390) is
activated at the cell edge synchronous with edge advancement, whereas
Cdc42 and Rac1 are activated 2 microns behind the edge with a delay of
40 seconds. This indicates that Rac1 and RhoA operate antagonistically
through spatial separation and precise timing, and that RhoA has a role
in the initial events of protrusion, whereas Rac1 and Cdc42 activate
pathways implicated in reinforcement and stabilization of newly expanded
protrusions.

Frank et al. (2009) found that Cdc42 was involved in a signaling complex
that modulated presynaptic Cav2.1 (CACNA1A; 601011) calcium channels in
the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. This signaling system involved
the Rho-type GEF ephexin (NGEF; 605991), which appeared to act with
Cdc42 to activate the Eph receptor (see EPHA1; 179610) for modulation of
Cav2.1 channel activity.

Murakoshi et al. (2011) used 2-photon fluorescence lifetime imaging
microscopy to monitor the activity of 2 Rho GTPases, RhoA and Cdc42, in
single dendritic spines undergoing structural plasticity associated with
long-term potentiation in CA1 pyramidal neurons in cultured slices of
rat hippocampus. When long-term volume increase was induced in a single
spine using 2-photon glutamate uncaging, RhoA and Cdc42 were rapidly
activated in the stimulated spine. These activities decayed over about 5
minutes, and were then followed by a phase of persistent activation
lasting more than half an hour. Although active RhoA and Cdc42 were
similarly mobile, their activity patterns were different. RhoA
activation diffused out of the stimulated spine and spread over about 5
microns along the dendrite. In contrast, Cdc42 activation was restricted
to the stimulated spine, and exhibited a steep gradient at the spine
necks. Inhibition of the Rho-Rock pathway preferentially inhibited the
initial spine growth, whereas the inhibition of the Cdc42-Pak pathway
blocked the maintenance of sustained structural plasticity. RhoA and
Cdc42 activation depended on calcium ion/calmodulin-dependent kinase
(CaMKII). Thus, Murakoshi et al. (2011) concluded that RhoA and Cdc42
relay transient CaMKII activation to synapse-specific, long-term
signaling required for spine structural plasticity.

Using synthetic derivatives of the enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor Map, Orchard et al. (2012) found that
CDC42 GTPase signal transduction was controlled by interaction between
Map and the PDZ domains of EBP50 (SLC9A3R1; 604990) and the induction of
clusters of actin-rich membrane protrusions.

Keestra et al. (2013) demonstrated that NOD1 (605980) senses cytosolic
microbial products by monitoring the activation state of small Rho
GTPases. Activation of RAC1 (602048) and CDC42 by bacterial delivery or
ectopic expression of SopE, a virulence factor of the enteric pathogen
Salmonella, triggered the NOD1 signaling pathway with consequent RIP2
(603455)-mediated induction of NF-kappa-B (see 164011)-dependent
inflammatory responses. Similarly, activation of the NOD1 signaling
pathway by peptidoglycan required RAC1 activity. Furthermore, Keestra et
al. (2013) showed that constitutively active forms of RAC1, CDC42, and
RHOA (165390) activated the NOD1 signaling pathway.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nicole et al. (1999) determined the organization of the CDC42 gene and
found that the gene encodes the placental and brain isoforms generated
by alternative splicing.

Moats-Staats and Stiles (1995) showed that the 5-prime end of another
gene, called BB1 by them (601106), overlaps the 3-prime end of G25K.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Through a structural analysis of DOCK9 (607325)-CDC42 complexes, Yang et
al. (2009) identified a nucleotide sensor within the alpha-10 helix of
the DHR2 domain that contributes to release of guanine diphosphate (GDP)
and then to discharge of the activated GTP-bound Cdc42. Magnesium
exclusion, a critical factor in promoting GDP release, is mediated by a
conserved valine residue within this sensor, whereas binding of
GTP-magnesium ion to the nucleotide-free complex results in
magnesium-inducing displacement of the sensor to stimulate discharge of
Cdc42-GTP. Yang et al. (2009) concluded that their studies identified an
unusual mechanism of GDP release and defined the complete guanine
nucleotide exchange factor catalytic cycle from GDP dissociation
followed by GTP binding and discharge of the activated GTPase.

MAPPING

Using SSCP analysis of a mouse backcross panel, Marks and Kwiatkowski
(1996) demonstrated that the gene encoding cdc42 is localized to the
distal portion of mouse chromosome 4 between Ephb2 proximally and Cappb
(601572) distally. The human homologs of both of the 2 flanking genes
were mapped to human chromosome 1p36.1 by Barron-Casella et al. (1995),
thus indicating that this is the likely site of the human CDC42 gene.
The CDC42 gene was mapped to the 1p36-p35 region by radiation hybrid
analysis (Schuler et al., 1996; Jensen et al., 1997; Deloukas et al.,
1998).

Nicole et al. (1999) demonstrated a CDC42-like transcript on chromosome
4 that does not contain introns and is similar to the placental isoform,
suggesting that it is a processed pseudogene.

Nicole et al. (1999) excluded the CDC42 gene as the site of mutation in
the Schwartz-Jampel syndrome type 1 (255800).

ANIMAL MODEL

Wu et al. (2006) stated that constitutive knockout of Cdc42 in mice
results in death around implantation. In order to examine the role of
Cdc42 in the differentiation of skin stem cells into hair follicles,
they targeted Cdc42 deletion to keratinocytes. Mutant mice were born
without obvious defects but showed impaired hair formation and growth
retardation. Within 4 weeks, all hairs were lost and did not grow again
in older animals. In the absence of Cdc42, degradation of beta-catenin
(CTNNB1; 116806) increased corresponding to decreased phosphorylation of
Gsk3-beta and increased phosphorylation of axin (603816), which is
required for binding of beta-catenin to the degradation machinery. Wu et
al. (2006) concluded that Cdc42 regulation of beta-catenin turnover is
required for terminal differentiation of hair follicle progenitor cells.

By targeted deletion of Cdc42 in telencephalic neural progenitors in
mouse embryos, Chen et al. (2006) found that Cdc42 was essential for
establishment of apical-basal polarity of the telencephalic
neuroepithelium, a necessity for expansion and bifurcation of cerebral
hemispheres.

REFERENCE 1. Barron-Casella, E. A.; Torres, M. A.; Scherer, S. W.; Heng, H.
H.; Tsui, L. C.; Casella, J. F.: Sequence analysis and chromosomal
localization of human Cap Z: conserved residues within the actin-binding
domain may link Cap Z to gelsolin/severin and profilin protein families. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 21472-21479, 1995.

2. Brown, J. L.; Stowers, L.; Baer, M.; Trejo, J.; Coughlin, S.; Chant,
J.: Human Ste20 homologue hPAK1 links GTPases to the JNK MAP kinase
pathway. Curr. Biol. 6: 598-605, 1996.

3. Chen, L.; Liao, G.; Yang, L.; Campbell, K.; Nakafuku, M.; Kuan,
C.-Y.; Zheng, Y.: Cdc42 deficiency causes Sonic hedgehog-independent
holoprosencephaly. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 16520-16525, 2006.

4. Deloukas, P.; Schuler, G. D.; Gyapay, G.; Beasley, E. M.; Soderlund,
C.; Rodriguez-Tome, P.; Hui, L.; Matise, T. C.; McKusick, K. B.; Beckmann,
J. S.; Bentolila, S.; Bihoreau, M.-T.; and 53 others: A physical
map of 30,000 human genes. Science 282: 744-746, 1998.

5. Erickson, J. W.; Zhang, C.; Kahn, R. A.; Evans, T.; Cerione, R.
A.: Mammalian cdc42 is a brefeldin A-sensitive component of the Golgi
apparatus. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 26850-26854, 1996.

6. Etienne-Manneville, S.; Hall, A.: Cdc42 regulates GSK-3-beta and
adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity. Nature 421:
753-756, 2003.

7. Frank, C. A.; Pielage, J.; Davis, G. W.: A presynaptic homeostatic
signaling system composed of the Eph receptor, Ephexin, Cdc42, and
Cav2.1 calcium channels. Neuron 61: 556-569, 2009.

8. Garrett, W. S.; Chen, L.-M.; Kroschewski, R.; Ebersold, M.; Turley,
S.; Trombetta, S.; Galan, J. E.; Mellman, I.: Developmental control
of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42. Cell 102: 325-334, 2000.

9. Hamann, M. J.; Lubking, C. M.; Luchini, D. N.; Billadeau, D. D.
: Asef2 functions as a Cdc42 exchange factor and is stimulated by
the release of an autoinhibitory module from a concealed C-terminal
activation element. Molec. Cell. Biol. 27: 1380-1393, 2007.

10. Irie, F.; Yamaguchi, Y.: EphB receptors regulate dendritic spine
development via intersectin, Cdc42 and N-WASP. Nature Neurosci. 5:
1117-1118, 2002.

11. Jensen, S. J.; Sulman, E. P.; Maris, J. M.; Matise, T. C.; Vojta,
P. J.; Barrett, J. C.; Brodeur, G. M.; White, P. S.: An integrated
transcript map of human chromosome 1p35-p36. Genomics 42: 126-136,
1997.

12. Kang, R.; Wan, J.; Arstikaitis, P.; Takahashi, H.; Huang, K.;
Bailey, A. O.; Thompson, J. X.; Roth, A. F.; Drisdel, R. C.; Mastro,
R.; Green, W. N.; Yates, J. R., III; Davis, N. G.; El-Husseini, A.
: Neural palmitoyl-proteomics reveals dynamic synaptic palmitoylation. Nature 456:
904-909, 2008.

13. Kawasaki, Y.; Sagara, M.; Shibata, Y.; Shirouzu, M.; Yokoyama,
S.; Akiyama, T.: Identification and characterization of Asef2, a
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor specific for Rac1 and Cdc42. Oncogene 26:
7620-7627, 2007.

14. Keestra, A. M.; Winter, M. G.; Auburger, J. J.; Frassle, S. P.;
Xavier, M. N.; Winter, S. E.; Kim, A.; Poon, V.; Ravesloot, M. M.;
Waldenmaier, J. F. T.; Tsolis, R. M.; Eigenheer, R. A.; Baumler, A.
J.: Manipulation of small Rho GTPases is a pathogen-induced process
detected by NOD1. Nature 496: 233-237, 2013.

15. Kim, A. S.; Kakalis, L. T.; Abdul-Manan, N.; Liu, G. A.; Rosen,
M. K.: Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome protein. Nature 404: 151-158, 2000.

16. Machacek, M.; Hodgson, L.; Welch, C.; Elliott, H.; Pertz, O.;
Nalbant, P.; Abell, A.; Johnson, G. L.; Hahn, K. M.; Danuser, G.:
Coordination of Rho GTPase activities during cell protrusion. Nature 461:
99-103, 2009.

17. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Tan, L.; Lim, L.: A non-receptor
tyrosine kinase that inhibits the GTPase activity of p21cdc42. Nature 363:
364-367, 1993.

18. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Zhao, Z.; Lim, L.: A brain
serine/threonine protein kinase activated by Cdc42 and Rac1. Nature 367:
40-46, 1994.

19. Marks, P. W.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: Genomic organization and chromosomal
location of murine Cdc42. Genomics 38: 13-18, 1996.

20. Martin-Belmonte, F.; Gassama, A.; Datta, A.; Yu, W.; Rescher,
U.; Gerke, V.; Mostov, K.: PTEN-mediated apical segregation of phosphoinositides
controls epithelial morphogenesis through Cdc42. Cell 128: 383-397,
2007.

21. Moats-Staats, B. M.; Stiles, A. D.: Southern hybridization analyses
of somatic cell hybrids reveal that human BB1 is a member of a multigene
family dispersed throughout the human genome and appears to be linked
to the human G25K genes. DNA Cell Biol. 14: 465-474, 1995.

22. Munemitsu, S.; Innis, M. A.; Clark, R.; McCormick, F.; Ullrich,
A.; Polakis, P.: Molecular cloning and expression of a G25K cDNA,
the human homolog of the yeast cell cycle gene CDC42. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 10: 5977-5982, 1990.

23. Murakoshi, H.; Wang, H.; Yasuda, R.: Local, persistent activation
of Rho GTPases during plasticity of single dendritic spines. Nature 472:
100-104, 2011.

24. Musch, A.; Cohen, D.; Kreitzer, G.; Rodriguez-Boulan, E.: cdc42
regulates the exit of apical and basolateral proteins from the trans-Golgi
network. EMBO J. 20: 2171-2179, 2001.

25. Nakaya, Y.; Kuroda, S.; Katagiri, Y. T.; Kaibuchi, K.; Takahashi,
Y.: Mesenchymal-epithelial transition during somitic segmentation
is regulated by differential roles of Cdc42 and Rac1. Dev. Cell 7:
425-438, 2004.

26. Nalbant, P.; Hodgson, L.; Kraynov, V.; Toutchkine, A.; Hahn, K.
M.: Activation of endogenous Cdc42 visualized in living cells. Science 305:
1615-1619, 2004.

27. Nicole, S.; White, P. S.; Topaloglu, H.; Beigthon, P.; Salih,
M.; Hentati, F.; Fontaine, B.: The human CDC42 gene: genomic organization,
evidence for the existence of a putative pseudogene and exclusion
as a SJS1 candidate gene. Hum. Genet. 105: 98-103, 1999.

28. Orchard, R. C.; Kittisopikul, M.; Altschuler, S. J.; Wu, L. F.;
Suel, G. M.; Alto, N. M.: Identification of F-actin as the dynamic
hub in a microbial-induced GTPase polarity circuit. Cell 148: 803-815,
2012.

29. Schuler, G. D.; Boguski, M. S.; Stewart, E. A.; Stein, L. D.;
Gyapay, G.; Rice, K.; White, R. E.; Rodriguez-Tome, P.; Aggarwal,
A.; Bajorek, E.; Bentolila, S.; Birren, B. B.; and 92 others: A
gene map of the human genome. Science 274: 540-546, 1996.

30. Shen, Y.; Li, N.; Wu, S.; Zhou, Y.; Shan, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Ding,
C.; Yuan, Q.; Zhao, F.; Zeng, R.; Zhu, X.: Nudel binds Cdc42GAP to
modulate Cdc42 activity at the leading edge of migrating cells. Dev.
Cell 14: 342-353, 2008.

31. Shinjo, K.; Koland, J. G.; Hart, M. J.; Narasimhan, V.; Johnson,
D. I.; Evans, T.; Cerione, R. A.: Molecular cloning of the gene for
the human placental GTP-binding protein G(p) (G25K): identification
of this GTP-binding protein as the human homolog of the yeast cell-division-cycle
protein CDC42. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9853-9857, 1990.

32. Sin, W. C.; Haas, K.; Ruthazer, E. S.; Cline, H. T.: Dendrite
growth increased by visual activity requires NMDA receptor and Rho
GTPases. Nature 419: 475-480, 2002.

33. Wells, C. D.; Fawcett, J. P.; Traweger, A.; Yamanaka, Y.; Goudreault,
M.; Elder, K.; Kulkarni, S.; Gish, G.; Virag, C.; Lim, C.; Colwill,
K.; Starostine, A.; Metalnikov, P.; Pawson, T.: A Rich1/Amot complex
regulates the Cdc42 GTPase and apical-polarity proteins in epithelial
cells. Cell 125: 535-548, 2006.

34. Wu, W. J.; Erickson, J. W.; Lin, R.; Cerione, R. A.: The gamma-subunit
of the coatomer complex binds Cdc42 to mediate transformation. Nature 405:
800-804, 2000.

35. Wu, W. J.; Tu, S.; Cerione, R. A.: Activated Cdc42 sequesters
c-Cbl and prevents EGF receptor degradation. Cell 114: 715-725,
2003.

36. Wu, X.; Quondamatteo, F.; Lefever, T.; Czuchra, A.; Meyer, H.;
Chrostek, A.; Paus, R.; Langbein, L.; Brakebusch, C.: Cdc42 controls
progenitor cell differentiation and beta-catenin turnover in skin. Genes
Dev. 20: 571-585, 2006.

37. Yang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Roe, S. M.; Marshall, C. J.; Barford, D.
: Activation of Rho GTPases by DOCK exchange factors is mediated by
a nucleotide sensor. Science 325: 1398-1402, 2009.

38. Yasuda, S.; Oceguera-Yanez, F.; Kato, T.; Okamoto, M.; Yonemura,
S.; Terada, Y.; Ishizaki, T.; Narumiya, S.: Cdc42 and mDia3 regulate
microtubule attachment to kinetochores. Nature 428: 767-771, 2004.

39. Zheng, Y.; Fischer, D. J.; Santos, M. F.; Tigyi, G.; Pasteris,
N. G.; Gorski, J. L.; Xu, Y.: The faciogenital dysplasia gene product
FGD1 functions as a Cdc42Hs-specific guanine-nucleotide exchange factor. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 33169-33172, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/06/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/11/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/13/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/19/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/28/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/7/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/20/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/1999
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 4/8/1998
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 5/28/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 3/6/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/17/1991

EDITED alopez: 05/06/2013
mgross: 11/20/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
mgross: 5/10/2011
alopez: 5/10/2011
terry: 5/9/2011
mgross: 1/24/2011
terry: 1/6/2011
wwang: 5/17/2010
mgross: 5/11/2010
alopez: 1/11/2010
terry: 1/8/2010
alopez: 10/22/2009
terry: 10/13/2009
carol: 7/7/2009
alopez: 2/20/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
mgross: 4/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
mgross: 10/4/2007
terry: 8/30/2007
mgross: 1/19/2007
mgross: 6/7/2006
terry: 5/3/2006
wwang: 4/3/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
mgross: 10/7/2004
alopez: 10/4/2004
tkritzer: 9/28/2004
alopez: 4/19/2004
terry: 4/16/2004
cwells: 11/10/2003
tkritzer: 3/14/2003
ckniffin: 3/5/2003
alopez: 3/3/2003
alopez: 1/29/2003
terry: 1/29/2003
alopez: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
carol: 6/5/2002
terry: 11/15/2001
mgross: 9/7/2000
alopez: 7/20/2000
alopez: 3/10/2000
mcapotos: 12/7/1999
psherman: 11/3/1999
psherman: 10/18/1999
jlewis: 9/3/1999
terry: 8/23/1999
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
psherman: 3/18/1999
psherman: 4/21/1998
dholmes: 4/8/1998
alopez: 8/1/1997
alopez: 7/23/1997
mark: 12/16/1996
terry: 12/10/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/6/1996
carol: 4/1/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992
carol: 3/4/1991
carol: 1/17/1991

300550	TITLE *300550 PHOSPHATE-REGULATING ENDOPEPTIDASE HOMOLOG, X-LINKED; PHEX
;;PEX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The HYP Consortium (1995), comprising 29 investigators in 5
institutions, isolated a candidate gene for X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets (307800) from the Xp22.1 region by positional cloning. The gene
exhibited homology to a family of endopeptidase genes, members of which
are involved in the degradation or activation of a variety of peptide
hormones, including neutral endopeptidase (NEP; 120520),
endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE1; 600423), and Kell blood group
antigen (613883). Because of the homology and the function of the gene,
the authors referred to it as PEX ('phosphate regulating gene with
homologies to endopeptidases, on the X chromosome'). A partial PHEX
sequence corresponding to 638 amino acids was presented. The PHEX cDNA
was found to be evolutionarily conserved in primate, bovine, mouse, and
hamster DNA, and possibly in chicken DNA.

Guo and Quarles (1997) isolated a human PHEX cDNA from a bone cDNA
library. The deduced 749-amino acid protein has a molecular mass of 86.5
kD and shares 96% identity to the mouse sequence. The PHEX protein is
predicted to have a 20-residue N-terminal cytoplasmic tail, a 27-residue
transmembrane domain, and a 702-residue extracellular C-terminal region.
The protein belongs to the type II integral membrane zinc-dependent
endopeptidase family. PHEX transcripts were identified in human
osteosarcoma-derived cells and in differentiated mouse osteoblasts, but
not in immature mouse preosteoblasts, indicating stage-specific
expression. Guo and Quarles (1997) suggested that PHEX may play a role
in osteoblast-mediated bone mineralization.

Grieff et al. (1997) isolated human PHEX clones from an ovary cDNA
library. The gene encodes a 749-amino acid polypeptide that is 96%
identical to the murine Phex gene product and has significant homology
to other members of the membrane-bound zinc metallopeptidase family.
Northern blot analysis identified a 6.6-kb PHEX mRNA transcript at high
levels in adult ovary and fetal lung and at lower levels in adult lung
and fetal liver.

Du et al. (1996) reported the isolation and characterization of the
complete open reading frame of the mouse Phex gene. The deduced
749-amino acid protein showed 95% identity to the available human PHEX
sequence and significant homology to members of the membrane-bound
metalloendopeptidase family. Northern blot analysis revealed a 6.6-kb
mRNA transcript in bone and in cultured osteoblasts from normal mice;
the transcript was not detectable in samples from the mutant 'Hyp' mouse
but were detectable in Hyp bone by RT-PCR amplification. Beck et al.
(1997) cloned mouse Phex and human PHEX cDNAs encoding part of the
5-prime untranslated region, the protein coding region, and the entire
3-prime untranslated region. Using RT-PCR and ribonuclease protection
assays, they found that Phex/PHEX mRNA is expressed predominantly in
human fetal and in adult mouse calvaria and long bone.

GENE STRUCTURE

Holm et al. (1997) determined that the PHEX gene contains 18 exons. Its
genomic organization shares similarity with members of the family of
neutral endopeptidases.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 unrelated patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (307800),
the HYP Consortium (1995) identified 3 different mutations in the PHEX
gene (300550.0001-300550.0003).

Holm et al. (1997) identified mutations in the PHEX gene in 9 of 22
unrelated patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: 3 nonsense
mutations, a 1-bp deletion leading to a frameshift, a donor-splice site
mutation, and missense mutations in 4 patients (see, e.g.,
300550.0004-300550.0006).

Dixon et al. (1998) identified a total of 31 mutations in the PHEX gene
in 46 unrelated XLH kindreds and 22 unrelated patients with nonfamilial
XLH. Thirty of the mutations were scattered throughout the putative
extracellular domain. Dixon et al. (1998) also identified 6 PHEX
polymorphisms that had heterozygosity frequencies ranging from less than
1% to 43%. Over 20% of the mutations were observed in nonfamilial XLH
patients, who represented de novo occurrences of PHEX mutations. The
majority (over 70%) of the mutations were predicted to result in a
functional loss of the PHEX protein, rather than haploinsufficiency or a
dominant-negative effect.

Filisetti et al. (1999) reported 30 newly detected mutations in the PHEX
gene, and pooled findings with all previously published mutations. The
spectrum of the mutations displayed 16% deletions, 8% insertions, 34%
missense, 27% nonsense, and 15% splice site mutations, with peaks in
exons 15 and 17. Since 32.8% of PHEX amino acids are conserved in the
family of the endopeptidases, the number of missense mutations detected
at nonconserved residues was smaller than expected, whereas the number
of nonsense mutations observed at nonconserved residues was very close
to the expected number. Compared with conserved amino acids, the changes
in nonconserved amino acids may result in benign polymorphisms or
possibly mild disease that may go undiagnosed.

Sabbagh et al. (2000) stated that 131 HYP-causing mutations in the PHEX
gene had been reported. They announced the creation of an online PHEX
mutation database for the collection and distribution of information on
PHEX mutations.

Sabbagh et al. (2001) examined the effect of PHEX missense mutations on
cellular trafficking of the recombinant protein. Four mutant PHEX cDNAs
were generated by PCR mutagenesis (e.g., E581V). Three of the mutants
were completely sensitive to endoglycosidase H digestion, indicating
that they were not fully glycosylated. Sequestration of the
disease-causing mutant proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma
membrane localization of wildtype PHEX proteins was demonstrated by
immunofluorescence and cell surface biotinylation. Sabbagh et al. (2003)
assessed the impact of 9 PHEX missense mutations on cellular
trafficking, endopeptidase activity, and protein conformation. Eight
mutations had been identified in XLH patients; the remaining mutation,
E581V, had been engineered in NEP (120520), to which PHEX shows
significant homology, where it was shown to abolish catalytic activity
but not interfere with cell surface localization of the recombinant
protein (Devault et al., 1988). The authors demonstrated that some
mutations in secreted PHEX abrogate catalytic activity, whereas others
alter the trafficking and conformation of the protein, thus providing a
mechanism whereby missense mutations result in loss of function of the
PHEX protein. Endopeptidase activity of secreted and rescued PHEX
proteins was assessed using a novel internally quenched fluorogenic
peptide substrate.

Gaucher et al. (2009) analyzed the PHEX gene in 118 probands with
hypophosphatemic rickets and identified mutations in 49 (87%) of 56
familial cases and 44 (73%) of 60 known sporadic cases. Of the 78
different mutations identified, 16 were missense mutations, which all
occurred at residues that are highly conserved in mammals. Plotting all
reported PHEX missense mutations on a 3D protein model revealed that
missense mutations are primarily located in 2 regions in the inner part
of the PHEX protein; similar plotting of nonsense mutations showed a
random distribution. One patient with late-onset disease was found to
have a mutation in an intronic region of PHEX, 2 bp away from the splice
site consensus sequence, confirming that late-onset disease is part of
the spectrum of X-linked dominant hypophosphatemic rickets.

NOMENCLATURE

The PEX nomenclature conflicts with the use of the same symbol for
multiple peroxisomal proteins (peroxins) numbered 1 to 12 or more, e.g.,
PEX5 (600414). The gene symbol PHEX has much to recommend it (Dixon et
al., 1998; Filisetti et al., 1999).

ANIMAL MODEL

- The 'Hyp' Mouse

Eicher et al. (1976) observed a mouse model for X-linked
hypophosphatemia, designated Hyp. Hyp mice have bone changes resembling
rickets, dwarfism, and high fractional excretion of phosphate ion.

By various transplantation experiments, Ecarot-Charrier et al. (1988)
demonstrated an intrinsic defect in osteoblasts in the Hyp mouse. Bell
et al. (1988) reported that primary cultures of renal epithelial cells
from the Hyp mouse demonstrate a defect in phosphate transport and
vitamin D metabolism, suggesting a defect intrinsic to the kidney.
However, in cross-transplantation studies of kidneys in normal and Hyp
mice, Nesbitt et al. (1992) found that the Hyp phenotype was neither
transferred nor corrected by renal transplantation, suggesting that the
kidney was not the target organ for the genetic abnormality. Nesbitt et
al. (1992) postulated that the disorder in the mouse, and probably in
the human, is the result of a humoral factor and is not an intrinsic
renal abnormality. Nesbitt et al. (1992) suggested the presence of a
unique hormonal effect that results in a blockade of, or failure to
express, an essential gene function in a variety of cell types.

Parabiosis (Meyer et al., 1989) and renal transplantation (Nesbitt et
al., 1992) experiments demonstrated that the renal defect in brush
border membrane sodium-dependent phosphate transport in Hyp mice is not
intrinsic to the kidney, but rather depends on a circulating humoral
factor, which is not parathyroid hormone (Meyer et al., 1989), for its
expression. In Hyp mice, Tenenhouse et al. (1994) demonstrated that the
specific reduction in renal sodium-phosphate cotransport in brush border
membranes could be ascribed to a proportionate decrease in the abundance
of kidney NPT2 (182309) cotransporter mRNA and protein. However, the
NPT2 gene is located on chromosome 5 and, hence, cannot be the site of
the mutation primarily responsible for hereditary hypophosphatemia.
Tenenhouse et al. (1994) suggested that the X-linked gene may encode the
postulated circulating humoral factor that regulates the renal
sodium-phosphate cotransporter.

Beck et al. (1997) discovered a large deletion in the 3-prime region of
the Phex gene in the Hyp mouse.

Baum et al. (2003) demonstrated that Hyp mice have a 2-fold greater
urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) excretion than wildtype mice. To
determine whether prostaglandins were involved in the pathogenesis of
this disorder, Hyp and wildtype C57/B6 mice received intraperitoneal
injections with vehicle or indomethacin and were studied approximately
12 hours after the last dose of indomethacin. In the Hyp mice,
indomethacin decreased the fractional excretion of phosphate and
increased serum phosphate. There was no effect of indomethacin in the
wildtype mice. Indomethacin did not affect serum creatine or inulin
clearance, demonstrating that the normalization of urinary phosphate
excretion was not caused by changes in glomerular filtration rate.
Indomethacin treatment increased renal brush border membrane vesicle
NaPi2 protein abundance in Hyp mice to levels comparable to that of
wildtype mice. Baum et al. (2003) concluded that there is dysregulation
of renal prostaglandin metabolism in Hyp mice, and that indomethacin
treatment normalizes the urinary excretion of phosphate by a direct
tubular effect. These studies suggested that indomethacin may be an
effective form of therapy in humans with X-linked hypophosphatemia.

Lorenz-Depiereux et al. (2004) studied 2 spontaneous mutations in the
mouse Phex gene, Hyp-2J, a 7.3-kb deletion containing exon 15, and
Hyp-Duk, a 30-kb deletion containing exons 13 and 14. Both mutations
caused similar phenotypes in males, including shortened hind legs and
tail, a shortened square trunk, hypophosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and
rachitic bone disease. Hyp-Duk males also exhibited background-dependent
variable expression of deafness, circling behavior, and cranial
dysmorphology. Both Hyp-2J and Hyp-Duk males had thickened temporal bone
surrounding the cochlea and a precipitate in the scala tympani, but only
the hearing-impaired Hyp-Duk mice had degeneration of the organ of Corti
and spiral ganglion. Lorenz-Depiereux et al. (2004) noted that XLH
phenotypes could now be separated from non-XLH-related phenotypes.

During development and postnatal growth of the endochondral skeleton,
proliferative chondrocytes differentiate into hypertrophic chondrocytes,
which subsequently undergo apoptosis and are replaced by bone. Donohue
and Demay (2002) found that mice with rickets due to ablation of the
vitamin D receptor (VDR; 601769) had expansion of hypertrophic
chondrocytes due to impaired apoptosis of these cells. Sabbagh et al.
(2005) showed that institution of a rescue diet that restored mineral
ion homeostasis in Vdr-null mice prevented the development of rachitic
changes, indicating that mineral ion abnormalities, not ablation of the
Vdr gene, were the cause of impaired chondrocyte apoptosis. Similarly,
Hyp mice with rickets also showed impaired apoptosis of hypertrophic
chondrocytes, and the decreased apoptosis was correlated with
hypophosphatemia. Wildtype mice rendered hypercalcemic and
hypophosphatemic by dietary means also developed rickets. In vitro
studies showed that the apoptosis was mediated by caspase-9 (CASP9;
602234). Sabbagh et al. (2005) concluded that hypophosphatemia was the
common mediator of rickets in these cases. The findings indicated that
normal phosphorus levels are required for growth plate maturation and
that circulating phosphate is a key regulator of hypertrophic
chondrocyte apoptosis.

Yuan et al. (2008) generated mice with a global Phex knockout (Phex -/-)
and mice with conditional osteocalcin-promoted Phex inactivation only in
osteoblasts and osteocytes (OC-Phex -/-). The reduction in serum
phosphorus levels and kidney cell membrane phosphate transport as
compared to wildtype mice was similar among Hyp, Phex -/-, and OC-Phex
-/- mice; all 3 mutant strains had increased bone production and serum
FGF23 (605370) levels and decreased kidney membrane NPT2, and manifested
comparable osteomalacia. Yuan et al. (2008) concluded that aberrant Phex
function in osteoblasts and/or osteocytes alone is sufficient to
underlie the Hyp phenotype.

- The Gyro (Gy) Mouse

Lyon et al. (1986) identified a second type of X-linked dominant
hypophosphatemia in the mouse in addition to the Hyp. The phenotype,
called Gyro (Gy), is characterized by rickets/osteomalacia as in the Hyp
mouse, but also shows circling behavior, inner ear abnormalities,
sterility in hemizygous males, and a milder phenotype in heterozygous
females. The Gy and Hyp mutations have similar expression in the renal
tubule, but the Gy mutation has an additional effect on the inner ear.
The Gy allele is expressed in the inner ear of some heterozygous mice,
which show circling behavior. The authors found that Gy mapped close
(crossover value 0.4-0.8%) to Hyp. Lowe syndrome (309000) is not a human
counterpart of Gy because in that condition the transport defect is not
limited to phosphorus; moreover, characteristic morphologic changes in
the nephron observed in Lowe syndrome are not seen in the Gy mouse.

Nesbitt et al. (1987) found that PTH-dependent 1-alpha-hydroxylase
(CYP27B1; 609506) activity in the renal proximal convoluted tubule was
abnormally regulated in the Hyp mouse, whereas calcitonin-dependent
enzyme function in the proximal straight tubule was modulated normally.

In the search for a human equivalent of the Gy mutation, Boneh et al.
(1987) measured hearing in 22 patients with X-linked hypophosphatemia;
5, including 2 mother/son pairs, had sensorineural hearing deficits due
to cochlear dysfunction. The authors suggested that the disease in these
persons may be the human counterpart of Gy.

Davidai et al. (1990) provided further information on the differences
between the Hyp and Gy phenotypes in the mouse.

Collins and Ghishan (1996) found normal expression and location of the
renal Na+/P(i) transporter NPT2 in Gy mice, suggesting that the
molecular defect in the Gy mice is distinct from that in the Hyp mice,
which show a decrease in transporter activity in the renal proximal
tubules possibly related to decreased transcription (Collins et al.,
1995).

In Gy mice, Strom et al. (1997) found a deletion of the first 3 exons
and the promoter region of the PHEX, indicating that Hyp and Gy are
allelic disorders. However, Meyer et al. (1998) found that the Gyro
mouse has a partial deletion of both the Phex gene and the upstream
spermine synthase gene (300105), making it a contiguous gene syndrome in
that species. Gy is thus not as useful a model for human XLH as Hyp.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, 2-BP DEL, 675TC

In a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), the HYP Consortium
(1995) identified a 2-bp deletion (675delTC) in exon 1 of the PHEX gene.

.0002
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS1AS, G-A, -1

In a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), the HYP Consortium
(1995) identified a splicing mutation in the PHEX gene: a G-to-A
transition at the -1 position in the splice acceptor site of exon 2 of
the partially cloned gene.

.0003
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS1AS, G-C, -1

In a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), the HYP Consortium
(1995) identified a G-to-C transversion at the -1 position in the splice
acceptor site of exon 2 of the PHEX gene.

.0004
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, LEU274TER

In a sporadic case of hypophosphatemia in a female (307800), Holm et al.
(1997) identified an 823T-A transversion in the PHEX gene, resulting in
a leu274-to-ter (L274X) substitution. (The nucleotides and amino acids
were numbered on the basis of the cDNA sequence published by the HYP
Consortium (1995).)

.0005
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, CYS82TYR

In a male with familial X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), Holm et al.
(1997) identified a 247G-A transition in exon 3 of the PHEX gene,
resulting in a cys82-to-tyr (C82Y) substitution. (The nucleotides and
amino acids were numbered on the basis of the cDNA sequence published by
the HYP Consortium (1995).)

.0006
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, PHE249SER AND MET250ILE

In a female with familial hypophosphatemia (307800), Holm et al. (1997)
identified 2 mutations that were 4-bp apart in exon 7 of the PHEX gene:
a 748T-C transition, resulting in a phe249-to-ser (F249S) substitution
and a 752G-A transition, resulting in a met250-to-ile (M250I)
substitution. The 2 mutations were on the same allele, as demonstrated
by sequencing of both alleles. (The nucleotides and amino acids were
numbered on the basis of the cDNA sequence published by the HYP
Consortium (1995).)

.0007
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, LEU555PRO

In affected members of a kindred originally reported by Frymoyer and
Hodgkin (1977) as having 'adult-onset vitamin D-resistant
hypophosphatemic osteomalacia' (AVDRR), Econs et al. (1998) identified a
T-to-C transition in exon 16 of the PHEX gene, resulting in a
leu555-to-pro (L555P) substitution. Frymoyer and Hodgkin (1977) had
asserted that the disorder was distinct from X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets (307800) because affected children did not display radiographic
evidence of rickets and patients typically presented with clinical
manifestations of the disease in the fourth or fifth decade of life.
However, clinical evaluation of affected family members by Econs et al.
(1998) indicated that some displayed classic features of X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets. The authors were unable to verify progressive
bowing in adults. Because of the clinical spectrum of X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets and the presence of a PHEX mutation in affected
members of this kindred, the authors concluded that there is only 1 form
of X-linked dominant phosphate wasting.

.0008
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, A-G, NT-429

In a female patient from the Indian subcontinent with X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets (307800) and congenital adrenal hypoplasia
originally reported by Shah et al. (1988), Dixon et al. (1998)
identified an A-to-G transition at codon -429 of the 5-prime
untranslated region in the PHEX gene. The A-to-G transition was found to
cosegregate with the disease and was absent in 247 alleles examined.
Dixon et al. (1998) suggested that the mutation may lead to an
alteration in the binding sites for ribosomal and other translation
factors, such as tissue-specific regulatory proteins.

Shah et al. (1988) had termed the disorders in this Indian girl as
'familial glucocorticoid deficiency' and familial hypophosphatemic
rickets, and had suggested the possibility of a chromosomal abnormality
in activating both the X-linked hypophosphatemia locus and a closely
situated locus for glucocorticoid deficiency.

.0009
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS7, +1268, G-T

Using lymphoblastoid RNA and RT-PCR, Christie et al. (2001) investigated
11 unrelated X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (307800) patients in whom
coding region mutations had been excluded for intronic mutations that
could lead to mRNA splicing abnormalities. One X-linked hypophosphatemia
patient was found to have 3 abnormally large transcripts resulting from
51-, 100-, and 170-bp insertions, all of which would lead to missense
peptides and premature termination codons. The origin of these
transcripts was a G-to-T transversion at position +1268 of intron 7,
which resulted in the occurrence of a high quality novel donor splice
site (ggaagg to gtaagg). Splicing between this novel donor splice site
and 3 preexisting, but normally silent, acceptor splice sites within
intron 7 resulted in the occurrence of the 3 pseudoexons.

.0010
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, ARG567TER

Goji et al. (2006) described a family in which the father and only 1 of
his 2 daughters were affected by hypophosphatemic rickets (307800). The
pedigree interpretation of the family suggested that genetic
transmission of the disorder occurred as an autosomal dominant trait.
However, the affected daughter was heterozygous for an arg567-to-ter
(R567X) mutation in the PHEX gene, rather than in the FGF23 gene
(605370), suggesting that the genetic transmission occurred as an
X-linked dominant trait. Unexpectedly, the father was heterozygous for
this mutation. Single-nucleotide primer extension and denaturing HPLC
analysis of the father using DNA from single hair roots revealed that he
was a somatic mosaic for the mutation. Haplotype analysis confirmed that
the father transmitted the genotypes for 18 markers on the X chromosome
equally to his 2 daughters. The fact that he transmitted the mutation to
only 1 his 2 daughters indicated that he was a germline mosaic for the
mutation. Goji et al. (2006) concluded that somatic and germline
mosaicism for an X-linked dominant mutation in PHEX may mimic autosomal
dominant inheritance.

.0011
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS4, T-C, +6

Makras et al. (2008) described a mother and 2 sons with X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets (307800) with unusual clinical features,
including normal growth. A novel splice site mutation in intron 4 of the
PHEX gene, IVS4+6G-T, that resulted in skipping of exon 4 was present in
all 3 individuals. The mother and her sons were followed in the same
institution for nearly 30 years. The mother had hypophosphatemia and
normal height without ever receiving any treatment. Her 2 sons achieved
final heights of 183.7 cm (Z score, -0.01) and 182.7 cm (Z score,
-0.18), respectively, despite late initiation of treatment with
phosphate and low serum phosphate levels. In addition, they had
reversible proximal myopathy, which took approximately 7 years to
resolve in the more severely affected son and 8 months to resolve in the
other.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Collins and Ghishan (1994); Dennis et al. (1977); Lobaugh and Drezner
(1983); Meyer et al. (1979); Nesbitt et al. (1987); Strom et al. (1997)
REFERENCE 1. Baum, M.; Loleh, S.; Saini, N.; Seikaly, M.; Dwarakanath, V.; Quigley,
R.: Correction of proximal tubule phosphate transport defect in Hyp
mice in vivo and in vitro with indomethacin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
11098-11103, 2003.

2. Beck, L.; Soumounou, Y.; Martel, J.; Krishnamurthy, G.; Gauthier,
C.; Goodyer, C. G.; Tenenhouse, H. S.: Pex/PEX tissue distribution
and evidence for a deletion in the 3-prime region of the Pex gene
in X-linked hypophosphatemic mice. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 1200-1209,
1997.

3. Bell, C. L.; Tenenhouse, H. S.; Scriver, C. R.: Primary cultures
of renal epithelial cells from X-linked hypophosphatemic (Hyp) mice
express defects in phosphate transport and vitamin D metabolism. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 43: 293-303, 1988.

4. Boneh, A.; Reade, T. M.; Scriver, C. R.; Rishikof, E.: Audiometric
evidence for two forms of X-linked hypophosphatemia in humans, apparent
counterparts of Hyp and Gy mutations in mouse. Am. J. Med. Genet. 27:
997-1003, 1987.

5. Christie, P. T.; Harding, B.; Nesbit, M. A.; Whyte, M. P.; Thakker,
R. V.: X-linked hypophosphatemia attributable to pseudoexons of the
PHEX gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 3840-3844, 2001.

6. Collins, J. F.; Bulus, N.; Ghishan, F. K.: Sodium-phosphate transporter
adaptation to dietary phosphate deprivation in normal and hypophosphatemic
mice. Am. J. Physiol. 268: G917-G924, 1995.

7. Collins, J. F.; Ghishan, F. K.: Molecular cloning, functional
expression, tissue distribution and in situ hybridization of the renal
sodium phosphate (Na+/P(i)) transporter in the control and hypophosphatemic
mouse. FASEB J. 8: 862-868, 1994.

8. Collins, J. F.; Ghishan, F. K.: The molecular defect in the renal
sodium-phosphate transporter expression pathway of Gyro (Gy) mice
is distinct from that of hypophosphatemic (Hyp) mice. FASEB J. 10:
751-759, 1996.

9. Davidai, G. A.; Nesbitt, T.; Drezner, M. K.: Normal regulation
of calcitriol production in Gy mice: evidence for biochemical heterogeneity
in the X-linked hypophosphatemic diseases. J. Clin. Invest. 85:
334-339, 1990.

10. Dennis, V. W.; Bello-Reuss, E.; Robinson, R. R.: Response of
phosphate transport to parathyroid hormone in segments of rabbit nephron. Am.
J. Physiol. 233: F29-F38, 1977.

11. Devault, A.; Nault, C.; Zollinger, M.; Fournie-Zaluski, M.-C.;
Roques, B. P.; Crine, P.; Boileau, G.: Expression of neutral endopeptidase
(enkephalinase) in heterologous COS-1 cells: characterization of the
recombinant enzyme and evidence for a glutamic acid residue at the
active site. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 4033-4040, 1988.

12. Dixon, P. H.; Christie, P. T.; Wooding, C.; Trump, D.; Grieff,
M.; Holm, I.; Gertner, J. M.; Schmidtke, J.; Shah, B.; Shaw, N.; Smith,
C.; Tau, C.; Schlessinger, D.; Whyte, M. P.; Thakker, R. V.: Mutational
analysis of PHEX gene in X-linked hypophosphatemia. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 83: 3615-3623, 1998.

13. Donohue, M. M.; Demay, M. B.: Rickets in VDR null mice is secondary
to decreased apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Endocrinology 143:
3691-3694, 2002.

14. Du, L.; Desbarats, M.; Viel, J.; Glorieux, F. H.; Cawthorn, C.;
Ecarot, B.: cDNA cloning of the murine Pex gene implicated in X-linked
hypophosphatemia and evidence for expression in bone. Genomics 36:
22-28, 1996.

15. Ecarot-Charrier, B.; Glorieux, F. H.; Travers, R.; Desbarats,
M.; Bouchard, F.; Hinek, A.: Defective bone formation by transplanted
Hyp mouse bone cells into normal mice. Endocrinology 123: 768-773,
1988.

16. Econs, M. J.; Friedman, N. E.; Rowe, P. S. N.; Speer, M. C.; Francis,
F.; Strom, T. M.; Oudet, C.; Smith, J. A.; Ninomiya, J. T.; Lee, B.
E.; Bergen, H.: A PHEX gene mutation is responsible for adult-onset
vitamin D-resistant hypophosphatemic osteomalacia: evidence that the
disorder is not a distinct entity from X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 3459-3462, 1998.

17. Eicher, E. M.; Southard, J. L.; Scriver, C. R.; Glorieux, F. H.
: Hypophosphatemia: mouse model for human familial hypophosphatemic
(vitamin D-resistant) rickets. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 73: 4667-4671,
1976.

18. Filisetti, D.; Ostermann, G.; von Bredow, M.; Strom, T.; Filler,
G.; Ehrich, J.; Pannetier, S.; Garnier, J.-M.; Rowe, P.; Francis,
F.; Julienne, A.; Hanauer, A.; Econs, M. J.; Oudet, C.: Non-random
distribution of mutations in the PHEX gene, and under-detected missense
mutations at non-conserved residues. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7: 615-619,
1999.

19. Frymoyer, J. W.; Hodgkin, W.: Adult-onset vitamin D-resistant
hypophosphatemic osteomalacia: a possible variant of vitamin D-resistant
rickets. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 59: 101-106, 1977.

20. Gaucher, C.; Walrant-Debray, O.; Nguyen, T.-M.; Esterle, L.; Garabedian,
M.; Jehan, F.: PHEX analysis in 118 pedigrees reveals new genetic
clues in hypophosphatemic rickets. Hum. Genet. 125: 401-411, 2009.

21. Goji, K.; Ozaki, K.; Sadewa, A. H.; Nishio, H.; Matsuo, M.: Somatic
and germline mosaicism for a mutation of the PHEX gene can lead to
genetic transmission of X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets that mimics
an autosomal dominant trait. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 365-370,
2006.

22. Grieff, M.; Mumm, S.; Waeltz, P.; Mazzarella, R.; Whyte, M. P.;
Thakker, R. V.; Schlessinger, D.: Expression and cloning of the human
X-linked hypophosphatemia gene cDNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 231:
635-639, 1997.

23. Guo, R.; Quarles, L. D.: Cloning and sequencing of human PEX
from a bone cDNA library: evidence for its developmental stage-specific
regulation in osteoblasts. J. Bone Miner. Res. 12: 1009-1017, 1997.

24. Holm, I. A.; Huang, X.; Kunkel, L. M.: Mutational analysis of
the PEX gene in patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 60: 790-797, 1997.

25. HYP Consortium: A gene (HYP) with homologies to endopeptidases
is mutated in patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Nature
Genet. 11: 130-136, 1995.

26. Lobaugh, B.; Drezner, M. K.: Abnormal regulation of renal 25-hydroxyvitamin
D-1-alpha-hydroxylase activity in the X-linked hypophosphatemic mouse. J.
Clin. Invest. 71: 400-403, 1983.

27. Lorenz-Depiereux, B.; Guido, V. E.; Johnson, K. R.; Zheng, Q.
Y.; Gagnon, L. H.; Bauschatz, J. D.; Davisson, M. T.; Washburn, L.
L.; Donahue, L. R.; Strom, T. M.; Eicher, E. M.: New intragenic deletions
in the Phex gene clarify X-linked hypophosphatemia-related abnormalities
in mice. Mammalian Genome 15: 151-161, 2004.

28. Lyon, M. F.; Scriver, C. R.; Baker, L. R. I.; Tenenhouse, H. S.;
Kronick, J.; Mandla, S.: The Gy mutation: another cause of X-linked
hypophosphatemia in mouse. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 4899-4903,
1986.

29. Makras, P.; Hamdy, N. A. T.; Kant, S. G.; Papapoulos, S. E.:
Normal growth and muscle dysfunction in X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets associated with a novel mutation in the PHEX gene. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 93: 1386-1389, 2008.

30. Meyer, R. A., Jr.; Henley, C. M.; Meyer, M. H.; Morgan, P. L.;
McDonald, A. G.; Mills, C.; Price, D. K.: Partial deletion of both
the spermine synthase gene and the Pex gene in the X-linked hypophosphatemic,
Gyro (Gy) mouse. Genomics 48: 289-295, 1998.

31. Meyer, R. A., Jr.; Jowsey, J.; Meyer, M. H.: Osteomalacia and
altered magnesium metabolism in the X-linked hypophosphatemic mouse. Calcif.
Tissue Int. 27: 19-26, 1979.

32. Meyer, R. A., Jr.; Meyer, M. H.; Gray, R. W.: Parabiosis suggests
a humoral factor is involved in X-linked hypophosphatemia in mice. J.
Bone Miner. Res. 4: 493-500, 1989.

33. Nesbitt, T.; Coffman, T. M.; Griffiths, R.; Drezner, M. K.: Crosstransplantation
of kidneys in normal and Hyp mice: evidence that the Hyp mouse phenotype
is unrelated to an intrinsic renal defect. J. Clin. Invest. 89:
1453-1459, 1992.

34. Nesbitt, T.; Lobaugh, B.; Drezner, M. K.: Calcitonin stimulation
of renal 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1(alpha)-hydroxylase activity in hypophosphatemic
mice: evidence that the regulation of calcitriol production is not
universally abnormal in X-linked hypophosphatemia. J. Clin. Invest. 79:
15-19, 1987.

35. Nesbitt, T.; Lobaugh, B.; Drezner, M. K.: Calcitonin stimulation
of renal 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1(alpha)-hydroxylase activity in hypophosphatemic
mice: evidence that the regulation of calcitriol production is not
universally abnormal in X-linked hypophosphatemia. J. Clin. Invest. 79:
15-19, 1987.

36. Sabbagh, Y.; Boileau, G.; Campos, M.; Carmona, A. K.; Tenenhouse,
H. S.: Structure and function of disease-causing missense mutations
in the PHEX gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2213-2222, 2003.

37. Sabbagh, Y.; Boileau, G.; DesGroseillers, L.; Tenenhouse, H. S.
: Disease-causing missense mutations in the PHEX gene interfere with
membrane targeting of the recombinant protein. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
1539-1546, 2001.

38. Sabbagh, Y.; Carpenter, T. O.; Demay, M. B.: Hypophosphatemia
leads to rickets by impairing caspase-mediated apoptosis of hypertrophic
chondrocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9637-9642, 2005.

39. Sabbagh, Y.; Jones, A. O.; Tenenhouse, H. S.: PHEXdb, a locus-specific
database for mutations causing X-linked hypophosphatemia. Hum. Mutat. 16:
1-6, 2000.

40. Shah, B. R.; Fiordalisi, I.; Sheinbaum, K.; Finberg, L.: Familial
glucocorticoid deficiency in a girl with familial hypophosphatemic
rickets. Am. J. Dis. Child. 142: 900-903, 1988. Note: Erratum: Am.
J. Dis. Child. 142: 1330 only, 1988.

41. Strom, T. M.; Francis, F.; Lorenz, B.; Boddrich, A.; Econs, M.
J.; Lehrach, H.; Meitinger, T.: Pex gene deletions in Gy and Hyp
mice provide mouse models for X-linked hypophosphatemia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 165-171, 1997.

42. Strom, T. M.; Francis, F.; Lorenz, B.; Boddrich, A.; Econs, M.
J.; Lehrach, H.; Meitinger, T.: Pex gene deletions in Gy and Hyp
mice provide mouse models for X-linked hypophosphatemia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 165-171, 1997.

43. Tenenhouse, H. S.; Werner, A.; Biber, J.; Ma, S.; Martel, J.;
Roy, S.; Murer, H.: Renal Na(+)-phosphate cotransport in murine X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets: molecular characterization. J. Clin. Invest. 93:
671-676, 1994.

44. Yuan, B.; Takaiwa, M.; Clemens, T. L.; Feng, J. Q.; Kumar, R.;
Rowe, P. S.; Xie, Y.; Drezner, M. K.: Aberrant Phex function in osteoblasts
and osteocytes alone underlies murine X-linked hypophosphatemia. J.
Clin. Invest. 118: 722-734, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/6/2010
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/14/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/20/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/15/2005

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 7/28/2005

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
alopez: 4/18/2011
terry: 1/13/2011
wwang: 10/8/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
alopez: 1/14/2009
wwang: 3/25/2008
terry: 3/20/2008
terry: 8/6/2007
carol: 3/21/2007
wwang: 9/23/2005
wwang: 9/19/2005
ckniffin: 9/7/2005
carol: 9/1/2005
ckniffin: 8/15/2005

607515	TITLE *607515 PLACENTA-SPECIFIC GENE 8; PLAC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By subtractive hybridization, Rissoan et al. (2002) identified PLAC8,
which they designated C15, as 1 of several transcripts expressed at high
levels in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The deduced 115-amino acid
protein contains a cleavable 23-amino acid signal peptide and no
transmembrane domain. PLAC8 shares 83% homology with mouse Plac8, which
contains 112 amino acids. The human sequence conserves 15 of the 16
cysteine residues found in the mouse protein. RT-PCR detected PLAC8
expression in all leukocyte populations tested, with weaker expression
in monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Northern blot analysis detected a
major transcript of 0.7 kb and minor transcripts of 4.4 and 7 kb in
organs of the immune system. High expression was found in spleen, lymph
nodes, peripheral blood leukocytes, and bone marrow, with lower
expression in thymus, appendix, and fetal liver.

By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Galaviz-Hernandez et al.
(2003) detected strong expression of Plac8 in placenta at 9.5 days
postcoitum (dpc) through 18.5 dpc. In situ hybridization showed
expression limited to trophoblast giant cells at 6.5 and 8.5 dpc and to
the derived spongiotrophoblast layer at 10.5 and 18.5 dpc.

GENE FUNCTION

Rissoan et al. (2002) showed that PLAC8 expression was downregulated
upon activation, particularly in dendritic cells generated in vitro from
CD34 (142230) progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rissoan et al. (2002) determined that the PLAC8 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By homology to a BAC clone, Rissoan et al. (2002) mapped the PLAC8 gene
to chromosome 4q13-q21.

By database analysis, Galaviz-Hernandez et al. (2003) mapped the PLAC8
gene to chromosome 4q21 and the mouse Plac8 gene to chromosome 5E3.

REFERENCE 1. Galaviz-Hernandez, C.; Stagg, C.; de Ridder, G.; Tanaka, T. S.;
Ko, M. S. H.; Schlessinger, D.; Nagaraja, R.: Plac8 and Plac9, novel
placental-enriched genes identified through microarray analysis. Gene 309:
81-89, 2003.

2. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 6/11/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/24/2003

EDITED wwang: 06/16/2009
wwang: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/11/2009
mgross: 1/24/2003

605117	TITLE *605117 SUPPRESSOR OF CYTOKINE SIGNALING 2; SOCS2
;;STAT-INDUCED STAT INHIBITOR 2; SSI2; STATI2;;
CYTOKINE-INDUCIBLE SH2 PROTEIN 2; CIS2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SOCS proteins, such as SOCS2, negatively regulate cytokine receptor
signaling via the Janus kinase (see 147795)/signal transducer and
activation of transcription (STAT; see 600555) pathway (the JAK/STAT
pathway) (Minamoto et al., 1997).

CLONING

By a computer-aided homology search of sequence databases, Minamoto et
al. (1997) identified a partial sequence of SSI2, a member of the SSI
(STAT-induced STAT inhibitor) gene family. They isolated an SSI2 cDNA
from a Jurkat cDNA library. SSI2 encodes a protein of 198 amino acids.
The deduced amino acid sequences of human SSI2 and SSI3 (604176) share
significant homology with human and mouse SSI1 (SOCS1; 603597) and mouse
Cis (602441) at the C-terminal region as well as in the SH2 domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed strong expression of SSI2 in heart,
placenta, lung, kidney, and prostate.

On the basis of an EST database search, Masuhara et al. (1997)
identified SOCS2, which they called CIS2. They found that a C-terminal
40-amino acid region, designated the CIS homology (CH) domain, and the
SH2 domain are highly conserved in the CIS genes, while the respective
N-terminal regions of these proteins share little similarity.

Dey et al. (1998) identified SOCS2 based on its interaction with the
cytoplasmic domain of insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF1R;
147370) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen. They cloned a full-length SOCS2 cDNA
by 5-prime RACE PCR of a human fetal brain cDNA library. Northern blot
analysis demonstrated expression of SOCS2 in many human fetal and adult
tissues, with particular abundance in fetal kidney and adult heart,
skeletal muscle, pancreas, and liver.

GENE FUNCTION

Minamoto et al. (1997) found that SSI2 expression was induced by
cytokine stimulation, and its forced expression in the mouse myeloid
leukemia cell line M1 suppressed the apoptotic affects of LIF (159540)
similarly to SSI1.

Dey et al. (1998) found that the human SOCS2 protein interacted strongly
with the activated IGF1R and not with a kinase-negative mutant receptor
in yeast 2-hybrid assays. Mutation of receptor tyrosines 950, 1250,
1251, and 1316 to phenylalanine or deletion of the C-terminal 93 amino
acids did not result in decreased interaction of the receptor with human
SOCS2 protein. SOCS2 interacted with IGF1R both in vitro and in vivo.
Dey et al. (1998) concluded that their results raised the possibility
that SOCS proteins may play a regulatory role in IGF1 receptor
signaling.

Machado et al. (2006) showed that lipoxin A4 (LXA4) activated 2
receptors in mouse splenic dendritic cells, Ahr (600253) and Lxar
(FPRL1; 136538), and that this activation triggered Socs2.
Socs2-deficient mouse dendritic cells were hyperresponsive to microbial
stimuli and were refractory to the inhibitory action of LXA4, but not
Il10 (124092). Upon infection with an intracellular pathogen,
Socs2-deficient mice had uncontrolled production of proinflammatory
cytokines, decreased microbial proliferation, aberrant leukocyte
infiltration, and elevated mortality. Machado et al. (2006) also showed
that Socs2 was a crucial intracellular mediator of the antiinflammatory
actions of aspirin-induced lipoxins in vivo.

GENE STRUCTURE

Metcalf et al. (2000) demonstrated that the mouse SOCS2 gene is composed
of 3 exons and 2 introns.

MAPPING

By cytogenetic and radiation hybrid mapping, Yandava et al. (1999)
mapped the SOCS2 gene to chromosome 12q21.3-q23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kato et al. (2006) performed a region-wide association analysis on
12q15-q22 using more than 500 SNPs in 1,492 unrelated Japanese
individuals and identified an association between type II diabetes
(125853) and a 13.6-kb haplotype block that includes the entire SOCS2
gene. Five SNPs in the 5-prime region of the SOCS2 gene were
significantly associated with type II diabetes. Kato et al. (2006)
concluded that SOCS2 may play a role in susceptibility to type II
diabetes in the Japanese.

ANIMAL MODEL

Metcalf et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in Socs2 by targeted
disruption. Socs2-deficient mice were indistinguishable from their
littermates until weaning at 3 weeks of age, but subsequently grew more
rapidly. Socs2 -/- adult males were on average 40% heavier than wildtype
littermates. Adult Socs2 +/- males exhibited an intermediate body
weight. Increased growth was also significant but less marked in female
Socs2 -/- mice. Adult Socs2 -/- females typically attained the weight of
wildtype male mice, but heterozygous Socs2 females were not
significantly heavier than sex-matched wildtype littermates. Neither
male nor female Socs2 -/- mice accumulated significantly more fatty
tissue than wildtype mice. Rather, increased body weight in these mice
resulted from an increase in the weight of most visceral organs.
Sexually dimorphic or male-specific organs were not disproportionately
enlarged. Carcass weight was also significantly increased, indicating
that muscle and bone may contribute significantly to the increased size
of Socs2-deficient mice. There was significant increase in long bone
length. Tail length was normal. The increase in size was due to elevated
cell numbers rather than increased cell size. Metcalf et al. (2000)
observed a marked thickening of the dermis associated with excessive
collagen accumulation in all of 7 males, and less prominently in 6 of 8
female Socs2 -/- mice. Collagen deposition was also increased around the
bronchi and vessels of the lungs of 6 of the 9 male, but only 3 of 10
female, Socs2-deficient mice. No hematologic abnormalities were
observed. The characteristics of Socs2 -/- mice were similar to those of
mice with growth hormone (GH; 139250) excess and IGF1 (147440) excess.
Characteristics of deregulated growth hormone and IGF1 signaling,
including decreased production of major urinary protein, increased local
IGF1 production, and collagen accumulation in the dermis were observed
in Socs2-deficient mice, indicating that Socs2 may have an essential
negative regulatory role in the growth hormone/IGF1 pathway.

Turnley et al. (2002) studied the role of Socs2 in mouse neural
development. They found that Socs2 was expressed by mouse progenitor
cells and neurons in response to LIF-like cytokines. Progenitor cells
lacking Socs2 produced fewer neurons and more astrocytes in vitro. Socs2
-/- mice had fewer neurons and neurogenin-1 (NGN1; 601726)-expressing
cells in the developing cortex, whereas overexpression of Socs2
increased neuronal differentiation. Turnley et al. (2002) found that GH
inhibited Ngn1 expression and neuronal production, and this action was
blocked by Socs2 overexpression. They speculated that Socs2 promotes
neuronal differentiation by blocking GH-mediated downregulation of Ngn1.

Using GH-deficient Socs2 -/- mice, Greenhalgh et al. (2005) demonstrated
that the Socs2 -/- phenotype is dependent upon the presence of
endogenous GH. Treatment with exogenous GH induced excessive growth in
terms of overall body weight, body and bone lengths, and the weight of
internal organs and tissues. Microarray analysis on liver RNA extracts
after exogenous GH administration revealed a heightened response to GH.
The conserved C-terminal SOCS-box motif was essential for all inhibitory
function. SOCS2 was found to bind 2 phosphorylated tyrosines on the GH
receptor (600946), and mutation analysis of these amino acids showed
that both were essential for SOCS2 function. Greenhalgh et al. (2005)
concluded that SOCS2 is a negative regulator of GH signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Dey, B. R.; Spence, S. L.; Nissley, P.; Furlanetto, R. W.: Interaction
of human suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-2 with the insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24095-24101, 1998.

2. Greenhalgh, C. J.; Rico-Bautista, E.; Lorentzon, M.; Thaus, A.
L.; Morgan, P. O.; Willson, T. A.; Zervoudakis, P.; Metcalf, D.; Street,
I.; Nicola, N. A.; Nash, A. D.; Fabri, L. J.; Norstedt, G.; Ohlsson,
C.; Flores-Morales, A.; Alexander, W. S.; Hilton, D. J.: SOCS2 negatively
regulates growth hormone action in vitro and in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
397-406, 2005.

3. Kato, H.; Nomura, K.; Osabe, D.; Shinohara, S.; Mizumori, O.; Katashima,
R.; Iwasaki, S.; Nishimura, K.; Yoshino, M.; Kobori, M.; Ichiishi,
E.; Nakamura, N.; and 14 others: Association of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in the suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2) gene
with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese. Genomics 87: 446-458, 2006.

4. Machado, F. S.; Johndrow, J. E.; Esper, L.; Dias, A.; Bafica, A.;
Serhan, C. N.; Aliberti, J.: Anti-inflammatory actions of lipoxin
A4 and aspirin-triggered lipoxin are SOCS-2 dependent. Nature Med. 12:
330-334, 2006.

5. Masuhara, M.; Sakamoto, H.; Matsumoto, A.; Suzuki, R.; Yasukawa,
H.; Mitsui, K.; Wakioka, T.; Tanimura, S.; Sasaki, A.; Misawa, H.;
Yokouchi, M.; Ohtsubo, M.; Yoshimura, A.: Cloning and characterization
of novel CIS family genes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 239: 439-446,
1997.

6. Metcalf, D.; Greenhalgh, C. J.; Viney, E.; Willson, T. A.; Starr,
R.; Nicola, N. A.; Hilton, D. J.; Alexander, W. S.: Gigantism in
mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signalling-2. Nature 405: 1069-1073,
2000.

7. Minamoto, S.; Ikegame, K.; Ueno, K.; Narazaki, M.; Naka, T.; Yamamoto,
H.; Matsumoto, T.; Saito, H.; Hosoe, S.; Kishimoto, T.: Cloning and
functional analysis of new members of STAT induced STAT inhibitor
(SSI) family: SSI-2 and SSI-3. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 237:
79-83, 1997.

8. Turnley, A. M.; Faux, C. H.; Rietze, R. L.; Coonan, J. R.; Bartlett,
P. F.: Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 regulates neuronal differentiation
by inhibiting growth hormone signaling. Nature Neurosci. 5: 1155-1162,
2002.

9. Yandava, C. N.; Pillari, A.; Drazen, J. M.: Radiation hybrid and
cytogenetic mapping of SOCS1 and SOCS2 to chromosomes 16p13 and 12q,
respectively. Genomics 61: 108-111, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/3/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/7/2000

EDITED alopez: 08/07/2008
terry: 7/29/2008
mgross: 1/3/2007
wwang: 6/14/2006
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
alopez: 11/7/2002
mgross: 10/7/2002
alopez: 7/7/2000

606414	TITLE *606414 INSULIN-LIKE 6; INSL6
;;RELAXIN/INSULIN-LIKE FACTOR 1; RIF1
DESCRIPTION Insulin gene superfamily hormones regulate cell growth, metabolism, and
tissue-specific functions. Members of this family are characterized by a
signal peptide, a B chain, a connecting C chain, and an A chain.

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences with similarity to the B or A
chains of insulin (INS; 176730) and relaxin (RLN1; 179730), followed by
RACE-PCR, Hsu (1999) identified cDNAs encoding mouse and human INSL6.
The deduced 213-amino acid protein, which shares 45% sequence identity
with the mouse protein, contains the classic B-C-A domain configuration,
including the 6 cysteines in the B and A domains, of the insulin/relaxin
family proteins. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 1.2-kb
transcript confined to testis. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated
expression restricted to interstitial cells in mouse testis.

Using similar methods, Lok et al. (2000) also cloned and characterized
INSL6. In situ hybridization analysis detected localization primarily in
rat and rhesus seminiferous tubules.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Lok et al. (2000) mapped the INSL6 gene
to chromosome 9p24, near the INSL4 (600910) and a proposed
'testis-determining factor' (see 154230) genes. By FISH, Hsu (1999)
mapped the mouse Insl6 gene to chromosome 19C3.

REFERENCE 1. Hsu, S. Y.: Cloning of two novel mammalian paralogs of relaxin/insulin
family proteins and their expression in testis and kidney. Molec.
Endocr. 13: 2163-2174, 1999.

2. Lok, S.; Johnston, D. S.; Conklin, D.; Lofton-Day, C. E.; Adams,
R. L.; Jelmberg, A. C.; Whitmore, T. E.; Schrader, S.; Griswold, M.
D.; Jaspers, S. R.: Identification of INSL6, a new member of the
insulin family that is expressed in the testis of the human and rat. Biol.
Reprod. 62: 1593-1599, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/25/2001

EDITED alopez: 02/18/2011
cwells: 11/2/2001
cwells: 10/26/2001

610777	TITLE *610777 NEUROGUIDIN; NGDN
;;NGD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neuroguidin is an EIF4E (133440)-binding protein that interacts with
CPEB (607342) and functions as a translational regulatory protein during
development of the vertebrate nervous system (Jung et al., 2006).

CLONING

Jung et al. (2006) cloned mouse Ngdn cDNA based on its homology with
Drosophila ngdn. The mouse and human protein sequences are 89%
identical. The 311-amino acid human NGDN protein has 3 conserved
N-terminal EIF4E-binding motifs. Northern blot analysis showed Ngdn
expression in mouse cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, kidney, spleen,
ovary, and testis. Western blot analysis detected Ngdn protein in all
mouse tissues except muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation and cap column assays in mouse cerebellum
extracts, Jung et al. (2006) determined that Ngdn physically interacts
with EIF4E. Using Ngdn EIF4E-binding motif deletion mutants, they showed
that all 3 motifs contribute to binding and can compensate for one
another. In Xenopus oocytes, Ngdn coimmunoprecipitated with CPEB, and
Ngdn inhibited translation of cytoplasmic polyadenylation element
(CPE)-containing mRNAs in oocytes. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of
developing Xenopus embryos detected ngdn mRNA in the animal pole
blastomeres of the 4-cell embryo and in the neural crest and neural
folds of the neurula-stage embryo. Injection of antisense
morpholino-oligonucleotides against ngdn resulted in disrupted neural
tube closure and neural crest migration.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NGDN
gene to chromosome 14 (TMAP SHGC-62927).

REFERENCE 1. Jung, M.-Y.; Lorenz, L.; Richter, J. D.: Translational control
by neuroguidin, a eukaryotic initiation factor 4E and CPEB binding
protein. Molec. Cell Biol. 26: 4277-4287, 2006.

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 2/20/2007

EDITED wwang: 02/20/2007
wwang: 2/20/2007

609666	TITLE *609666 TWO-PORE SEGMENT CHANNEL 1; TPCN1
;;TWO-PORE CHANNEL 1; TPC1;;
KIAA1169
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-gated Ca(2+) and Na+ channels have 4 homologous domains, each
containing 6 transmembrane segments, S1 to S6. TPCN1 is similar to these
channels, but it has only 2 domains containing S1 to S6 (Ishibashi et
al., 2000).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned TPCN1, which they designated
KIAA1169. The deduced 775-amino acid protein, which may be N-terminally
truncated, contains motifs associated with ion transport proteins.
RT-PCR ELISA detected robust expression in all adult and fetal tissues
and specific brain regions examined. Highest expression was in heart and
kidney, and lowest expression was in spleen.

Ishibashi et al. (2000) cloned rat Tpcn1, which they called Tpc1. The
deduced 819-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 94.6
kD. It contains 2 homologous domains, each of which has 6 transmembrane
segments (S1 to S6) and a putative pore loop between S5 and S6. Northern
blot analysis detected a 5-kb transcript expressed at highest levels in
rat kidney, followed by liver, lung, and spleen. In rat kidney, Tpc1 was
expressed at the apical membrane of medullary collecting ducts. By EST
database analysis, Ishibashi et al. (2000) identified likely human and
plant orthologs of Tpc1.

GENE FUNCTION

Calcraft et al. (2009) showed that 2-pore channels (TPCs) comprise a
family of nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP)
receptors, with human TPC1 and chicken TPC3 being expressed on endosomal
membranes, and human TPC2 on lysosomal membranes when expressed in
HEK293 cells. Membranes enriched with TPC2 show high affinity NAADP
binding, and TPC2 underpins NAADP-induced Ca(2+) release from
lysosome-related stores that is subsequently amplified by Ca(2+)-induced
Ca(2+) release by inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (InsP3Rs).
Responses to NAADP were abolished by disrupting the lysosomal proton
gradient and by ablating TPC2 expression, but were only attenuated by
depleting endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) stores or by blocking InsP3Rs.
Thus, TPCs form NAADP receptors that release Ca(2+) from acidic
organelles, which can trigger further Ca(2+) signals via
sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum. Calcraft et al. (2009) concluded
that TPCs provide insights into the regulation and organization of
Ca(2+) signals in animal cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TPCN1
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP D12S1195E).

REFERENCE 1. Calcraft, P. J.; Ruas, M.; Pan, Z.; Cheng, X.; Arredouani, A.;
Hao, X.; Tang, J.; Rietdorf, K.; Teboul, L.; Chuang, K.-T.; Lin, P.;
Xiao, R.; and 9 others: NAADP mobilizes calcium from acidic organelles
through two-pore channels. Nature 459: 596-600, 2009.

2. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

3. Ishibashi, K.; Suzuki, M.; Imai, M.: Molecular cloning of a novel
form (two-repeat) protein related to voltage-gated sodium and calcium
channels. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 270: 370-376, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/19/2005

EDITED alopez: 08/24/2009
terry: 8/17/2009
mgross: 10/19/2005

602327	TITLE *602327 PLECKSTRIN AND SEC7 DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN; PSD
;;TYL;;
EXCHANGE FACTOR FOR ARF6; EFA6;;
EFA6A
DESCRIPTION Perletti et al. (1997) identified a novel human gene on 10q24,
contiguous to the 3-prime end of the NFKB2 gene (164012) in a
tail-to-tail arrangement. They described a cDNA of 4,307 bp, isolated
from an adult human brain cDNA library, which contains an open reading
frame encoding a putative protein of 645 amino acids with a predicted
molecular weight of 71 kD. Database homology searches indicated that the
novel gene codes for a putative protein containing 2 discrete domains
with significant homology to the Sec7 and pleckstrin-homology (PH)
domains, respectively. They used the gene symbol PSD for
'pleckstrin-Sec7 domains.' Northern blot analysis of a panel of RNAs
from normal human tissues using the PSD cDNA as probe revealed the
presence of 3 different tissue-specific transcripts of approximately
4.3, 2.3, and 1.8 kb, the longest of which was expressed only in brain.
The data suggested that the PSD gene may encode a protein related to the
protein family containing both the Sec7 in the PH domains and thought to
be involved in signaling transduction processes. Other human proteins in
the same family include cytohesin-1 (Kolanus et al., 1996) and ARNO
(602488) (Chardin et al., 1996).

Derrien et al. (2002) reported that PSD, which they called EFA6A, is 63%
identical to EFA6B (PSD4; 614442) and contains a Sec7 domain adjacent to
a PH domain, followed by a C-terminal coiled-coil motif. Northern blot
analysis showed that EFA6A expression was largely restricted to brain,
with a smaller transcript expressed in small intestine, colon, and
ovary. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated punctate cell surface
expression of ARF6 (600464) and EFA6A, like EFA6B, in transfected baby
hamster kidney cells. Both EFA6 proteins also colocalized with F-actin
(see 102610).

GENE FUNCTION

Derrien et al. (2002) found that recombinant EFA6A stimulated nucleotide
exchange on myristoylated ARF6, with only low activity on ARF1 (103180).
The C-terminal region was involved in microvilli lengthening. Derrien et
al. (2002) concluded that EFA6 family guanine exchange factors are
modular proteins that work through the coordinated action of the
catalytic Sec7 domain to promote ARF6 activation, through the PH domain
to regulate association with specific subdomains of the plasma membrane,
and through the C-terminal region to control actin cytoskeletal
reorganization.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the PSD gene to chromosome 10q24.32 based on an
alignment of the PSD sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC142689) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Chardin, P.; Paris, S.; Antonny, B.; Robineau, S.; Beraud-Dufour,
S.; Jackson, C. L.; Chabre, M.: A human exchange factor for ARF contains
Sec7- and pleckstrin-homology domains. Nature 384: 481-484, 1996.

2. Derrien, V.; Couillault, C.; Franco, M.; Martineau, S.; Montcourrier,
P.; Houlgatte, R.; Chavrier, P.: A conserved C-terminal domain of
EFA6-family ARF6-guanine nucleotide exchange factors induces lengthening
of microvilli-like membrane protrusions. J. Cell Sci. 115: 2867-2879,
2002.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/24/2012.

4. Kolanus, W.; Nagel, W.; Schiller, B.; Zeitlmann, L.; Godar, S.;
Stockinger, H.; Seed, B.: Alpha-L-beta-2 integrin/LFA-1 binding to
ICAM-1 induced by cytohesin-1, a cytoplasmic regulatory molecule. Cell 86:
233-242, 1996.

5. Perletti, L.; Talarico, D.; Trecca, D.; Ronchetti, D.; Fracchiolla,
N. S.; Maiolo, A. T.; Neri, A.: Identification of a novel gene, PSD,
adjacent to NFKB2/lyt-10, which contains Sec7 and pleckstrin-homology
domains. Genomics 46: 251-259, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 01/24/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/16/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/24/2012
terry: 12/16/2011
mgross: 4/21/2004
mgross: 1/20/2000
mgross: 3/18/1999
carol: 5/22/1998
dholmes: 3/10/1998
mark: 2/9/1998

300658	TITLE *300658 NDP GENE; NDP
;;NORRIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NDP gene encodes norrin, a secreted cysteine-rich protein that
belongs to the cystine knot growth factor family (Meindl et al., 1992).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Berger et al. (1992) and Chen et al. (1992)
isolated a likely candidate gene for the site of mutation in Norrie
disease (ND; 310600). The gene was found to be expressed in retina,
choroid, and fetal brain by Berger et al. (1992) and in fetal and adult
brain by Chen et al. (1992). It was evolutionarily conserved and encoded
a predicted protein of 133 amino acids. The genomic equivalent of the
cDNA spanned a maximum of 50 kb (Chen et al., 1992) and was partly
deleted in several typical Norrie disease patients.

By studying the number and spacing of cysteine residues, Meindl et al.
(1992) detected homologies between the NDP gene product and a C-terminal
domain that is common to a group of proteins including mucins.

Chen et al. (1993) found that expression of the NDP gene is not confined
to the eye or to the brain. They found homology with cysteine-rich
protein-binding domains of intermediate-early genes implicated in the
regulation of cell proliferation. This led them to propose that the NDP
molecule likewise may be involved in the pathway that regulates neural
cell differentiation and proliferation.

Meitinger et al. (1993) reported that sequence pattern searches and
3-dimensional modeling suggested that the NDP protein has a tertiary
structure similar to that of transforming growth factor-beta (see TGFB1,
190180). The model identified NDP as a member of an emerging family of
growth factors containing a cystine knot motif, with direct implications
for the physiologic role of NDP.

Berger et al. (1996) cloned the mouse Ndp gene, which encodes a
polypeptide that shares 94% sequence identity with the human protein.
RNA in situ hybridization revealed expression in retina, brain, and
olfactory bulb and epithelium of 2-week-old mice.

GENE STRUCTURE

Meindl et al. (1992) found that only exons 2 and 3 of the NDP gene are
translated. Exon 2 contains the first 58 codons of the open reading
frame. The intron that follows it is roughly 14.5 kb. Exon 3 is the
largest exon and contains residues 59-133 of the open reading frame and
a 917-bp 3-prime untranslated region.

Chen et al. (1993) determined that the NDP gene spans 28 kb and contains
3 exons, the first of which is entirely contained within the 5-prime
untranslated region.

MAPPING

Sims et al. (1992) narrowed the mapping of the NDP gene to a 150-kb
region on chromosome Xp defined by a recombination and by the smallest
submicroscopic chromosomal deletion associated with Norrie disease. They
concluded that the order of loci was: pter--DXS7--MAOA--MAOB--NDP--cen.

Berger et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Ndp gene to the X chromosome.

GENE FUNCTION

In studies in COS-7 cells, Perez-Vilar and Hill (1997) found that norrin
was present only in cell lysates and the extracellular matrix. Further
analysis showed that most of the norrin in the extracellular matrix
formed cross-linked disulfide-bonded oligomers that contained up to 20
monomers.

By in situ hybridization of NDP mRNA, Hartzer et al. (1999) found
abundant signals in the outer nuclear, inner nuclear, and ganglion cell
layers of the retina in all 3 species (mouse, rabbit, and human)
examined. There was no significant expression in the vitreous humor,
lens, or rod outer segment. High expression levels were also observed in
the cerebellar granular layer, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, cortex, and
epithelium of the rabbit brain. These data suggested that the NDP gene
could play a critical role in the differentiation or maintenance of the
differentiated state of the retina.

Incomplete retinal vascularization occurs in both Norrie disease and
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). One form of FEVR (EVR1;
133780) is caused by defects in frizzled-4 (FZD4; 604579), a presumptive
Wnt receptor. Xu et al. (2004) determined that norrin and FZD4 function
as a ligand-receptor pair based on the similarity in vascular phenotypes
caused by norrin and FZD4 mutations in humans and mice; the specificity
and high affinity of norrin-FZD4 binding; the high efficiency with which
norrin induces FZD4- and LRP (see 107770)-dependent activation of the
classic Wnt pathway; and the signaling defects displayed by
disease-associated variants of norrin and FZD4. These data defined a
norrin-FZD4 signaling system that plays a central role in vascular
development in the eye and ear, and they indicated that ligands
unrelated to Wnts can act through frizzled receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Norrie Disease

Berger et al. (1992) identified small deletions in the NDP gene in
several patients with Norrie disease. In 12 of 17 unrelated patients
with Norrie disease, Berger et al. (1992) identified 11 different
mutations in the NDP gene (see, e.g., 300658.0001-300658.0002). Most of
the mutations were located in exon 3.

In 3 unrelated patients with Norrie disease, Meindl et al. (1992)
identified 3 missense mutations in the NDP gene
(300658.0003-300658.0005). All 3 mutations replaced evolutionarily
conserved cysteines or created new cysteine codons, emphasizing the
functional importance of these sites. These findings and the clinical
features of Norrie disease suggested a possible role for the NDP gene in
a neuroectodermal cell-cell interaction.

- Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy

Shastry et al. (1997) reported 4 novel missense mutations in the NDP
gene associated with 1 X-linked and 4 sporadic cases of familial
exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR2; 305390) (see 300658.0013).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Among 109 patients with pediatric vitreoretinopathies, Wu et al. (2007)
identified 11 with a mutation in the NDP gene. They found that NDP
mutations disrupting the cysteine-knot motif corresponded to severe
retinal dysgenesis and a diagnosis of Norrie disease, whereas patients
with noncysteine mutations had varying degrees of avascular peripheral
retina, extraretinal vasculature, and subretinal exudate.

Kondo et al. (2007) screened 62 FEVR and 3 ND Japanese probands and
family members for mutations in the NDP gene and identified 5 different
mutations (1 splicing and 4 missense) in 4 FEVR patients and 2 ND
patients. One proband with a missense mutation in the signal sequence of
NDP had significant phenotypic heterogeneity between the affected eyes,
indicating a diagnosis of FEVR or ND. The proband with a splicing
mutation had typical features of ND, whereas a maternal nephew had a
diagnosis of FEVR.

Using a norrin-based reporter assay to analyze the effects of
FEVR-causing mutations, Qin et al. (2008) demonstrated that a nonsense
mutation in FZD4 completely abolished signaling activity, whereas
missense mutations in FZD4 and LRP5 caused a moderate level of
reduction, and a double missense mutation in both genes caused a severe
reduction in activity, correlating roughly with clinical phenotypes.
Norrin mutants, however, showed variable effects on signal transduction,
and no correlation with clinical phenotypes was observed; norrin mutants
also showed impaired cell surface binding. Qin et al. (2008) concluded
that norrin signaling is involved in FEVR pathogenesis, but suggested
the presence of an unknown parallel pathway at the level of
receptor/ligand binding as evidenced by the moderate and variable signal
reduction lacking a clear genotype/phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Berger et al. (1996) used gene targeting technology to generate Ndp
mutant mice. Hemizygous mice carrying a replacement mutation in exon 2
of the Ndp gene developed retrolental structures in the vitreous body
and showed an overall disorganization of the retinal ganglion cell
layer. The outer plexiform layer disappeared occasionally, resulting in
a juxtaposed inner and outer nuclear layer. The ocular findings were
consistent with observations in patients with Norrie disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, ARG90PRO

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Berger et al. (1992)
identified a 685G-C transversion in exon 3 of the NDP gene, resulting in
an arg90-to-pro (R90P) substitution. The patient had no hearing
impairment or mental disturbances, but had a family history of the
disorder.

.0002
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, SER75CYS

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Berger et al. (1992)
identified a 640C-G transversion in exon 3 of the NDP gene, resulting in
a ser75-to-cys (S75C) substitution.

.0003
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, VAL60GLU

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Meindl et al. (1992)
identified a 595T-A in the NDP gene, resulting in a val60-to-glu (V60E)
substitution, inherited from the mother.

.0004
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, TYR44CYS

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Meindl et al. (1992)
identified a 547A-G transition in the NDP gene, resulting in a
tyr44-to-cys (Y44C) substitution.

.0005
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS96TYR

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Meindl et al. (1992)
identified a 703G-A transition in the NDP gene, resulting in a
cys96-to-tyr (C96Y) substitution.

.0006
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, LEU124PHE

In a family with X-linked exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR2; 305390)
manifested by members of 4 generations (Dudgeon, 1979) and found to have
possible linkage to markers in the region of the Norrie disease locus
(Fullwood et al., 1993), Chen et al. (1993) demonstrated a C-to-T
transition in the NDP gene, resulting in a leu124-to-phe (L124F)
substitution in the highly conserved region of the NDP gene. The
mutation was absent in unaffected family members and in normal controls.

.0007
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS69SER

In a family with a manifesting female carrier of Norrie disease
(310600), Chen et al. (1993) identified a 614G-C transversion in the NDP
gene, resulting in a cys69-to-ser (C69S) substitution. The carrier
female had been noted to have severely impaired vision at age 2.
Examination revealed a cataract in the right eye and total retinal
detachment with a vascularized mass behind the lens. In the left eye, a
retinal fold and traction retinal detachment in the temporal periphery
were evident. The child was otherwise normal. Her carrier mother was
normal. Two of the mother's brothers had Norrie disease.

.0008
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS128TER

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Wong et al. (1993) identified
a dinucleotide GC-to-AA change in the NDP gene, resulting in a
cys128-to-ter (C128X) substitution. The mutant protein lacked the last 6
amino acids of the carboxyl terminus. Wong et al. (1993) pointed out
that the NDP protein normally has 11 cysteines, that the codon 128
mutation involved the tenth cysteine, and that most reported mutations
have involved this amino acid residue.

.0009
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, MET1VAL

In 2 Japanese males with Norrie disease (310600) from apparently
unrelated families, Isashiki et al. (1995) identified an A-to-G
transition at the initiation codon of exon 2 of the NDP gene, resulting
in a met1-to-val (M1V) substitution. Both mothers were heterozygous for
the mutation. Neither patient showed mental retardation or hearing
impairment. Although the 2 families had lived in the same prefecture in
southwestern Japan for at least 2 centuries, no relationship between the
2 families could be identified. All previously identified mutations had
occurred in single families, indicating a marked heterogeneity of
mutations. The finding of the same mutation in 2 apparently unrelated
families, taken with the rarity of the disease, suggested that they
shared a common ancestor.

.0010
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, ARG121TRP

In a 29-year-old male patient with X-linked exudative vitreoretinopathy
(EVR2; 305390), Fuchs et al. (1995) found an arg121-to-trp (R121W)
mutation in the NDP gene. Low visual acuity had been noted since birth.
When the patient was 3 years old, the right eye was enucleated because
an intraocular tumor was suspected. Histologic examination showed severe
intraocular inflammation without malignancy. Visual acuity in the left
eye remained unchanged until adulthood. The retina showed severe
temporal dragging of the vessels, including the macula. Severely reduced
visual acuity was known in several maternal male relatives; the mother
and maternal grandmother had normal visual acuity.

Shastry et al. (1995) identified the same mutation in affected members
in 3 generations of a family segregating X-linked exudative
vitreoretinopathy.

Shastry (1998) identified the R121W mutation in a 'simplex' case of
exudative vitreoretinopathy.

A different substitution at the same codon (R121L) has been described
(300658.0017).

.0011
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, LEU13ARG

In affected members of a large Cuban kindred with Norrie disease
(310600), Fuchs et al. (1994) identified a 454T-G transversion in the
NDP gene, resulting in a leu13-to-arg (L13R) substitution. The
nucleotide substitution creates a new HhaI restriction site. This
mutation was identified in a large Cuban pedigree which consisted of 380
members, 46 of whom were affected. The disorder showed a typical pattern
of X-linked inheritance over 7 generations. Eighteen patients examined
shared similar clinical features. Pseudoglioma was always present in
both eyes, frequently with phthisis bulbi, enophthalmos, opaque cornea,
and cataract. In addition, about 45% of the patients showed moderate or
severe mental retardation. Hearing loss was recognized in 78% of the
patients, with different ages of onset.

.0012
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, LEU61PHE

Rehm et al. (1997) identified a large Costa Rican kindred in which 15
males were afflicted with congenital blindness, progressive hearing
loss, and venous insufficiency. Because of an X-linked pattern of
inheritance and the ophthalmologic and otologic findings, including
bilateral retinal dysplasia and detachment and progressive bilateral
sensorineural hearing loss, a tentative diagnosis of Norrie disease
(310600) was considered. However, venous insufficiency was a clinical
finding apparently not previously recognized in association with Norrie
disease. Linkage analysis using microsatellite repeat markers
demonstrated linkage to the Norrie disease region and studies of the NDP
gene showed a point mutation in the third exon resulting in an
leu61-to-phe (L61F) substitution. No obligate carrier females had any
ocular or relevant pathology, but all affected males had varicose veins
with peripheral venous stasis ulcers. Phlebography and other radiologic
examinations showed deep venous system insufficiency and moderate
dilatation of veins. Transfemoral arteriography showed patency of the
femoral and distal arterial system.

.0013
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY, X-LINKED
NDP, HIS42ARG

Shastry et al. (1997) found an H42R mutation of the NDP gene segregating
with exudative vitreoretinopathy (305390) in 3 generations of a family.
They also identified mutations in the NDP gene in 4 sporadic cases of
FEVR.

.0014
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, 1-BP DEL

In a boy with Norrie disease (310600), Chynn et al. (1996) identified a
1-bp deletion in codon 35 of the NDP gene. The deletion changed the
amino acids encoded by codons 35 through 39 and resulted in a premature
stop at codon 40. The unaffected mother was heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0015
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, ALA105THR

In an Italian family in which 5 males in 4 generations had
characteristic ophthalmologic findings of Norrie disease (310600),
Torrente et al. (1997) identified an ala105-to-thr (A105T) missense
mutation in the NDP gene. Affected individuals had no mental retardation
or hearing abnormality.

.0016
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, CYS110GLY

In an Italian family with exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR2; 305390) in
an X-linked pedigree pattern, Torrente et al. (1997) demonstrated a
cys110-to-gly (C110G) mutation in the NDP gene.

.0017
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, ARG121LEU

In a large kindred with X-linked recessive exudative vitreoretinopathy
(EVR2; 305390), Johnson et al. (1996) identified an arg121-to-leu
(R121L) mutation in the NDP gene. The clinical phenotype and rate of
disease progression were extremely variable, with progression to total
retinal detachment occurring before the age of 2 years in some and later
than 21 years in others. Johnson et al. (1996) pointed out that all
mutations identified in X-linked vitreoretinopathy have been missense
mutations, presumably not affecting the 3-dimensional structure of the
NDP gene product. Note that the same codon is involved in the
arg121-to-trp mutation (300658.0010). Johnson et al. (1996) suggested
that the mutations causing X-linked vitreoretinopathy cluster around
residues 121-126, but this is not entirely true, as indicated by the
cys110-to-gly mutation (300658.0016) and the his42-to-arg mutation
(300658.0013).

.0018
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS96TRP

Black et al. (1999) reported a woman with a unilateral variant of Coats
disease (300216) who gave birth to a son affected by Norrie disease
(310600). Both carried a 704C-G transversion in the NDP gene, resulting
in a cys96-to-trp (C96W) substitution. Subsequent analysis of the
retinas of 9 enucleated eyes from males with Coats disease demonstrated
a somatic C96W mutation in the NDP gene in 1 that was not present in
nonretinal tissue. Black et al. (1999) suggested that Coats
telangiectasis is secondary to somatic mutation in the NDP gene, which
results in a deficiency of norrin within the developing retina. This
supported observations that the protein is critical for normal retinal
vasculogenesis. The authors noted that a cys96-to-tyr substitution
(300658.0005) had previously been described.

.0019
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, VAL45GLU

In a boy with Norrie disease (310600), Lev et al. (2007) identified a
134T-A transversion in the NDP gene, resulting in a val45-to-glu (V45E)
substitution. He had profound mental retardation and myoclonic seizures
with hypsarrhythmia on EEG. His asymptomatic mother was heterozygous for
the mutation. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that V45E lies within an
extracellular localization motif and may alter the distribution pattern
of norrin, which in turn may alter norrin-mediated cell-cell
communication.

.0020
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, SER73TER

In affected male members of a family with Norrie disease (310600),
Walker et al. (1997) identified a 626C-A transversion in exon 3 of the
NDP gene, resulting in a ser73-to-ter (S73X) substitution. Affected
members had a severe ocular phenotype, but no mental retardation or
deafness.

.0021
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, SER101PHE

In affected male members of a family with Norrie disease (310600),
Walker et al. (1997) identified a 710C-T transition in exon 3 of the NDP
gene, resulting in a ser101-to-phe (S101F) substitution. Affected
members had a less severe ocular phenotype compared to other patients
with Norrie disease and no mental retardation or deafness.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bergen et al. (1993); Bleeker-Wagemakers et al. (1985); Chen et al.
(1992); Harmon et al. (1993); Hattori et al. (1991); Isashiki et al.
(1995); Meindl et al. (1995); Schuback et al. (1995)
REFERENCE 1. Bergen, A. A. B.; Wapenaar, M. C.; Schuurman, E. J. M.; Diergaarde,
P. J.; Lerach, H.; Monaco, A. P.; Bakker, E.; Bleeker-Wagemakers,
E. M.; van Ommen, G. J. B.: Detection of a new submicroscopic Norrie
disease deletion interval with a novel DNA probe isolated by differential
Alu PCR fingerprint cloning. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 62: 231-235,
1993.

2. Berger, W.; Meindl, A.; van de Pol, T. J. R.; Cremers, F. P. M.;
Ropers, H. H.; Doerner, C.; Monaco, A.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Lebo, R.;
Warburg, M.; Zergollern, L.; Lorenz, B.; Gal, A.; Bleeker-Wagemakers,
E. M.; Meitinger, T.: Isolation of a candidate gene for Norrie disease
by positional cloning. Nature Genet. 1: 199-203, 1992. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 2: 84 only, 1992.

3. Berger, W.; van de Pol, D.; Bachner, D.; Oerlemans, F.; Winkens,
H.; Hameister, H.; Wieringa, B.; Hendriks, W.; Ropers, H.-H.: An
animal model for Norrie disease (ND): gene targeting of the mouse
ND gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 51-59, 1996.

4. Berger, W.; van de Pol, D.; Warburg, M.; Gal, A.; Bleeker-Wagemakers,
L.; de Silva, H.; Meindl, A.; Meitinger, T.; Cremers, F.; Ropers,
H.-H.: Mutations in the candidate gene for Norrie disease. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 1: 461-465, 1992.

5. Black, G. C. M.; Perveen, R.; Bonshek, R.; Cahill, M.; Clayton-Smith,
J.; Lloyd, I. C.; McLeod, D.: Coats' disease of the retina (unilateral
retinal telangiectasis) caused by somatic mutation in the NDP gene:
a role for norrin in retinal angiogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
2031-2035, 1999.

6. Bleeker-Wagemakers, L. M.; Friedrich, U.; Gal, A.; Wienker, T.
F.; Warburg, M.; Ropers, H.-H.: Close linkage between Norrie disease,
a cloned DNA sequence from the proximal short arm, and the centromere
of the X chromosome. Hum. Genet. 71: 211-214, 1985.

7. Chen, Z.-Y.; Battinelli, E. M.; Fielder, A.; Bundey, S.; Sims,
K.; Breakefield, X. O.; Craig, I. W.: A mutation in the Norrie disease
gene (NDP) associated with X-linked familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Nature
Genet. 5: 180-183, 1993.

8. Chen, Z.-Y.; Battinelli, E. M.; Hendriks, R. W.; Powell, J. F.;
Middleton-Price, H.; Sims, K. B.; Breakefield, X. O.; Craig, I. W.
: Norrie disease gene: characterization of deletions and possible
function. Genomics 16: 533-535, 1993.

9. Chen, Z.-Y.; Battinelli, E. M.; Woodruff, G.; Young, I.; Breakefield,
X. O.; Craig, I. W.: Characterization of a mutation within the NDP
gene in a family with a manifesting female carrier. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2:
1727-1729, 1993.

10. Chen, Z.-Y.; Hendriks, R. W.; Jobling, M. A.; Powell, J. F.; Breakefield,
X. O.; Sims, K. B.; Craig, I. W.: Isolation and characterization
of a candidate gene for Norrie disease. Nature Genet. 1: 204-208,
1992.

11. Chen, Z.-Y.; Sims, K. B.; Coleman, M.; Donnai, D.; Monaco, A.;
Breakefield, X. O.; Davies, K. E.; Craig, I. W.: Characterization
of a YAC containing part or all of the Norrie disease locus. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 1: 161-164, 1992.

12. Chynn, E. W.; Walton, D. S.; Hahn, L. B.; Dryja, T. P.: Norrie
disease: diagnosis of a simplex case by DNA analysis. Arch. Ophthal. 114:
1136-1138, 1996.

13. Dudgeon, J.: Familial exudative vitreo-retinopathy. Trans. Ophthal.
Soc. U.K. 99: 45-49, 1979.

14. Fuchs, S.; Kellner, U.; Wedemann, H.; Gal, A.: Missense mutation
(Arg121Trp) in the Norrie disease gene associated with X-linked exudative
vitreoretinopathy. Hum. Mutat. 6: 257-259, 1995.

15. Fuchs, S.; Xu, S. Y.; Caballero, M.; Salcedo, M.; La O, A.; Wedemann,
H.; Gal, A.: A missense point mutation (Leu13Arg) of the Norrie disease
gene in a large Cuban kindred with Norrie disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
655-656, 1994.

16. Fullwood, P.; Jones, J.; Bundey, S.; Dudgeon, J.; Fielder, A.
R.; Kilpatrick, M. W.: X linked exudative vitreoretinopathy: clinical
features and genetic linkage analysis. Brit. J. Ophthal. 77: 168-170,
1993.

17. Harmon, D. L.; Gardner-Medwin, D.; Stirling, J. L.: Two new mutations
in a late infantile Tay-Sachs patient are both in exon 1 of the beta-hexosaminidase
alpha subunit gene. J. Med. Genet. 30: 123-128, 1993.

18. Hartzer, M. K.; Cheng, M.; Liu, X.; Shastry, B. S.: Localization
of the Norrie disease gene mRNA by in situ hybridization. Brain Res.
Bull. 49: 355-358, 1999.

19. Hattori, Y.; Yamashiro, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Morishita, M.;
Yamamoto, K.; Yamamoto, K.; Narai, S.; Kimura, A.: A new beta-thalassemia
mutation (initiation codon ATG-to-GTG) found in the Japanese population. Hemoglobin 15:
317-325, 1991.

20. Isashiki, Y.; Ohba, N.; Yanagita, T.; Hokita, N.; Doi, N.; Nakagawa,
M.; Ozawa, M.; Kuroda, N.: Novel mutation at the initiation codon
in the Norrie disease gene in two Japanese families. Hum. Genet. 95:
105-108, 1995.

21. Isashiki, Y.; Ohba, N.; Yanagita, T.; Hokita, N.; Hotta, Y.; Hayakawa,
M.; Fujiki, K.; Tanabe, U.: Mutations in the Norrie disease gene:
a new mutation in a Japanese family. (Letter) Brit. J. Ophthal. 79:
703-708, 1995.

22. Johnson, K.; Mintz-Hittner, H. A.; Conley, Y. P.; Ferrell, R.
E.: X-linked exudative vitreoretinopathy caused by an arginine to
leucine substitution (R121L) in the Norrie disease protein. Clin.
Genet. 50: 113-115, 1996.

23. Kondo, H.; Qin, M.; Kusaka, S.; Tahira, T.; Hasebe, H.; Hayashi,
H.; Uchio, E.; Hayashi, K.: Novel mutations in Norrie disease gene
in Japanese patients with Norrie disease and familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1276-1282, 2007.

24. Lev, D.; Weigl, Y.; Hasan, M.; Gak, E.; Davidovich, M.; Vinkler,
C.; Leshinsky-Silver, E.; Lerman-Sagie, T.; Watemberg, N.: A novel
missense mutation in the NDP gene in a child with Norrie disease and
severe neurological involvement including infantile spasms. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 143A: 921-924, 2007.

25. Meindl, A.; Berger, W.; Meitinger, T.; van de Pol, D.; Achatz,
H.; Dorner, C.; Haasemann, M.; Hellebrand, H.; Gal, A.; Cremers, F.;
Ropers, H.-H.: Norrie disease is caused by mutations in an extracellular
protein resembling C-terminal globular domain of mucins. Nature Genet. 2:
139-143, 1992.

26. Meindl, A.; Lorenz, B.; Achatz, H.; Hellebrand, H.; Schmitz-Valckenberg,
P.; Meitinger, T.: Missense mutations in the NDP gene in patients
with a less severe course of Norrie disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4:
489-490, 1995.

27. Meitinger, T.; Meindl, A.; Bork, P.; Rost, B.; Sander, C.; Haasemann,
M.; Murken, J.: Molecular modeling of the Norrie disease protein
predicts a cystine knot growth factor tertiary structure. Nature
Genet. 5: 376-380, 1993.

28. Perez-Vilar, J.; Hill, R. L.: Norrie disease protein (norrin)
forms disulfide-linked oligomers associated with the extracellular
matrix. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 33410-33415, 1997.

29. Qin, M.; Kondo, H.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K.: Moderate reduction
of Norrin signaling activity associated with the causative missense
mutations identified in patients with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Hum.
Genet. 122: 615-623, 2008.

30. Rehm, H. L.; Gutierrez-Espeleta, G. A.; Garcia, R.; Jimenez, G.;
Khetarpal, U.; Priest, J. M.; Sims, K. B.; Keats, B. J. B.; Morton,
C. C.: Norrie disease gene mutation in a large Costa Rican kindred
with a novel phenotype including venous insufficiency. Hum. Mutat.
9: 402-408, 1997.

31. Schuback, D. E.; Chen, Z. Y.; Craig, I. W.; Breakefield, X. O.;
Sims, K. B.: Mutations in the Norrie disease gene. Hum. Mutat. 5:
285-292, 1995.

32. Shastry, B. S.: Identification of a recurrent missense mutation
in the Norrie disease gene associated with a simplex case of exudative
vitreoretinopathy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 246: 35-38, 1998.

33. Shastry, B. S.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Plager, D. A.; Hartzer, M.
K.; Trese, M. T.: Linkage and candidate gene analysis in X-linked
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Genomics 27: 341-344, 1995.

34. Shastry, B. S.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Trese, M. T.: Identification
of novel missense mutations in the Norrie disease gene associated
with one X-linked and four sporadic cases of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Hum.
Mutat. 9: 396-401, 1997.

35. Sims, K. B.; Lebo, R. V.; Benson, G.; Shalish, C.; Schuback, D.;
Chen, Z. Y.; Bruns, G.; Craig, I. W.; Golbus, M. S.; Breakefield,
X. O.: The Norrie disease gene maps to a 150 kb region on chromosome
Xp11.3. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 83-89, 1992.

36. Torrente, I.; Mangino, M.; Gennarelli, M.; Novelli, G.; Giannotti,
A.; Vadala, P.; Dallapiccola, B.: Two new missense mutations (A105T
and C110G) in the norrin gene in two Italian families with Norrie
disease and familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. (Letter) Am. J.
Med. Genet. 72: 242-244, 1997.

37. Walker, J. L.; Dixon, J.; Fenton, C. R.; Hungerford, J.; Lynch,
S. A.; Stenhouses, S. A. R.; Christian, A.; Craig, I. W.: Two new
mutations in exon 3 of the NDP gene: S73X and S101F associated with
severe and less severe ocular phenotype, respectively. Hum. Mutat. 9:
53-56, 1997.

38. Wong, F.; Goldberg, M. F.; Hao, Y.: Identification of a nonsense
mutation at codon 128 of the Norrie's disease gene in a male infant. Arch.
Ophthal. 111: 1553-1557, 1993.

39. Wu, W.-C.; Drenser, K.; Trese, M.; Capone, A., Jr.; Dailey, W.
: Retinal phenotype-genotype correlation of pediatric patients expressing
mutations in the Norrie disease gene. Arch. Ophthal. 125: 225-230,
2007.

40. Xu, Q.; Wang, Y.; Dabdoub, A.; Smallwood, P. M.; Williams, J.;
Woods, C.; Kelley, M. W.; Jiang, L.; Tasman, W.; Zhang, K.; Nathans,
J.: Vascular development in the retina and inner ear: control by
Norrin and Frizzled-4, a high-affinity ligand-receptor pair. Cell 116:
883-895, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/12/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/27/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 10/19/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 7/17/2007

EDITED wwang: 01/24/2011
carol: 12/19/2008
wwang: 3/17/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
carol: 11/27/2007
carol: 10/19/2007
carol: 7/27/2007
ckniffin: 7/27/2007
ckniffin: 7/26/2007

614792	TITLE *614792 TRANSMEMBRANE AND UBIQUITIN-LIKE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; TMUB1
;;DENDRITIC CELL-DERIVED UBIQUITIN-LIKE PROTEIN; DULP;;
SB144;;
C7ORF21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitin-like proteins (ULP) share 15 to 60% identity with ubiquitin at
the amino acid level and are involved in cell cycle progression, DNA
repair, apoptosis, endocytosis of membrane receptors, and cellular
protein location. DULP, a widely expressed protein derived from
dendritic cells, shares 26% identity with ubiquitin (see UBA52, 191321
and UBA80, 191343) (Liu et al., 2009).

CLONING

By random sequencing of a dendritic cell cDNA library, Liu et al. (2009)
isolated a 1,322-bp cDNA with a single open reading frame (ORF) of 738
bp and encoding a 246-amino acid protein that they designated DULP.
Residues 103 to 176 of DULP have homology to UBA80, including to the
essential ile44 hydrophobic patch and the lys6 involved in the formation
of a multiubiquitin chain that binds to the proteasome subunit RPN10
(PSMD4; 601648). However, val-gly substituted for the conserved
diglycine motif, required for conjugation formation by ULPs. RT-PCR
analysis detected wide expression in many, but not all, cancer cell
lines. Western blot analysis showed expression of a 28-kD myc
(190080)-tagged protein. Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated
expression strong in the nucleus and weaker in the cytosol. Transient
expression of DULP resulted in apoptosis that was not mediated through
the proteasome or mitochondria. Liu et al. (2009) concluded that DULP is
a novel ubiquitin-like protein expressed in dendritic cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2009) determined that the DULP gene comprises 2 exons.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Liu et al. (2009) mapped the TMUB1 (DULP) gene to
chromosome 7q36.1.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, G.; Liu, S.; Li, P.; Tang, L.; Han, Y.; An, H.; Li, J.; Dai,
X.; Li, N.; Cao, X.; Yu, Y.: Cloning and characterization of DULP,
a novel ubiquitin-like molecule from human dendritic cells. Cell.
Molec. Immun. 6: 27-33, 2009.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/30/2012

EDITED terry: 12/05/2012
terry: 12/5/2012
alopez: 8/30/2012

609206	TITLE *609206 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION ELONGATION FACTOR 1, EPSILON-1; EEF1E1
;;ELONGATION FACTOR p18
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing cDNAs randomly selected from a cDNA library derived from
human umbilical cord CD34 (142230)-positive cells, Mao et al. (1998)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding EEF1E1. The deduced 174-amino acid
protein is a homolog of the rodent elongation factor p18.

GENE FUNCTION

Park et al. (2005) found that human p18 was induced and translocated to
the nucleus in response to DNA damage. Expression of p18 resulted in
elevated p53 (191170) levels, while p18 depletion blocked p53 induction.
p18 interacted directly with ATM (607585) and ATR (601215) in response
to DNA damage. ATM activity was dependent on the level of p18,
suggesting that p18 is required for activation of ATM. RT-PCR showed
that p18 expression was low in several different human cancer cell lines
and tissues. These results, as well as findings in p18 mutant mice,
suggested that p18 is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor and a key
factor for ATM/ATR-mediated p53 activation.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mao et al. (1998) mapped the EEF1E1 gene
to chromosome 6p25.1-p23.

ANIMAL MODEL

Park et al. (2005) found that inactivation of both p18 alleles in mice
caused embryonic lethality, whereas heterozygous mice showed high
susceptibility to spontaneous tumors.

REFERENCE 1. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

2. Park, B.-J.; Kang, J. W.; Lee, S. W.; Choi, S.-J.; Shin, Y. K.;
Ahn, Y. H.; Choi, Y. H.; Choi, D.; Lee, K. S.; Kim, S.: The haploinsufficient
tumor suppressor p18 upregulates p53 via interactions with ATM/ATR. Cell 120:
209-221, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/16/2005

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 2/16/2005

EDITED mgross: 02/16/2005
mgross: 2/16/2005

606926	TITLE *606926 LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID RECEPTOR 5; LPAR5
;;LPA5;;
G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 92; GPR92;;
GPR93
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs, or GPRs) contain 7 transmembrane
domains and transduce extracellular signals through heterotrimeric G
proteins.

CLONING

Lee et al. (2001) identified GPR92, which they designated GPR93, in a
genomic database using the sequences of the cysteinyl leukotriene-2
receptor (605666) as query. GPR92 encodes a deduced 372-amino acid
protein that shares 36 to 40% sequence identity in the transmembrane
regions with the G protein-coupled purinergic receptor P2Y5 (P2RY5;
609239), GPR23 (300086), and GPR17 (603071).

MAPPING

Lee et al. (2001) mapped the GPR92 gene to chromosome 12 based on
sequence similarity between the GPR92 sequence and a BAC clone (GenBank
GENBANK AC006087) localized to chromosome 12. White et al. (2000)
identified GPR92 near the FGF23 gene on chromosome 12p13.

REFERENCE 1. Lee, D. K.; Nguyen, T.; Lynch, K. R.; Cheng, R.; Vanti, W. B.;
Arkhitko, O.; Lewis, T.; Evans, J. F.; George, S. R.; O'Dowd, B. F.
: Discovery and mapping of ten novel G protein-coupled receptor genes. Gene 275:
83-91, 2001.

2. White, K. E.; Evans, W. E.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.; Speer, M. C.;
Econs, M. J.; Lorenz-Depiereux, B.; Grabowski, M.; Meitinger, T.;
Strom, T. M.: Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated
with mutations in FGF23. Nature Genet. 26: 345-348, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2002

EDITED alopez: 04/22/2008
mgross: 3/4/2005
terry: 11/22/2002
carol: 5/10/2002

114080	TITLE *114080 CALCIUM/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE IV; CAMK4
;;BRAIN Ca(2+)/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE TYPE IV
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein phosphorylation, a prominent activity in the brain, apparently
plays an important role in several neural functions such as neural
transmitter release, ion channel modulation, and axoplasmic transport.
Sikela et al. (1989) identified cDNA clones corresponding to a brain
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, which they referred to as
brain CaM kinase IV (CAMK4). On the basis of Western blot analysis, this
kinase appeared to be restricted to brain in the rat; interestingly, it
was not detected in the brain of the newborn, but became detectable
within a few days after birth.

By immunostaining of adult mouse brain sections, Wei et al. (2002) found
Camk4-labeled neurons in the hippocampus, amygdala, anterior cingulate
cortex, somatosensory cortex, and insular cortex.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis, Sikela et al. (1989) showed that the CAMK4
gene is present in single copy in the mouse and human genomes. Analysis
of DNA from hybrid cells showed that the gene is located on human
chromosome 5, and in situ hybridization indicated that the location is
5q21-q23. By Southern blot analysis of Chinese hamster/mouse somatic
cell hybrids, Sikela et al. (1990) demonstrated that the homologous
mouse locus, Camk4, maps to chromosome 18. Analysis of interspecific
backcrosses positioned Camk4 in the centromeric region near 2 mutations
known to affect neurologic function and fertility. Sikela et al. (1990)
raised the possibility that a defect in Camk4 may be responsible for 1
of these mutant phenotypes.

GENE FUNCTION

Koga et al. (2012) found that knockdown of CAMK4 via small interfering
RNA in T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE;
152700) resulted in augmentation of the percentage of CD25 (IL2RA;
147730)-positive/FOXP3 (300292)-positive regulatory T cells. They
concluded that CAMK4 is important in the generation and function of
regulatory T cells in patients with SLE.

ANIMAL MODEL

Camk4 is a multifunctional serine/threonine protein kinase with limited
tissue distribution that has been implicated in transcriptional
regulation in lymphocytes, neurons, and male germ cells. In the mouse
testis, however, Camk4 is expressed in spermatids and associated with
chromatin and nuclear matrix. Elongating spermatids are not
transcriptionally active, raising the possibility that Camk4 has a novel
function in male germ cells. To investigate the role of Camk4 in
spermatogenesis, Wu et al. (2000) generated mice with a targeted
deletion of the Camk4 gene. Male Camk4 -/- mice were infertile with
impairment of spermiogenesis in late elongating spermatids. The
sequential deposition of sperm basic nuclear proteins on chromatin was
disrupted, with a specific loss of protamine-2 (182890) and prolonged
retention of transition protein-2 (190232) in step-15 spermatids.
Protamine-2 is phosphorylated by Camk4 in vitro, implicating a
connection between Camk4 signaling and the exchange of basic nuclear
proteins in mammalian male germ cells. Defects in protamine-2 have been
identified in sperm of infertile men, suggesting that the results of Wu
et al. (2000) may have clinical implications for the understanding of
human male infertility.

CAMK4 is implicated in the regulation of CRE-dependent transcription. To
investigate the role of this kinase in neuronal plasticity and memory,
Kang et al. (2001) generated transgenic mice in which the expression of
a dominant-negative form of Camk4 was restricted to the postnatal
forebrain. In these transgenic mice, activity-induced Creb (123810)
phosphorylation and Fos (164810) expression were significantly
attenuated. Hippocampal late long-term potentiation (LTP) was also
impaired, whereas basic synaptic function and early LTP were unaffected.
These deficits correlated with impairments in long-term memory,
specifically in its consolidation/retention phase but not in the
acquisition phase. The results indicated that neural activity-dependent
CAMK4 signaling in the neuronal nucleus plays an important role in the
consolidation/retention of hippocampus-dependent long-term memory.

Wei et al. (2002) studied pain and fear memory in Camk4-null mice.
Behavioral responses to an acute noxious stimulus or to prolonged injury
were identical in wildtype and Camk4-null mice, but fear memory was
significantly reduced in the absence of Camk4. Brain sections of
wildtype mice following fear conditioning showed phospho-Creb
immunoreactivity, indicating Creb activation, in memory-related areas
including the hippocampal CA1 region, basolateral amygdala, anterior
cingulate cortex, primary somatosensory cortex, and agranular insular
cortex. Brain sections of Camk4 -/- mice showed no evidence of
fear-induced phospho-Creb in the somatosensory cortex and insular cortex
and lower levels of phospho-Creb in the anterior cingulate cortex.
Electrophysiologic studies indicated that Camk4 contributes to synaptic
potentiation. Stimulation of brain slices induced significant synaptic
potentiation in the anterior cingulate cortex, insular cortex, and
somatosensory cortex of wildtype mice, but reduced or blocked
potentiation in Camk4 -/- mice. Camk4 was also found to be required for
calmodulin (see 114180) translocation in response to KCl application in
the hippocampus, amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, somatosensory
cortex, and insular cortex. Wei et al. (2002) concluded that Camk4 is
crucial in the trapping of Ca(2+)/calmodulin complexes in neuronal
nuclei and in Creb phosphorylation and activation.

CAMK4 expression is developmentally regulated in T lymphocytes and is
highest in CD4 (186940)-positive/CD8 (see 186910)-positive thymocytes.
Using flow cytometric analysis, Raman et al. (2001) showed that
thymocytes from mice lacking Camk4 had impaired thymocyte maturation,
particularly in positive selection, and defective calcium-dependent gene
transcription.

Wu et al. (2002) generated transgenic mice that selectively express in
skeletal muscle a constitutively active form of
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-4. Skeletal muscles from
these mice showed augmented mDNA replication and mitochondrial
biogenesis, upregulation of mitochondrial enzymes involved in fatty acid
metabolism and electron transport, and reduced susceptibility to fatigue
during repetitive contractions. CAMK induced expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 (PGC1; 604517), a
master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis in vivo, and activated the
PGC1 gene promoter in cultured myocytes. Thus, Wu et al. (2002)
concluded that a calcium-regulated signaling pathway controls
mitochondrial biogenesis in mammalian cells.

MRL/lpr mice have decreased Il2 (147680) production and develop an
SLE-like disease. By RT-PCR analysis, Koga et al. (2012) showed that T
cells from MRL/lpr mice had increased nuclear Camk4. MRL/lpr mice
lacking Camk4 had significantly prolonged survival, restoration of Cd4
T-cell Il2 production, and increased numbers of
Cd4-positive/Cd25-positive/Foxp3-positive regulatory T cells. Koga et
al. (2012) concluded that Camk4 is important in the generation and
function of regulatory T cells in lupus-prone mice.

REFERENCE 1. Kang, H.; Sun, L. D.; Atkins, C. M.; Soderling, T. R.; Wilson,
M. A.; Tonegawa, S.: An important role of neural activity-dependent
CaMKIV signaling in the consolidation of long-term memory. Cell 106:
771-783, 2001.

2. Koga, T.; Ichinose, K.; Mizui, M.; Crispin, J. C.; Tsokos, G. C.
: Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV suppresses IL-2 production
and regulatory T cell activity in lupus. J. Immun. 189: 3490-3496,
2012.

3. Raman, V.; Blaeser, F.; Ho, N.; Engle, D. L.; Williams, C. B.;
Chatila, T. A.: Requirement for Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase
type IV/Gr in setting the thymocyte selection threshold. J. Immun. 167:
6270-6278, 2001.

4. Sikela, J. M.; Adamson, M. C.; Wilson-Shaw, D.; Kozak, C. A.:
Genetic mapping of the gene for Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase IV (Camk-4) to mouse chromosome 18. Genomics 8: 579-582,
1990.

5. Sikela, J. M.; Law, M. L.; Kao, F.-T.; Hartz, J. A.; Wei, Q.; Hahn,
W. E.: Chromosomal localization of the human gene for brain Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase type IV. Genomics 4: 21-27, 1989.

6. Wei, F.; Qiu, C.-S.; Liauw, J.; Robinson, D. A.; Ho, N.; Chatila,
T.; Zhuo, M.: Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV is required
for fear memory. Nature Neurosci. 5: 573-579, 2002.

7. Wu, H.; Kanatous, S. B.; Thurmond, F. A.; Gallardo, T.; Isotani,
E.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Williams, R. S.: Regulation of mitochondrial
biogenesis in skeletal muscle by CaMK. Science 296: 349-352, 2002.

8. Wu, J. Y.; Ribar, T. J.; Cummings, D. E.; Burton, K. A.; McKnight,
G. S.; Means, A. R.: Spermiogenesis and exchange of basic nuclear
proteins are impaired in male germ cells lacking Camk4. Nature Genet. 25:
448-452, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 06/13/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/25/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/12/1989

EDITED mgross: 06/13/2013
terry: 5/19/2010
wwang: 12/20/2005
alopez: 7/25/2002
carol: 6/18/2002
terry: 6/13/2002
alopez: 4/17/2002
terry: 4/16/2002
mgross: 1/16/2002
mgross: 9/25/2001
alopez: 8/1/2000
terry: 8/1/2000
alopez: 2/22/1999
carol: 3/26/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/27/1992
carol: 2/4/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989

606044	TITLE *606044 SJOGREN SYNDROME/SCLERODERMA AUTOANTIGEN 1; SSSCA1
;;CENTROMERIC AUTOANTIGEN, 27-KD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The centromere plays an essential role in the pairing and partitioning
of replicated chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis and is recognized by
anticentromere antibodies in patients with autoimmune disorders. By
immunoscreening a cDNA library with serum from a Sjogren syndrome
(270150) patient with anticentromere antibodies, Muro et al. (1998)
isolated a cDNA encoding SSSCA1, which they referred to as p27 due to
its molecular mass in Western blot analysis. The deduced 199-amino acid,
leucine-rich protein has an N terminus with many charged residues and a
potential phosphorylation site; 2 short proline-rich stretches; and a
potential C-terminal phosphorylation site. Immunofluorescence analysis
failed to demonstrate centromeric or other staining. Immunoblot analysis
with recombinant SSSCA1 determined that approximately 2% of patients
with anticentromere antibodies had anti-SSSCA1 antibodies, while less
than 1% of autoimmune patients without anticentromere antibodies had
anti-SSSCA1 antibodies. All 5 seropositive patients had a diagnosis of
scleroderma (see 181750) or Sjogren syndrome with internal organ
involvement.

REFERENCE 1. Muro, Y.; Yamada, T.; Himeno, M.; Sugimoto, K.: cDNA cloning of
a novel autoantigen targeted by a minor subset of anti-centromere
antibodies. Clin. Exp. Immun. 111: 372-376, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/04/2012
mgross: 6/20/2001

602034	TITLE *602034 CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE RECEPTOR 2; CRHR2
;;CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING FACTOR RECEPTOR 2; CRFR2;;
CRF2 RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Liaw et al. (1996) stated that there are 2 G protein-coupled
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH; 122560) receptors, CRHR1 (122561)
and CRHR2, which they termed the CRF2 receptor. CRH is a 41-amino acid
peptide synthesized in the hypothalamus that is the principal
neuroregulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis and
plays an important role in coordinating the endocrine, autonomic, and
behavioral responses to stress and immune challenge.

CLONING

Liaw et al. (1996) used clones of the rat CRF2 receptor to isolate the
human gene from brain and kidney genomic DNA libraries. The predicted
protein, which is 411 amino acids in length and 70% identical to the
CRF1 receptor, contains a putative N-terminal secretory signal sequence
and 7 putative transmembrane domains. Liaw et al. (1996) expressed the
CRF2 receptor and found that transfected cells responded to the binding
of CRH with an increase in intracellular cAMP. Although the rat receptor
has 2 alternatively spliced variants, termed CRF2-alpha and CRF2-beta,
Liaw et al. (1996) found no evidence for alternative splicing of the
human receptor. Liaw et al. (1996) reported that the pharmacologic
profile of this protein was similar to that of the rat CRF2-alpha
protein but distinct from the human CRF1 receptor.

Kostich et al. (1998) reported a novel CRHR2 splice isoform, which they
referred to as 'CRF2-gamma,' found in human brain. CRF2-gamma cDNA
encodes a 397-amino acid receptor containing an amino terminus with no
significant homology to the already reported alpha- and beta-termini.
PCR and Southern blot analysis of CRF2-gamma RNA expression in human
brain detected expression in the septum and hippocampus, with weaker but
detectable expression in the amygdala, nucleus accumbens, midbrain, and
frontal cortex.

GENE FUNCTION

While CRFR1 shares 70% sequence identity with CRFR2, it has much higher
affinity for rat/human CRF. Liaw et al. (1997) determined the regions
involved in receptor-ligand binding and/or receptor activation using
chimeric receptor constructs of human CRFR1 and CRFR2 and generated
point mutations of both receptors. The EC(50) values in stimulation of
intracellular cAMP by the receptors for the peptide ligand were
determined using a cAMP-dependent reporter system. Three regions of the
receptor were found to be important for optimal binding of CRF and/or
receptor activation. The first region was mapped to the junction of the
third extracellular domain and the fifth transmembrane domain.
Substitutions of 3 amino acids of CRFR1 in this region (val266, tyr267,
and thr268) by the corresponding CRFR2 amino acids (asp266, leu267, and
val268) increased the EC(50) value by approximately 10-fold. The other 2
regions were in the second extracellular domain of the CRFR1 (amino
acids 175-178 and his189). Substitutions in each of these 2 regions
increased the EC(50) value for CRF by approximately 7- to 8-fold, but
only in the presence of the amino acid 266-268 mutation involving the
first region, suggesting that the latter 2 regions may play a secondary
role in peptide ligand binding.

Hsu and Hsueh (2001) identified stresscopin (SCP; 605901) and
stresscopin-related peptide (SRP; 605902) as specific ligands for CRHR2.

Lemos et al. (2012) reported that corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF;
122560), a neuropeptide released in response to acute stressors and
other arousing environmental stimuli, acts in the nucleus accumbens of
naive mice to increase dopamine release through coactivation of the
receptors CRFR1 (122561) and CRFR2. Remarkably, severe-stress exposure
completely abolished this effect without recovery for at least 90 days.
This loss of CRF's capacity to regulate dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens is accompanied by a switch in the reaction to CRF from
appetitive to aversive, indicating a diametric change in the emotional
response to acute stressors. Lemos et al. (2012) concluded that their
results offer a biologic substrate for the switch in affect which is
central to stress-induced depressive disorders.

GENE STRUCTURE

The CRHR2 gene consists of 12 exons spanning approximately 30 kb (Liaw
et al., 1996).

MAPPING

Meyer et al. (1997) used radiation hybrids and fluorescence in situ
hybridization to map CRHR2 to human chromosome 7p21-p15 between the STS
markers D7S632 and D7S690.

Lesh et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Crhr2 gene to chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

Coste et al. (2000) generated Crhr2 -/- mice through targeted disruption
and demonstrated that CRHR2 supplies regulatory features of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis stress response. Although initiation
of the stress response appeared to be normal, Crhr2 -/- mice showed
early termination of adrenocorticotropic hormone (Acth) release,
suggesting that CRHR2 is involved in maintaining
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis drive. CRHR2 also appears to modify
the recovery phase of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis response,
as corticosterone levels remained elevated after stress in Crhr2 -/-
mice. In addition, stress coping behaviors associated with dearousal
were reduced in Crhr2 -/- mice. Coste et al. (2000) also demonstrated
that CRHR2 is essential for sustained feeding suppression induced by
urocortin (600945). Feeding was initially suppressed in Crhr2 -/- mice
following urocortin administration, but Crhr2 -/- mice recovered more
rapidly and completely than did wildtype mice. In addition to central
nervous system effects, Coste et al. (2000) found that, in contrast to
wildtype mice, Crhr2 -/- mice failed to show the enhanced cardiac
performance or reduced blood pressure associated with systemic
urocortin, suggesting that CRHR2 mediates these peripheral human dynamic
effects. Moreover, Crhr2 -/- mice have elevated basal blood pressure,
demonstrating that CRHR2 participates in cardiovascular homeostasis.

Bale et al. (2000) generated Crhr2 -/- mice by targeted disruption. They
found that Crhr2 -/- mice were hypersensitive to stress and displayed
increased anxiety-like behavior. Mutant mice had normal basal feeding
and weight gain but decreased food intake following food deprivation.
Intravenously injected urocortin produced no effect on mean arterial
pressure in the mutant mice.

Kishimoto et al. (2000) generated mice deficient for Crhr2 by targeted
disruption. They reported that male but not female Crhr2-deficient mice
exhibited enhanced anxious behavior in several tests of anxiety in
contrast to mice lacking Crhr1. The enhanced anxiety of Crhr2-deficient
mice was not due to changes in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
activity, but rather reflected impaired responses in specific brain
regions involved in emotional and autonomic functions, as monitored by a
reduction in Creb phosphorylation in male, but not female, Crhr2 -/-
mice. Kishimoto et al. (2000) proposed that CRHR1 predominantly mediates
a central anxiolytic response, opposing the general anxiogenic effect of
CRH mediated by CRHR1. Kishimoto et al. (2000) found that neither male
nor female Crhr2-deficient mice showed alterations of baseline feeding
behavior. Both responded with increased edema formation in response to
thermal exposure, however, indicating that in contrast to its central
role in anxiety, the peripheral role of CRHR2 in vascular permeability
is independent of gender.

REFERENCE 1. Bale, T. L.; Contarino, A.; Smith, G. W.; Chan, R.; Gold, L. H.;
Sawchenko, P. E.; Koob, G. F.; Vale, W. W.; Lee, K.-F.: Mice deficient
for corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2 display anxiety-like
behaviour and are hypersensitive to stress. Nature Genet. 24: 410-414,
2000.

2. Coste, S. C.; Kesterson, R. A.; Heldwein, K. A.; Stevens, S. L.;
Heard, A. D.; Hollis, J. H.; Murray, S. E.; Hill, J. K.; Pantely,
G. A.; Hohimer, A. R.; Hatton, D. C.; Phillips, T. J.; Finn, D. A.;
Low, M. J.; Rittenberg, M. B.; Stenzel, P.; Stenzel-Poore, M. P.:
Abnormal adaptations to stress and impaired cardiovascular function
in mice lacking corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2. Nature
Genet. 24: 403-409, 2000.

3. Hsu, S. Y.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Human stresscopin and stresscopin-related
peptide are selective ligands for the type 2 corticotropin-releasing
hormone receptor. Nature Med. 7: 605-611, 2001.

4. Kishimoto, T.; Radulovic, J.; Radulovic, M.; Lin, C. R.; Schrick,
C.; Hooshmand, F.; Hermanson, O.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Spiess, J.: Deletion
of Crhr2 reveals an anxiolytic role for corticotropin-releasing hormone
receptor-2. Nature Genet. 24: 415-419, 2000.

5. Kostich, W. A.; Chen, A.; Sperle, K.; Largent, B. L.: Molecular
identification and analysis of a novel human corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF) receptor: the CRF2-gamma receptor. Molec. Endocr. 12:
1077-1085, 1998.

6. Lemos, J. C.; Wanat, M. J.; Smith, J. S.; Reyes, B. A. S.; Hollon,
N. G.; Van Bockstaele, E. J.; Chavkin, C.; Phillips, P. E. M.: Severe
stress switches CRF action in the nucleus accumbens from appetitive
to aversive. Nature 490: 402-406, 2012.

7. Lesh, J. S.; Burrows, H. L.; Seasholtz, A. F.; Camper, S. A.:
Mapping of the mouse corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 2 gene
(Crhr2) to chromosome 6. Mammalian Genome 8: 944-945, 1997.

8. Liaw, C. W.; Grigoriadis, D. E.; Lovenberg, T. W.; De Souza, E.
B.; Maki, R. A.: Localization of ligand-binding domains of human
corticotropin-releasing factor receptor: a chimeric receptor approach. Molec.
Endocr. 11: 980-985, 1997.

9. Liaw, C. W.; Lovenberg, T. W.; Barry, G.; Oltersdorf, T.; Grigoriadis,
D. E.; De Souza, E. B.: Cloning and characterization of the human
corticotropin-releasing factor-2 receptor complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid. Endocrinology 137: 72-77, 1996.

10. Meyer, A. H.; Ullmer, C.; Schmuck, K.; Morel, C.; Wishart, W.;
Lubbert, H.; Engels, P.: Localization of the human CRF2 receptor
to 7p21-p15 by radiation hybrid mapping and FISH analysis. Genomics 40:
189-190, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/30/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/27/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/8/1997

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
carol: 2/22/2012
alopez: 3/15/2010
alopez: 5/3/2001
terry: 5/2/2001
alopez: 3/31/2000
terry: 3/30/2000
carol: 7/23/1999
mgross: 4/16/1999
mgross: 4/15/1999
mark: 2/2/1998
alopez: 1/29/1998
terry: 1/27/1998
dholmes: 11/26/1997
alopez: 10/10/1997
alopez: 10/8/1997

604926	TITLE *604926 PHOSPHATE CYTIDYLYLTRANSFERASE 1, CHOLINE, BETA ISOFORM; PCYT1B
DESCRIPTION CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT; EC 2.7.7.15) is a key
regulator of phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis; see PCYT1A (123695).

By searching EST databases for CT-like cDNAs, Lykidis et al. (1998)
identified a sequence encoding PCYT1B. Sequence analysis of the deduced
330-amino acid protein showed that the catalytic core and helical domain
of PCYT1B are nearly identical to those of PCYT1A. The N-terminal
domain, however, lacks the nuclear localization motif found in PCYT1A.
The C terminus of PCYT1B is shorter than that of PCYT1A and has only 3
rather than the 16 serine residues of PCYT1A that are potential
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of approximately 6.5-, 1.9-, and 1.1-kb PCYT1B transcripts
that were most abundant in testis, placenta, brain, ovary, and all fetal
tissues tested. Like PCYT1A, PCYT1B has CT activity that is dependent on
the presence of stimulatory lipids. SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analyses
indicated that PCYT1B is expressed both as a 35-kD and a 42-kD protein,
with an apparent posttranslational modification of the first 26 amino
acids accounting for expression of the second form. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed that PCYT1B is localized in the cytoplasm.

REFERENCE 1. Lykidis, A.; Murti, K. G.; Jackowski, S.: Cloning and characterization
of a second human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase. J. Biol.
Chem. 273: 14022-14029, 1998. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 273:
19357 only, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/5/2000

EDITED terry: 04/01/2013
carol: 5/8/2000

605744	TITLE *605744 EXOSTOSIN-LIKE GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 3; EXTL3
;;EXOSTOSIN-LIKE 3;;
MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES-LIKE 3;;
EXT-RELATED GENE 1; EXTR1;;
REG PROTEIN RECEPTOR, RAT, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with the sequences of EXT1 (608177), EXT2
(608210), and EXTL1 (601738), followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Saito et al. (1998) cloned full-length cDNAs for 2 new members of the
EXT family, EXTL2 (602411) and EXTL3, which they called EXTR2 and EXTR1,
respectively. The deduced 919-amino acid EXTL3 protein contains a highly
conserved region in the C terminus common to other EXT proteins.
Northern blot analysis detected expression of 6.2- and 4.7-kb EXTR1
transcripts in all tissues tested except ovary. The larger transcript
was predominant in brain, skeletal muscle, and testis, and the shorter
transcript in heart, liver, thymus, and prostate.

Kobayashi et al. (2000) isolated a cDNA for a REG protein (see 167770)
receptor from a rat islet cDNA library. Cells into which the cDNA had
been introduced bound REG protein with high affinity. When the cDNA was
introduced into a pancreatic beta-cell line that showed REG-dependent
growth, the transformants exhibited a significant increase in the
incorporation of 5-prime-bromo-2-prime-deoxyuridine as well as in the
cell numbers in response to REG protein. A homology search revealed that
the rat REG protein receptor cDNA is a homolog of EXTL3. The rat and
human proteins share 97% sequence identity. Kobayashi et al. (2000)
found that REG receptor mRNA in the rat is detectable in liver, kidney,
stomach, small intestine, colon, adrenal gland, pituitary gland, and
brain, but not in heart, suggesting the possible involvement of the
REG-REG protein receptor signal system in a variety of cell types other
than pancreatic beta cells.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Saito et al.
(1998) mapped the human EXTL3 gene to chromosome 8p21. By FISH,
radiation hybrid analysis, and inclusion within a mapped contig, Van Hul
et al. (1998) mapped the gene to 8p21-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Kobayashi, S.; Akiyama, T.; Nata, K.; Abe, M.; Tajima, M.; Shervani,
N. J.; Unno, M.; Matsuno, S.; Sasaki, H.; Takasawa, S.; Okamoto, H.
: Identification of a receptor for Reg (regenerating gene) protein,
a pancreatic beta-cell regeneration factor. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
10723-10726, 2000.

2. Saito, T.; Seki, N.; Yamauchi, M.; Tsuji, S.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma,
S.; Hori, T.: Structure, chromosomal location, and expression profile
of EXTR1 and EXTR2, new members of the multiple exostoses gene family. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 243: 61-66, 1998.

3. Van Hul, W.; Wuyts, W.; Hendrickx, J.; Speleman, F.; Wauters, J.;
De Boulle, K.; Van Roy, N.; Bossuyt, P.; Willems, P. J.: Identification
of a third EXT-like gene (EXTL3) belonging to the EXT gene family. Genomics 47:
230-237, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/29/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/19/2001

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
ckniffin: 10/30/2003
mcapotos: 5/30/2001
carol: 5/29/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
carol: 3/19/2001

605710	TITLE *605710 GDNF FAMILY RECEPTOR ALPHA-3; GFRA3
;;GLIAL CELL LINE-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR RECEPTOR ALPHA-3
DESCRIPTION Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF; 600837) and neurturin
(NRTN; 602018) promote the survival and maintenance of different
neuronal cell types. GDNF signals through a receptor complex composed of
a GDNF family receptor and the membrane-bound protein tyrosine-kinase
receptor RET (164761).

CLONING

Masure et al. (1998) and Baloh et al. (1998) identified a novel member
of the GDNF receptor family, GFRA3, by screening databases for sequences
similar to GFRA1 (601496) and GFRA2 (601956). Masure et al. (1998) found
that the full-length GFRA3 cDNA sequence encodes a 400-amino acid
protein with a putative 26-amino acid signal peptide, a C-terminal
hydrophobic region, and 3 potential N-glycosylation sites. GFRA3 shares
approximately 35% amino acid identity with GFRA1 and GFRA2. There is
conservation of 28 cysteines between all 3 family members, suggesting
that the disulfide bond pairing has been conserved. Both Masure et al.
(1998) and Baloh et al. (1998) determined that GFRA3, like GFRA1 and
GFRA2, is a multiply N-glycosylated protein that is
glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored to the cell surface. Masure
et al. (1998) identified N-glycosylated forms of GFRA3 ranging from 43
to 62 kD.

By Northern blot analysis, Masure et al. (1998) detected expression of
GFRA3 in human tissues as an approximately 2.3-kb transcript
predominantly in spinal cord, with weak expression in cerebellum; in
peripheral tissues, high expression was detected in colon, small
intestine, pancreas, heart, testis, and prostate. Additional 1.3- and
1.6-kb transcripts were detected in testis and pancreas. Using RT-PCR of
different brain regions, Masure et al. (1998) detected highest
expression in cerebellum and spinal cord, with little expression in
other brain areas. They confirmed expression of GFRA3 in cerebellum by
in situ hybridization. However, by Northern blot analysis, Baloh et al.
(1998) found no expression of GFRA3 in human whole brain or in any of 13
subdissected regions of the adult brain. They found expression in a wide
range of tissues, including the stomach, colon, small intestine,
appendix, and the urogenital system. By in situ hybridization of
embryonic day 14 mice, they detected expression of Gfra3 in developing
peripheral nerve, sensory ganglia, and sympathetic ganglia. Consistent
with their Northern blot data from human tissues, they found no
expression in mouse brain.

GENE FUNCTION

From studies in transfected fibroblasts, Baloh et al. (1998) concluded
that GFRA3 does not form a signaling receptor complex with RET for GDNF,
NRTN, or PSPN (602921). Baloh et al. (1998) determined that artemin
(ARTN; 603886), a novel member of the GDNF family, is a ligand for
GFRA3-RET.

GENE STRUCTURE

Onochie et al. (2000) characterized the structure of the human GFRA3
gene. The gene has 8 coding exons and a gene structure and organization
similar to that of GFRA1. The authors identified 3 polymorphic variants
in GFRA3 in a normal control population and found the same variants in
patients with Hirschsprung disease, but found no correlation between
these variants and the Hirschsprung disease phenotype.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Masure et al. (1998) and Baloh et
al. (1998) mapped the GFRA3 gene to 5q31.1-q31.3 and 5q31.2-q32,
respectively.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nishino et al. (1999) examined the role of Gfra3 in nervous system
development by generating mice with a disrupted Gfra3 gene. Mice lacking
functional Gfra3 exhibited severe defects in the superior cervical
ganglion (SCG), whereas other ganglia appeared normal. SCG precursor
cells in the mutant embryos failed to migrate to the correct position,
and they subsequently failed to innervate the target organs. After
birth, SCG neurons underwent progressive cell death. These observations
suggested that GFRA3-mediated signaling is required both for the rostral
migration of SCG precursors and for the survival of mature SCG neurons.

REFERENCE 1. Baloh, R. H.; Gorodinsky, A.; Golden, J. P.; Tansey, M. G.; Keck,
C. L.; Popescu, N. C.; Johnson, E. M., Jr.; Milbrandt, J.: GFR-alpha-3
is an orphan member of the GDNF/neurturin/persephin receptor family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 5801-5806, 1998.

2. Baloh, R. H.; Tansey, M. G.; Lampe, P. A.; Fahrner, T. J.; Enomoto,
H.; Simburger, K. S.; Leitner, M. L.; Araki, T.; Johnson, E. M., Jr.;
Milbrandt, J.: Artemin, a novel member of the GDNF ligand family,
supports peripheral and central neurons and signals through the GFR-alpha-3-RET
receptor complex. Neuron 21: 1291-1302, 1998.

3. Masure, S.; Cik, M.; Pangalos, M. N.; Bonaventure, P.; Verhasselt,
P.; Lesage, A. S. J.; Leysen, J. E.; Gordon, R. D.: Molecular cloning,
expression and tissue distribution of glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic
factor family receptor alpha-3 (GFR-alpha-3). Europ. J. Biochem. 251:
622-630, 1998.

4. Nishino, J.; Mochida, K.; Ohfuji, Y.; Shimazaki, T.; Meno, C.;
Ohishi, S.; Matsuda, Y.; Fujii, H.; Saijoh, Y.; Hamada, H.: GFR-alpha-3,
a component of the artemin receptor, is required for migration and
survival of the superior cervical ganglion. Neuron 23: 725-736,
1999.

5. Onochie, C. I.; Korngut, L. M.; Vanhorne, J. B.; Myers, S. M.;
Michaud, D.; Mulligan, L. M.: Characterisation of the human GFR-alpha-3
locus and investigation of the gene in Hirschsprung disease. J. Med.
Genet. 37: 674-679, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Michael J. Wright  - updated: 8/9/2001

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 3/1/2001

EDITED alopez: 07/17/2009
cwells: 8/16/2001
cwells: 8/14/2001
terry: 8/9/2001
carol: 3/5/2001
carol: 3/2/2001

300737	TITLE *300737 G ANTIGEN 10; GAGE10
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) reported that the GAGE10 gene has an 8.9-kb
insertion relative to other genes in the GAGE gene cluster. The GAGE10
gene contains 5 exons spanning about 12.7 kb and has a LINE insertion.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE10 gene to the 5-prime end of a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome
Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/6/2008

EDITED wwang: 08/18/2008
wwang: 8/6/2008

613664	TITLE *613664 SMOOTHELIN-LIKE 1; SMTNL1
;;CALPONIN HOMOLOGY-ASSOCIATED SMOOTH MUSCLE PROTEIN; CHASM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SMTNL1, which is a member of the smoothelin (SMTN; 602127) family,
regulates contraction and relaxation of skeletal and smooth muscle
fibers and mediates vascular adaptation to exercise (Wooldridge et al.,
2008).

CLONING

Borman et al. (2004) cloned mouse Smtnl1, which they called Chasm. The
deduced 459-amino acid protein contains a C-terminal calponin homology
(CH) domain and a single potential serine phosphorylation site.

Using Western blot analysis, Wooldridge et al. (2008) showed that Smtnl1
was expressed in mouse skeletal muscle and heart and in tissues
containing smooth muscle. Smtnl1 was preferentially expressed in
striated muscles containing type 1 or type 2a fibers. Immunofluorescence
confocal microscopy revealed that Smtnl1 localized to the I band and M
line, but was absent in the Z line. In human muscle, SMTNL1 expression
appeared specific to type 2a fibers.

GENE FUNCTION

Smooth muscle can relax passively due to removal of the contractile
stimulus, or it can relax actively via cyclin nucleotide-dependent
protein kinases, such as PKA (see 176911) without a change in
contractile stimuli or intracellular calcium concentration, a phenomena
called calcium desensitization. Borman et al. (2004) showed that mouse
Chasm could relax permeabilized and submaximally contracted rabbit ileum
smooth muscle in a concentration-dependent manner. Chasm was
phosphorylated by PKA and PKG (see 176894) in vitro at the single serine
phosphorylation site, and Chasm was phosphorylated during the early
stages of smooth muscle relaxation.

Wooldridge et al. (2008) found that dephosphorylated mouse Smtnl1
inhibited the activity of mouse myosin phosphatase (see 603768), while
phosphorylation of Smtnl1 by PKA or PKG inactivated Smtnl1 and permitted
myosin dephosphorylation. In both isolated smooth and striated mouse
muscle, Smtnl1 was serine phosphorylated in response to agonists that
elevate intracellular cAMP or cGMP. Maximal phosphorylation of Smtnl1
correlated with maximal relaxation of aorta in response to
acetylcholine.

Lontay et al. (2010) showed that the expression of SMTNL1 was
upregulated in uterus during pregnancy in humans and mice. In mice,
pregnancy induced the expression of Smtnl1 in vascular and uterine
smooth muscle and in type 2a skeletal muscle fibers, and appeared to be
regulated by sex hormones. A concomitant increase in the myosin
phosphatase subunit Mypt1 (PPP1R12A; 602021) was also observed.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and immunofluorescence microscopy
revealed that Smtnl1 bound and colocalized with Mypt1 in diffuse
cytosolic and discrete nuclear localizations. Agonist-dependent
phosphorylation of Smtnl1 resulted in its nuclear translocation.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the SMTNL1 gene to chromosome 11q12.1 based on an
alignment of the SMTNL1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA111832) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Wooldridge et al. (2008) found that deletion of Smtnl1 in mice had no
effect on basal activity, litter size, or embryonic development.
However, Smtnl1 -/- mice showed a PKA/PKG-mediated adaption to exercise,
exhibiting better exercise performance and improved
vasorelaxation/contractile responses compared with wildtype littermates.
Expression of Smtnl1 in wildtype animals was reduced with exercise, and
this effect was stronger in female mice. Vascular smooth muscle from
sedentary and exercise-trained female Smtnl1 -/- mice exhibited more
significant changes in responsiveness to beta- and alpha-adrenergic
agonists than their male counterparts. Exercise also induced more
significant reduction of Smtnl1 expression in females compared with
males. Striated muscle from male Smtnl1 -/- mice showed a greater
tendency to switch to an oxidative phenotype. Wooldridge et al. (2008)
concluded that receptor-mediated pathways can acutely regulate SMTNL1
function through serine phosphorylation, whereas exercise achieves the
same effect by reducing SMTNL1 expression.

Lontay et al. (2010) found that pregnant Smtnl1 -/- mice showed
increased expression of Mypt1 in vascular and uterine smooth muscle, and
isolated thoracic aorta from pregnant Smtn1l -/- females showed profound
reduction in isometric force compared with aorta from pregnant wildtype
females.

REFERENCE 1. Borman, M. A.; MacDonald, J. A.; Haystead, T. A. J.: Modulation
of smooth muscle contractility by CHASM, a novel member of the smoothelin
family of proteins. FEBS Lett. 573: 207-213, 2004.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/2/2010.

3. Lontay, B.; Bodoor, K.; Weitzel, D. H.; Loiselle, D.; Fortner,
C.; Lengyel, S.; Zheng, D.; Devente, J.; Hickner, R.; Haystead, T.
A. J.: Smoothelin-like 1 protein regulates myosin phosphatase-targeting
subunit 1 expression during sexual development and pregnancy. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 29357-29366, 2010.

4. Wooldridge, A. A.; Fortner, C. N.; Lontay, B.; Akimoto, T.; Neppl,
R. L.; Facemire, C.; Datto, M. B.; Kwon, A.; McCook, E.; Li, P.; Wang,
S.; Thresher, R. J.; Miller, S. E.; Perriard, J.-C.; Gavin, T. P.;
Hickner, R. C.; Coffman, T. M.; Somlyo, A. V.; Yan, Z.; Haystead,
T. A. J.: Deletion of the protein kinase A/protein kinase G target
SMTNL1 promotes an exercise-adapted phenotype in vascular smooth muscle. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 11850-11859, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/9/2010

EDITED terry: 02/25/2011
wwang: 12/27/2010
wwang: 12/9/2010

194541	TITLE *194541 ZINC FINGER- AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 25; ZBTB25
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN KUP; KUP;;
ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 46, FORMERLY; ZNF46, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chardin et al. (1991) isolated a human cDNA encoding a protein with 2
zinc fingers in its C-terminal part, which they named KUP for
Kruppel-related protein. Genomic sequences hybridizing with the human
KUP probe were found in rat and mouse. The highest levels of expression
of the gene were found in testis, fetal liver, and hematopoietic cells.
The KUP protein is 433 amino acids long, has a molecular weight of about
50 kD, and binds to DNA. Its structure, resembling that of the Kruppel
family, suggests that it is also a transcription factor.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a systems analysis of transcriptional regulators within T cells
during different phases of development and differentiation, Benita et
al. (2010) identified ZBTB25, a BTB-POZ family transcription factor, as
a highly T cell-enriched transcription factor. They provided evidence
that ZBTB25 negatively regulates NFAT (see 600489) activation, including
RNA interference studies showing ZBTB25 knockdown resulted in enhanced
activation of NFAT target genes after T-cell receptor engagement. Benita
et al. (2010) concluded that ZBTB25 has a role in NFAT-mediated gene
expression.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Chardin et al. (1991) assigned the ZNF46 gene
to chromosome 14q23-q24.

REFERENCE 1. Benita, Y.; Cao, Z.; Giallourakis, C.; Li, C.; Gardet, A.; Xavier,
R. J.: Gene enrichment profiles reveal T-cell development, differentiation,
and lineage-specific transcription factors including ZBTB25 as a novel
NF-AT repressor. Blood 115: 5376-5384, 2010.

2. Chardin, P.; Courtois, G.; Mattei, M.-G.; Gisselbrecht, S.: The
KUP gene, located on human chromosome 14, encodes a protein with two
distant zinc fingers. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 1431-1436, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/7/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1991

EDITED mgross: 01/04/2012
terry: 12/7/2011
alopez: 7/6/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991
supermim: 6/4/1991

614277	TITLE *614277 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME 2W; UBE2W
;;UBC16, ARABIDOPSIS, HOMOLOG OF; UBC16
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitination is a common posttranslational modification that plays
roles in many cellular pathways and in protein degradation. Conjugation
of ubiquitin to substrate proteins requires an E1 ubiquitin-activating
enzyme (e.g., UBE1; 314370), an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (e.g.,
UBE2A; 312180), and an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (e.g., UBE3A;
601623). UBE2W is an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (summary by Zhang
et al., 2011).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a human fetal brain cDNA library, Yin
et al. (2006) cloned UBE2W, which they called UBC16. The deduced
162-amino acid protein has an approximately 150-amino acid catalytic
core, termed the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (UBC) domain, which
contains 2 nuclear localization signals at its C-terminal end. Human
UBC16 shares 51% amino acid identity with Arabidopsis Ubc16. RT-PCR
detected ubiquitous UBC16 expression, with highest expression in heart,
brain, liver, and pancreas. Fluorescence-tagged UBC16 localized to
nuclei of transfected HEK293 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation analysis, Yin et al. (2006) showed that nuclear localization
of human UBC in transfected HEK293 cells required both the nuclear
localization signals and enzyme activity.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2011) showed that mouse
Ube2w interacted with Fancl (608111), an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in
DNA damage repair. They confirmed the interaction by protein pull-down
and coimmunoprecipitation analyses. Fancl showed a ubiquitous
intracellular localization in the absence of Ube2w and a nuclear
localization in the presence of Ube2w. Ube2w formed nuclear homodimers.
Ube2w exhibited ubiquitin-conjugating activity and monoubiquitinated the
PHD domain of Fancl in vitro. Ubiquitination by Ube2w required a
conserved active-site cysteine within its ubiquitin-conjugating domain.
Ube2w also monoubiquitinated Fancd2 (613984). Downregulation of UBE2W in
human cell lines markedly reduced FANCD2 monoubiquitination caused by
ultraviolet irradiation, but not FANCD2 monoubiquitination caused by the
DNA crosslinking agent mitomycin C or FANCD2 monoubiquitination that
occurs normally during S phase.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yin et al. (2006) determined that the UBE2W gene contains 7 exons and
spans 8.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yin et al. (2006) mapped the UBE2W gene to
chromosome 8q13-q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Yin, G.; Ji, C.; Wu, T.; Shen, Z.; Xu, X.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: Cloning,
characterization and subcellular localization of a gene encoding a
human ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2) homologous to the Arabidopsis
thaliana UBC-16 gene product. Front. Biosci. 11: 1500-1507, 2006.

2. Zhang, Y.; Zhou, X.; Zhao, L.; Li, C.; Zhu, H.; Xu, L.; Shan, L.;
Liao, X.; Guo, Z.; Huang, P.: UBE2W interacts with FANCL and regulates
the monoubiquitination of Fanconi anemia protein FANCD2. Molec. Cells 31:
113-122, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/2/2011

EDITED joanna: 11/03/2011
mgross: 11/2/2011
carol: 11/1/2011

180490	TITLE *180490 RIBOPHORIN II; RPN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RPN2 gene encodes ribophorin II, which is involved in ribosome
binding. Ribophorin I (RPN1; 180470) and RPN2 are abundant, highly
conserved glycoproteins located exclusively in the membranes of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum (Crimaudo et al., 1987).

CLONING

Using probes derived from a human liver expression library, Crimaudo et
al. (1987) isolated and sequenced full-length human cDNA clones encoding
ribophorins I and II. The cDNA clones hybridized to mRNA species of 2.5
kb and encoded polypeptides of 68.5 and 69.3 kD, respectively. Sequence
comparisons and immunoblotting with specific antibodies showed both
proteins to be highly conserved throughout a variety of species.
However, no relationship between the 2 proteins could be deduced from
their primary sequences.

MAPPING

Using cDNAs in the study of a panel of somatic cell hybrids, Barton et
al. (1987) mapped RPN2 to chromosome 20. Loffler et al. (1991) mapped
the RPN2 gene to 20q12-q13.1 by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelleher et al. (1992) reported that mammalian oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorin I,
ribophorin II, and a 48-kD oligosaccharyltransferase protein (602202).

Among 44 women with breast cancer (114480), Honma et al. (2008) observed
a significant association (p = 0.0052) between increased expression of
RPN2 in cancer tissue and decreased clinical response to the
antimicrotubule chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA) targeting RPN2 significantly promoted docetaxel-dependent
apoptosis and cell growth inhibition of docetaxel-resistant human breast
cancer cells in vitro. In vivo atelocollagen delivery of RPN2 siRNA
significantly reduced drug-resistant tumor growth in mice given
docetaxel. Further studies indicated that RPN2 conferred drug resistance
via increased glycosylation of P-glycoproteins. Honma et al. (2008)
concluded that RPN2 siRNA introduction may hypersensitize cancer cell
responses to chemotherapeutic agents.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, D. E.; Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Francke, U.: The genes
for ribophorins I and II are on human chromosomes 3q and 20 and mouse
chromosomes 6 and 12, respectively. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
577 only, 1987.

2. Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Gausepohl, H.; Meyer, D. I.: Human
ribophorins I and II: the primary structure and membrane topology
of two highly conserved round endoplasmic reticulum-specific glycoproteins. EMBO
J. 6: 75-82, 1987.

3. Honma, K.; Iwao-Koizumi, K.; Takeshita, F.; Yamamoto, Y.; Yoshida,
T.; Nishio, K.; Nagahara, S.; Kato, K.; Ochiya, T.: RPN2 gene confers
docetaxel resistance in breast cancer. Nature Med. 14: 939-948,
2008. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 14: 1128 only, 2008.

4. Kelleher, D. J.; Kreibich, G.; Gilmore, R.: Oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorins
I and II and a 48 kd protein. Cell 69: 55-65, 1992.

5. Loffler, C.; Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Hansmann, I.: Mapping of the
ribophorin II (RPN II) gene to human chromosome 20q12-q13.1 by in-situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 87: 221-222, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/26/1987

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
wwang: 9/25/2008
ckniffin: 9/24/2008
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/2/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 6/20/1988
marie: 3/25/1988

612358	TITLE *612358 KININOGEN 1; KNG1
;;KININOGEN; KNG
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN, INCLUDED; HMWK, INCLUDED; HK, INCLUDED;;
LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN, INCLUDED; LMWK, INCLUDED; LK, INCLUDED;;
BRADYKININ, INCLUDED; BK, INCLUDED;;
FITZGERALD FACTOR, INCLUDED;;
FLAUJEAC FACTOR, INCLUDED;;
WILLIAMS FACTOR, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

High molecular weight kininogen (HMWK) plays an important role in
assembly of the plasma kallikrein (see 147910)-kinin system. The KNG1
gene generates both HMWK and low molecular weight kininogen (LMWK)
through alternative splicing. Both HMWK and LMWK contain an identical
heavy chain consisting of protein domains 1, 2, and 3. However, HMWK
contains a 56-kD light chain that consists of domains 5 and 6H, whereas
LMWK contains a unique 4-kD light chain that consists of domain 5L. In
both proteins, the heavy and light chains are linked by domain 4, which
contains the bradykinin (BK) nonapeptide. BK, which is released by
plasma kallikrein, is a potent inflammatory mediator that causes
vasodilation and enhanced capillary permeability, induces pain, and
stimulates production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin (see 601699) from
endothelial cells. During vascular damage, BK stimulates smooth muscle
proliferation and intimal hypertrophy. Release of BK from HMWK generates
a 2-chain HMWK, termed HMWKa, containing the heavy and light chains
joined by a disulfide bond (Merkulov et al., 2008).

CLONING

In the 1970s, a number of similar patients with abnormal coagulation
tests but no apparent bleeding tendency were identified and described as
lacking a coagulation factor variously termed Fitzgerald factor,
Flaujeac factor, or Williams factor, among other names (see 228960). At
first the nature of these factors was uncertain, but further studies
showed that they were identical to high molecular weight kininogen
(Davie, 1979; Giangrande, 2003).

Takagaki et al. (1985) isolated human cDNAs encoding the HMW and LMW
prekininogens. They determined that the HMW and LMW prekininogen mRNAs
are identical throughout the 5-prime UTR and the protein-coding region
up to the sequence encoding the 12 amino acids distal to the BK
sequence, after which the 2 mRNAs completely diverge. The HMW and LMW
prekininogens contain 626 and 427 amino acids, respectively. They share
a common signal peptide, heavy chain, and BK moiety, which consist of
18, 362, and 9 amino acids, respectively. The unique light chains of HMW
and LMW prekininogens consist of 255 and 38 amino acids, respectively.
There are 17 cysteines in both the bovine and human heavy chain,
indicating that the human heavy chain, like its bovine counterpart, can
form 8 loops, each connected by 2 adjacent cysteines.

Merkulov et al. (2008) determined that the mouse genome contains 2
kininogen genes, Kng1 and Kng2, that are 91% identical. Using RT-PCR,
they found that Kng1 was expressed predominantly in liver and adrenal
gland, whereas Kng2 was expressed predominantly in kidney, with lower
expression in liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kitamura et al. (1985) determined that the KNG1 gene contains 11 exons
and spans 27 kb. Exons 1 through 9 encode the 5-prime UTR and the signal
peptide and heavy chain sequences common to both HMWK and LMWK. Exon 10
encodes the common sequence for BK and the unique sequence for HMWK, and
exon 11 encodes the unique sequence for LMWK.

MAPPING

Fong et al. (1991) mapped the KNG gene to chromosome 3 using
human-hamster somatic cell hybrids and the PCR of hybrid DNA with
gene-specific primers. KNG was further assigned to chromosome 3q26-qter
using DNA from a second panel of chromosome 3 deletion mapping cell
hybrids. Cheung et al. (1992) also mapped the KNG gene to chromosome
3q26-qter by in situ hybridization. The assignment substantiated the
evolutionary relationship of kininogen to 2 other members of the
cystatin superfamily, alpha-2HS-glycoprotein (AHSG; 138680) and
histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG; 142640), which also map to the long
arm of chromosome 3.

Merkulov et al. (2008) determined that the 2 mouse kininogen genes, Kng1
and Kng2, are located in a head-to-head orientation on chromosome 16.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cheung et al. (1993) demonstrated that Ms. Williams, the patient with
total kininogen deficiency (228960) reported by Colman et al. (1975),
was homozygous for a nonsense mutation in the KNG1 gene (612358.0001).

Krijanovski et al. (2003) found that a 6-year-old boy with cerebral
artery thrombosis and HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp deletion
of 1492A in the KNG1 gene (612358.0002), corresponding to amino acid 480
of the mature protein. The mutation resulted in a frameshift and
premature termination at amino acid 532 of the mature protein. Each
parent and a sib were heterozygous for the mutation. Krijanovski et al.
(2003) found that truncation or frameshift at or before position 480 of
mature HMWK prevented biosynthesis, processing, and/or secretion of the
protein into plasma. Krijanovski et al. (2003) also identified the
causative mutation in Fitzgerald trait as a 17-bp substitution in intron
9 of the KNG1 gene (612358.0003). They provided a diagram comparing the
molecular defects of Williams trait (612358.0001), their reported
deletion of 1492A, and Fitzgerald trait with normal HMWK.

Using immunoblot and Southern blot analyses, Hayashi et al. (1990)
detected no molecular abnormality of kininogen in the DNA from patients
from 4 Japanese families with total kininogen deficiency or from 1
patient with isolated HMWK deficiency. However, in the patient with
isolated HMWK deficiency, a partial deletion in intron 7 was found by
restriction analysis. This partial deletion was assumed to be related to
an abnormality of alternative splicing of HMW prekininogen mRNA.
However, Shigekiyo et al. (2007) found that this patient with isolated
HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp insertion (C) at nucleotide
1217 in exon 10 of the KNG1 gene (612358.0004). The insertion resulted
in a frameshift in codon 406 and a premature stop signal in codon 415.
The patient's parents and brother were heterozygous for the mutation.

- Association with Decreased Activated Partial Thromboplastin
Time

Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is considered a global test
of thrombotic tendency. A shortened aPTT is associated with an increased
risk of thrombosis as well as several prothrombotic risk factors
including age, female sex, estrogen use, and obesity. Prolonged aPTT is
an indicator of coagulation disorders in patients with deficiencies of
factors in the intrinsic pathways of coagulation. Houlihan et al. (2010)
conducted a genomewide association study for activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) in a total of 1,477 relatively healthy adults
from the Lothian Birth Cohorts of 1936 (LBC1936) and 1921 (LBC1921). A
highly significant association with a relatively large effect size was
found between aPTT and a SNP in the KNG1 gene, dbSNP rs710446 (combined
p = 9.52 x 10(-22)). The SNP dbSNP rs710446 represents a missense
change, ile581 to thr (I581T, 1742T-C), in exon 10 of kininogen 1
isoform 1. The effects of dbSNP rs710446 were additive, with each G
allele decreasing aPTT by 0.36 standard deviations. This SNP explained
5.2% and 8.1% of the variance in aPTT in LBC1936 and LBC1921,
respectively. Mutations in KNG1 cause high molecular weight kininogen
(HMWK) deficiency, an autosomal recessive coagulation defect; Kng1
knockout mice demonstrate prolonged aPTT and delayed arterial thrombosis
(Merkulov et al., 2008).

Among 1,542 European patients with venous thrombosis (see 188050) and
1,110 controls, Morange et al. (2011) found a significant association
between the C allele of dbSNP rs710446 and risk of thrombosis (odds
ratio (OR) of 1.196; p = 0.0012) A borderline association was observed
in a small independent sample of 590 controls and 596 patients (OR of
1.171; p = 0.059). This allele was also associated with decreased aPTT
levels. Morange et al. (2011) concluded that the I581T variant is a
genetic risk factor for venous thrombosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Merkulov et al. (2008) found that Kng1 -/- mice were viable and appeared
normal, although they lacked plasma HMWK and LMWK. Kng1 -/- mice showed
normal tail vein bleeding times, but they displayed significantly
prolonged time to vessel occlusion in an induced arterial thrombosis
model.

NOMENCLATURE

For a historical account of the nomenclature of coagulation factors,
including high molecular weight kininogen, see Giangrande (2003).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
KININOGEN DEFICIENCY, TOTAL
KNG1, ARG196TER

In the patient (Ms. Williams) with total kininogen deficiency (228960)
reported by Colman et al. (1975) as having Williams trait, Cheung et al.
(1993) found homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 22 in
exon 5 (nucleotide 587 of the cDNA) of the KNG1 gene, resulting in a CGA
(arg)-to-TGA (stop) mutation in exon 5. All 3 daughters were found to be
heterozygous and a granddaughter was found to be normal. In the proband,
both high and low molecular weight kininogens were completely absent;
the 3 daughters had approximately 50% high molecular weight kininogen
and the granddaughter had normal high molecular weight kininogen. Using
the amino acid count according to Nakanishi, which includes the signal
peptide, Kunapuli (1993) determined that the amino acid altered was
arg196.

.0002
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 1-BP DEL, 1492A

Krijanovski et al. (2003) described studies of the plasma and DNA of a
6-year-old male, born of first-cousin parents, with cerebral artery
thrombosis and HMWK deficiency (228960). The previously healthy child
had headache and vomiting 10 days after moderate cerebral trauma,
followed by loss of consciousness and subsequent visual impairment. CT
scan and angiography showed extensive left vertebral-basilar artery
thrombosis and a left vertebral artery dissection. The patient had a
prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and received
fresh frozen plasma before arteriography and then daily for 8 days,
which resulted in normalization of the APTT and resolution of neurologic
symptoms. There was full neurologic recovery with warfarin anticoagulant
therapy for 6 months, and there had been no recurrence after 2 years of
follow-up. The child had no high molecular weight kininogen procoagulant
activity and antigen (less than 1%). He was found to be homozygous for
deletion of an adenine at cDNA position 1492 in exon 10 of the KNG1
gene, corresponding to position 480 of the mature protein. The mutation
resulted in a frameshift and premature termination at amino acid 532 of
the mature protein. Each parent and a sib were heterozygous for the same
defect. Krijanovski et al. (2003) found that truncation or frameshift at
or before position 480 of mature HMWK prevented biosynthesis,
processing, and/or secretion of the protein into plasma.

.0003
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 17-BP DEL/17-BP INS, NT1559

The first plasma with HMWK deficiency (228960) to be recognized was
derived from an African American of the surname Fitzgerald (Waldmann et
al., 1975). Studying DNA prepared from a more that 25-year-old frozen
plasma specimen, Krijanovski et al. (2003) determined that the KNG1
defect in Fitzgerald trait resides in intron 9, with substitution of 17
consecutive basepairs at nucleotides 1559 through 1575. The substituted
segment had 1559T and 1575A at its 2 ends and consisted of 5 TGT
triplets, which in Fitzgerald DNA were changed to 5 GTG triplets, the
end nucleotides being changed to 1559G and 1575G. Also at nucleotide
position 1578, a GT sequence in normal DNA was changed to TG in
Fitzgerald intron 9. Furthermore, in Fitzgerald intron 9, single
basepair polymorphisms were found at nucleotide positions 119 (C to T),
1586 (T to G), and 1736 (A to G).

.0004
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 1-BP INS, 1217C

Using restriction analysis, Hayashi et al. (1990) found that a Japanese
patient with isolated HMWK deficiency (228960) had a partial deletion in
intron 7 of the KNG1 gene. This partial deletion was assumed to be
related to an abnormality of alternative splicing of HMW prekininogen
mRNA. However, Shigekiyo et al. (2007) found that this patient with
isolated HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp insertion (C) at
nucleotide 1217 in exon 10 of the KNG1 gene. The insertion resulted in a
frameshift in codon 406 and a premature stop signal in codon 415. The
patient's brother and parents, who were second cousins, were
heterozygous for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Cheung, P. P.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Colman, R. W.: Chromosomal mapping
of human kininogen gene (KNG) to 3q26-qter. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 59:
24-26, 1992.

2. Cheung, P. P.; Kunapuli, S. P.; Scott, C. F.; Wachtfogel, Y. T.;
Colman, R. W.: Genetic basis of total kininogen deficiency in Williams'
trait. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23361-23365, 1993.

3. Colman, R. W.; Bagdasarian, A.; Talamo, R. C.; Scott, C. F.; Seavey,
M.; Guimaraes, J. A.; Pierce, J. V.; Kaplan, A. P.: Williams trait:
human kininogen deficiency with diminished levels of plasminogen proactivator
and prekallikrein associated with abnormalities of the Hageman factor
dependent pathways. J. Clin. Invest. 56: 1650-1662, 1975.

4. Davie, E. W.: Personal Communication. Seattle, Wash.  11/26/1979.

5. Fong, D.; Smith, D. I.; Hsieh, W.-T.: The human kininogen gene
(KNG) mapped to chromosome 3q26-qter by analysis of somatic cell hybrids
using the polymerase chain reaction. Hum. Genet. 87: 189-192, 1991.

6. Giangrande, P. L. F.: Six characters in search of an author: the
history of the nomenclature of coagulation factors. Brit.  J. Haemat. 121:
703-712, 2003.

7. Hayashi, H.; Ishimaru, F.; Fujita, T.; Tsurumi, N.; Tsuda, T.;
Kimura, I.: Molecular genetic survey of five Japanese families with
high molecular weight kininogen deficiency. Blood 75: 1296-1304,
1990.

8. Houlihan, L. M.; Davies, G.; Tenesa, A.; Harris, S. E.; Luciano,
M.; Gow, A. J.; McGhee, K. A.; Liewald, D. C.; Porteous, D. J.; Starr,
J.  M.; Lowe, G. D.; Visscher, P. M.; Deary, I. J.: Common variants
of large effect in F12, KNG1, and HRG are associated with activated
partial thromboplastin time. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86: 626-631, 2010.

9. Kitamura, N.; Kitagawa, H.; Fukushima, D.; Takagaki, Y.; Miyata,
T.; Nakanishi, S.: Structural organization of the human kininogen
gene and a model for its evolution. J. Biol. Chem. 260: 8610-8617,
1985.

10. Krijanovski, Y.; Proulle, V.; Mahdi, F.; Dreyfus, M.; Muller-Esterl,
W.; Schmaier, A. H.: Characterization of molecular defects of Fitzgerald
trait and another novel high-molecular-weight kininogen-deficient
patient: insights into structural requirements for kininogen expression. Blood 101:
4430-4436, 2003.

11. Kunapuli, S. P.: Personal Communication. Philadelphia, Pa.
12/21/1993.

12. Merkulov, S.; Zhang, W.-M.; Komar, A. A.; Schmaier, A. H.; Barnes,
E.; Zhou, Y.; Lu, X.; Iwaki, T.; Castellino, F. J.; Luo, G.; McCrae,
K. R.: Deletion of murine kininogen gene 1 (mKng1) causes loss of
plasma kininogen and delays thrombosis. Blood 111: 1274-1281, 2008.

13. Morange, P.-E.; Oudot-Mellakh, T.; Cohen, W.; Germain, M.; Saut,
N.; Antoni, G.; Alessi, M.-C.; Bertrand, M.; Dupuy, A.-M.; Letenneur,
L.; Lathrop, M.; Lopez, L. M.; Lambert, J.-C.; Emmerich, J.; Amouyel,
P.; Tregouet, D.-A.: KNG1 Ile581Thr and susceptibility to venous
thrombosis. Blood 117: 3692-3694, 2011.

14. Shigekiyo, T.; Miyagi, J.; Shirakami, A.; Shibata, H.; Tsukai,
K.; Aihara, K.: Isolated high-molecular-weight kininogen deficiency:
a novel frameshift mutation in exon 10. (Letter) Blood 109: 5062-5063,
2007.

15. Takagaki, Y.; Kitamura, N.; Nakanishi, S.: Cloning and sequence
analysis of cDNAs for human high molecular weight and low molecular
weight prekininogens: primary structures of two human prekininogens. J.
Biol. Chem. 260: 8601-8609, 1985.

16. Waldmann, R.; Abraham, J. P.; Rebuck, J. W.; Caldwell, J.; Saito,
H.; Ratnoff, O. D.: Fitzgerald factor: a hitherto unrecognized coagulation
factor. Lancet 305: 949-951, 1975. Note: Originally Volume I.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2008

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 10/23/2008

EDITED ckniffin: 02/23/2012
wwang: 8/11/2011
ckniffin: 8/1/2011
alopez: 9/10/2010
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
terry: 4/8/2009
mgross: 10/24/2008

612605	TITLE *612605 LATE CORNIFIED ENVELOPE 1C; LCE1C
;;LATE ENVELOPE PROTEIN 3; LEP3
DESCRIPTION For background information on the LCE gene cluster, see 612603.

CLONING

By database analysis to identify human orthologs of mouse genes encoding
late envelope proteins (LEPs), Marshall et al. (2001) identified LCE1C,
which they called LEP3.

Using real-time PCR, Jackson et al. (2005) detected high LCE1C
expression in human fetal, arm, penal, and abdominal skin. Expression
was much lower in vulva and was not detected in tongue and esophagus.

GENE FUNCTION

Jackson et al. (2005) showed that expression of LCE1 genes, including
LCE1C, was upregulated in cultured normal human keratinocytes by
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, but not by calcium. Induction of LCE1C
could be detected 24 hours after UV irradiation and was very high 36
hours after UV irradiation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jackson et al. (2005) determined that the LCE1C gene contains 2 exons.
Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marshall et al. (2001) mapped the LCE1C
gene within the LCE gene cluster on chromosome 1q21. Jackson et al.
(2005) stated that the mouse Lce1c gene maps to a syntenic LCE gene
cluster on chromosome 3F1.

REFERENCE 1. Jackson, B.; Tilli, C. M. L. J.; Hardman, M. J.; Avilion, A. A.;
MacLeod, M. C.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Byrne, C.: Late cornified envelope
family in differentiating epithelia--response to calcium and ultraviolet
irradiation. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1062-1070, 2005.

2. Marshall, D.; Hardman, M. J.; Nield, K. M.; Byrne, C.: Differentially
expressed late constituents of the epidermal cornified envelope. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13031-13036, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 02/11/2009

600811	TITLE *600811 DNA DAMAGE-BINDING PROTEIN 2; DDB2
;;DDB, p48 SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The p48 gene (DDB2) is required for expression of an ultraviolet
radiation (UV)-damaged DNA-binding activity and is disrupted by
mutations in the subset of xeroderma pigmentosum group E (XPE; 278740)
cells that lack this activity, DDB-negative XPE (Hwang et al., 1999).

CLONING

Dualan et al. (1995) isolated full-length human cDNAs encoding the 2
polypeptides of DDB: p127 (DDB1; 600045) and p48 (DDB2).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Dualan et al. (1995) assigned the
DDB2 gene to chromosome 11p12-p11.

GENE FUNCTION

Nichols et al. (1996) found that overexpression of p48 in insect cells
greatly increased DDB activity in the cells, especially if p127 was
jointly overexpressed. These results demonstrated that p48 is required
for DNA-binding activity.

Hwang et al. (1998) demonstrated that expression of human DDB2 activated
DNA binding by DDB1 in several hamster and human cell lines. No such
effects were observed following expression of DDB2 containing single
amino acid substitutions from XPE cells that lacked binding activity.
DDB2 formed a complex with DDB1 either bound to UV-damaged DNA or in
free solution. Activation of DDB1 occurred by a 'hit-and-run' mechanism,
since the presence of DDB2 was not required for subsequent binding of
DDB1 to UV-damaged DNA. Hamster cells that failed to express Ddb2, which
contains a WD motif with homology to proteins that reorganize chromatin,
also failed to efficiently repair cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in
nontranscribed DNA. Hwang et al. (1998) concluded that DDB2 plays a role
in repairing lesions that would otherwise remain inaccessible in
nontranscribed chromatin.

In human cells, efficient global genomic repair of DNA damage induced by
UV radiation requires the p53 tumor suppressor (191170). Hwang et al.
(1999) showed that p48 mRNA levels strongly depend on basal p53
expression and increase further after DNA damage in a p53-dependent
manner. Furthermore, like p53 -/- cells, XPE cells are deficient in
global genomic repair. These results identified p48 as a link between
p53 and the nucleotide excision-repair apparatus.

Shiyanov et al. (1999) stated that the DDB complex has a transcriptional
function in conjunction with E2F1 (189971), in addition to its role in
the DNA damage response. By coimmunoprecipitation analysis of HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, followed by mass spectrometric analysis and sequencing
of novel tryptic peptides, they found that the DDB complex interacted
with CUL4A (603137), a predicted E3 ubiquitin ligase. The DDB-CUL4A
complex bound UV-damaged DNA.

Tang et al. (2000) found that UV-damaged DNA-binding activity (UV-DDB)
is deficient in cell lines and primary tissues from rodents.
Transfection of p48 conferred UV-DDB to hamster cells and enhanced
removal of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) from genomic DNA and
from the nontranscribed strand of an expressed gene. Expression of p48
suppressed UV-induced mutations arising from the nontranscribed strand
but had no effect on cellular UV sensitivity. The results defined the
role of p48 in DNA repair, demonstrated the importance of CPDs in
mutagenesis, and suggested how rodent models can be improved to better
reflect cancer susceptibility in humans.

By immunoprecipitation analysis of HeLa cells, Groisman et al. (2003)
identified DDB2 and CSA (609412) as components of similar but distinct
protein complexes. Both DDB2 and CSA interacted with DDB1 (600045), a
component of both complexes. Cullin-4A (CUL4A; 603137), ROC1 (RBX1;
603814), and all the subunits of the COP9 signalosome (e.g., COPS2;
604508) were also present in both complexes. Following UV irradiation,
the DDB2 complex bound tightly to chromatin in a UV-dependent manner and
initiated global genome repair, whereas the CSA complex bound to RNA
polymerase II and initiated transcription-coupled repair. The COP9
signalosome in each complex differentially regulated cullin-based
ubiquitin ligase activity in response to UV irradiation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nichols (1995) reported that RT-PCR mutation analysis in 5 fibroblast
XPE strains (2 without and 3 with DDB-binding activity) covering 90 to
99% of the sequence of DDB1 revealed no mutations. Approximately 40% of
DDB2 had been sequenced and had revealed no mutations in 2 fibroblast
XPF strains (278760).

Nichols et al. (1996) identified mutations in the DDB2 gene in the 3
known cases of DDB-negative XPE. No mutations were found in the cDNA of
the 127-kD subunit.

Rapic-Otrin et al. (2003) described several genetically unrelated
patients with XPE, each carrying 2 mutated alleles for DDB2, causing
either a single amino acid change (see 600811.0004), a protein
truncation, or internal deletion. These defects resulted in a severe
decrease of detectable p48 protein, abolished interaction with the p127
subunit, and produced a deficiency in UV-DDB binding activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, LYS244GLU

In 1 of the 3 known cases of DDB-negative xeroderma pigmentosum,
complementation group E (278740), Nichols et al. (1996) found an A-to-G
transition causing a lys244-to-glu (K244E) amino acid change in the
48-kD subunit of the DDB heterodimer.

Shiyanov et al. (1999) stated that the K244E mutation in DDB2 interferes
with the DDB1 (600045)-DDB2 interaction in damaged DNA binding assays
and also affects transcriptional activity.

.0002
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, ARG273HIS

In 2 of the 3 known cases of DDB-negative xeroderma pigmentosum,
complementation group E (278740), Nichols et al. (1996) found a G-to-A
transition that caused an arg273-to-his (R273H) amino acid change in the
48-kD subunit of the DDB protein.

Shiyanov et al. (1999) stated that the R273H and lys244-to-glu (K244E;
600811.0001) mutations in DDB2 interfere with the DDB1 (600045)-DDB2
interaction in damaged DNA binding assays and also affect
transcriptional activity. They showed that the R273H mutation, but not
the K244E mutation, also abrogated interaction of the DDB complex with
CUL4A (603137).

.0003
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, ARG313TER

Itoh et al. (1999) studied a 62-year-old Japanese woman who was first
recognized to be photosensitive at the age of about 20 (see XPE;
278740). There were no complications during pregnancy, labor, or
delivery. The parents were consanguineous. She showed average
development. At the time of study, she had clinical sensitivity to UV
light including pigmented or depigmented macules and patches on the
face, neck, chest, and limbs, especially the dorsa of the hands. The
sun-exposed skin showed slight dryness. Furthermore, she had multiple
skin neoplasms (5 malignant melanomas and 14 basal cell carcinomas on
the face, and 2 squamous cell carcinomas in situ on her forearm and
leg). No mutation of DDB1 (600045) was detected; the DDB2 cDNA showed
homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 937 in exon 7 of
genomic DNA, generating a nonsense mutation in CGA (arg) to TGA (stop)
at codon 313. This would be expected to produce a protein truncated by
115 amino acids.

.0004
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, ASP307TYR

In an Italian woman with DDB-negative xeroderma pigmentosum,
complementation group E (278740), Rapic-Otrin et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a 1094G-T transversion in the DDB2 gene, resulting in
an asp307-to-tyr (D307Y) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Dualan, R.; Brody, T.; Keeney, S.; Nichols, A. F.; Admon, A.; Linn,
S.: Chromosomal localization and cDNA cloning of the genes (DDB1
and DDB2) for the p127 and p48 subunits of a human damage-specific
DNA binding protein. Genomics 29: 62-69, 1995.

2. Groisman, R.; Polanowska, J.; Kuraoka, I.; Sawada, J.; Saijo, M.;
Drapkin, R.; Kisselev, A. F.; Tanaka, K.; Nakatani, Y.: The ubiquitin
ligase activity in the DDB2 and CSA complexes is differentially regulated
by the COP9 signalosome in response to DNA damage. Cell 113: 357-367,
2003.

3. Hwang, B. J.; Ford, J. M.; Hanawalt, P. C.; Chu, G.: Expression
of the p48 xeroderma pigmentosum gene is p53-dependent and is involved
in global genomic repair. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 424-428, 1999.

4. Hwang, B. J.; Toering, S.; Francke, U.; Chu, G.: p48 activates
a UV-damaged-DNA binding factor and is defective in xeroderma pigmentosum
group E cells that lack binding activity. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
4391-4399, 1998.

5. Itoh, T.; Mori, T.; Ohkubo, H.; Yamaizumi, M.: A newly identified
patient with clinical xeroderma pigmentosum phenotype has a non-sense
mutation in the DDB2 gene and incomplete repair in (6-4) photoproducts. J.
Invest. Derm. 113: 251-257, 1999.

6. Nichols, A. F.: Personal Communication. Berkeley, Calif.  10/4/1995.

7. Nichols, A. F.; Ong, P.; Linn, S.: Mutations specific to the xeroderma
pigmentosum group E Ddb- phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 24317-24320,
1996.

8. Rapic-Otrin, V.; Navazza, V.; Nardo, T.; Botta, E.; McLenigan,
M.; Bisi, D. C.; Levine, A. S.; Stefanini, M.: True XP group E patients
have a defective UV-damaged DNA binding protein complex and mutations
in DDB2 which reveal the functional domains of its p48 product. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1507-1522, 2003.

9. Shiyanov, P.; Nag, A.; Raychaudhuri, P.: Cullin 4A associates
with the UV-damaged DNA-binding protein DDB. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
35309-35312, 1999.

10. Tang, J. Y.; Hwang, B. J.; Ford, J. M.; Hanawalt, P. C.; Chu,
G.: Xeroderma pigmentosum p48 gene enhances global genomic repair
and suppresses UV-induced mutagenesis. Molec. Cell 5: 737-744, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/26/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/30/1995

EDITED mgross: 03/14/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
terry: 12/17/2007
mgross: 7/7/2006
terry: 7/6/2006
tkritzer: 4/26/2005
mgross: 11/9/2004
terry: 11/5/2004
mgross: 6/20/2000
carol: 11/10/1999
terry: 11/1/1999
carol: 3/4/1999
mgross: 2/26/1999
mgross: 2/24/1999
terry: 2/18/1999
psherman: 5/8/1998
terry: 12/10/1996
terry: 11/13/1996
mark: 10/30/1995

602963	TITLE *602963 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2D 3; UBE2D3
;;UBC4/5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBCH5C; UBCH5C
DESCRIPTION See UBE2D1 (602961) for general information about ubiquitination and the
UBC4/5 subfamily of E2 enzymes.

CLONING

By PCR using oligonucleotides based on UBCH5B (UBE2D2; 602962), Jensen
et al. (1995) identified a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA
encoding UBCH5C, or UBE2D3. The predicted 147-amino acid UBCH5C and
UBCH5B proteins differ by only 4 amino acids, with 3 of the differences
conservative changes; the nucleotide sequences of their cDNAs are 87%
identical within the coding region and 23% conserved within the 3-prime
untranslated region. The UBCH5C protein has 94% sequence identity with
the Drosophila UbcD1 protein, 92% identity with C. elegans ubc2, 88%
identity with human UBCH5A (UBE2D1), and 79% identity with S. cerevisiae
UBC4 and UBC5, and Arabidopsis thaliana UBC8 and UBC9. Recombinant
UBCH5C expressed in E. coli had a molecular mass of 16 kD by SDS-PAGE.
Quantitative PCR showed that UBCH5C was expressed in all human tissues
examined and at higher levels than UBCH5A and UBCH5B.

GENE FUNCTION

Jensen et al. (1995) demonstrated that UBCH5C could conjugate ubiquitin
to target proteins in an E6AP (UBE3A; 601623)-dependent manner.

All-trans retinoic acid (RA) is used in differentiation therapy to
achieve remission of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) because it
causes APL cell cycle arrest and differentiation. Using a short hairpin
RNA screen, Hattori et al. (2007) identified UBE2D3 among 26 proteins
that were essential for RA-induced differentiation and growth arrest in
NB4 human promyelocytic cells. UBE2D3 was upregulated following RA
treatment of NB4 cells. UBE2D3 physically associated with cyclin D1
(CCND1; 168461) and mediated RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation. Knockdown
of UBE2D3 by RNA interference blocked RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation
and cell cycle arrest. Hattori et al. (2007) concluded that
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis is involved in RA-induced cell cycle
arrest.

Shembade et al. (2010) showed that A20 (191163) inhibits the E3 ligase
activities of TRAF6 (602355), TRAF2 (601895), and cIAP1 (601712) by
antagonizing interactions with E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes UBC13
(603679) and UBCH5C. A20, together with the regulatory molecule TAX1BP1
(605326), interacted with UBC13 and UBCH5C and triggered their
ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. These findings
suggested a mechanism of A20 action in the inhibition of inflammatory
signaling pathways.

Okiyoneda et al. (2010) identified the components of the peripheral
protein quality control network that removes unfolded CFTR containing
the F508del mutation (602421.0001) from the plasma membrane. Based on
their results and proteostatic mechanisms at different subcellular
locations, Okiyoneda et al. (2010) proposed a model in which the
recognition of unfolded cytoplasmic regions of CFTR is mediated by HSC70
(600816) in concert with DNAJA1 (602837) and possibly by the HSP90
machinery (140571). Prolonged interaction with the chaperone-cochaperone
complex recruits CHIP (607207)-UBCH5C and leads to ubiquitination of
conformationally damaged CFTR. This ubiquitination is probably
influenced by other E3 ligases and deubiquitinating enzyme activities,
culminating in accelerated endocytosis and lysosomal delivery mediated
by Ub-binding clathrin adaptors and the endosomal sorting complex
required for transport (ESCRT) machinery, respectively. In an
accompanying perspective, Hutt and Balch (2010) commented that the
'yin-yang' balance maintained by the proteostasis network is critical
for normal cellular, tissue, and organismal physiology.

REFERENCE 1. Hattori, H.; Zhang, X.; Jia, Y.; Subramanian, K. K.; Jo, H.; Loison,
F.; Newburger, P. E.; Luo, H. R.: RNAi screen identifies UBE2D3 as
a mediator of all-trans retinoic acid-induced cell growth arrest in
human acute promyelocytic NB4 cells. Blood 110: 640-650, 2007.

2. Hutt, D.; Balch, W. E.: The proteome in balance. Science 329:
766-767, 2010.

3. Jensen, J. P.; Bates, P. W.; Yang, M.; Vierstra, R. A.; Weissman,
A. M.: Identification of a family of closely related human ubiquitin
conjugating enzymes. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 30408-30414, 1995.

4. Okiyoneda, T.; Barriere, H.; Bagdany, M.; Rabeh, W. M.; Du, K.;
Hohfeld, J.; Young, J. C.; Lukacs, G. L.: Peripheral protein quality
control removes unfolded CFTR from the plasma membrane. Science 329:
805-810, 2010.

5. Shembade, N.; Ma, A.; Harhaj, E. W.: Inhibition of NF-kappa-B
signaling by A20 through disruption of ubiquitin enzyme complexes. Science 327:
1135-1139, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/12/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/03/2010
terry: 8/31/2010
alopez: 3/11/2010
mgross: 6/24/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
psherman: 9/4/1998
alopez: 9/3/1998
psherman: 8/13/1998

139240	TITLE *139240 GROWTH HORMONE 2; GH2
;;GROWTH HORMONE, VARIANT; GHV;;
GROWTH HORMONE, PLACENTAL; GH2;;
GROWTH HORMONE-LIKE; GHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lewis et al. (1978) described a structural variant of human growth
hormone (GH1; 139250), which they called growth hormone-2, or GH2. Its
molecular mass was estimated to be about 20 kD, whereas GH1 has a
molecular mass of about 22 kD. The variant had several amino acid
differences and reacted poorly with antibody to human growth hormone.
Seeburg (1982) studied the structure of the GH2 gene, which they
referred to as the GHV gene, and Pavlakis et al. (1981) studied the
protein resulting from its in vitro expression. Frankenne et al. (1987)
showed that a placental variant of growth hormone, which appears in
maternal serum in midpregnancy and rises in concentration thereafter to
term, is the product of the GHV gene. The GHV gene is not expressed in
the pituitary. Liebhaber et al. (1989) showed that the GHV gene is
expressed in the term placenta, specifically in the
syncytiotrophoblastic epithelium. The similarity in developmental and
tissue-specific expression to that of the related CSA (150200) and CSB
(118820) genes suggested that these genes may share common regulatory
elements.

GENE STRUCTURE

The GH2 gene differs from the GH1 gene by the presence of a GT-to-AT
transition at the 5-prime donor splice site of intron 2 (Chen et al.,
1989). A cryptic site develops at nucleotide +19.

Boguszewski et al. (1998) noted that the GHN (GH1) and GHV (GH2) genes
consist of 5 exons. They examined alternative splicing of GHV
transcripts. The coding region of the GHV gene was amplified by RT-PCR
using placental cDNA as template. DNA sequencing of several clones
revealed 2 novel transcripts. One transcript isoform had a 45-bp
deletion caused by the use of an alternative 3-prime splice site in exon
3, similar to that in the GH1 gene, and is predicted to encode a 20-kD
GHV protein isoform. The other transcript isoform arose by the use of an
alternative 5-prime splice site which caused a 4-bp deletion in the end
of exon 4 and is predicted to encode a 24-kD protein with 219 amino
acids, which the authors referred to as GHV3. The carboxy-terminal
sequence of GHV3 differs from those of 22-kD GHV and GHV2, the 2
previously reported transcripts of the GHV gene, and does not contain a
predicted transmembrane domain as described for GHV2. The authors
concluded that the GHV transcript undergoes alternative splicing
pathways that can generate at least 4 different mRNA isoforms,
predicting the expression of different GH protein products, including 2
with a complete sequence divergence in the carboxy terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Chellakooty et al. (2004) evaluated the association of maternal serum
levels of placental GH and IGF1 (147440) with fetal growth in a
prospective longitudinal study of 89 normal pregnant women. Placental GH
levels were detectable in all samples from as early as 5 weeks'
gestation and increased significantly throughout pregnancy until
approximately 37 weeks' gestation, when peak levels of 22 ng/ml were
reached. Subsequently, placental GH levels decreased until birth. The
change in placental GH during 24.5 to 37.5 weeks' gestation was
positively associated with fetal growth rate (P = 0.027) and birth
weight (P = 0.027). Gestational age at peak placental GH values (P =
0.007) was associated with pregnancy length. A positive association
between the change in placental GH and the change in IGF1 levels
throughout gestation was found in a multivariate analysis (r(2) = 0.42;
P less than 0.001).

MAPPING

By combination of restriction mapping with somatic cell hybridization,
Owerbach et al. (1980) localized the GH2 gene, which they called 'growth
hormone-like' (GHL), to chromosome 17.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

MacLeod et al. (1991) found abnormally large GHV mRNAs in 1 of 20
placentas. Sequence analysis demonstrated retention of the first 12
bases of intron 2, resulting from both a base substitution at the intron
2 splice-donor dinucleotide (GT to AT) and activation of a cryptic
splice-donor site 12 bases downstream. Survey of a total of 60
additional chromosomes failed to reveal other instances of this
mutation. While the importance of GHV to fetal and maternal physiology
remained to be defined, MacLeod et al. (1991) demonstrated by bioassays
that it has a strong somatogen activity. MacLeod et al. (1991) found no
direct evidence to suggest that the splice site mutation in the
heterozygous state has a significant adverse effect on the physiology of
pregnancy, labor, delivery, or fetal development.

REFERENCE 1. Boguszewski, C. L.; Svensson, P.-A.; Jansson, T.; Clark, R.; Carlsson,
L. M. S.; Carlsson, B.: Cloning of two novel growth hormone transcripts
expressed in human placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 2878-2885,
1998.

2. Chellakooty, M.; Vangsgaard, K.; Larsen, T.; Scheike, T.; Falck-Larsen,
J.; Legarth, J.; Andersson, A. M.; Main, K. M.; Skakkebaek, N. E.;
Juul, A.: A longitudinal study of intrauterine growth and the placental
growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor I axis in maternal
circulation: association between placental GH and fetal growth. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 384-391, 2004.

3. Chen, E. Y.; Liao, Y.-C.; Smith, D. H.; Barrera-Saldana, H. A.;
Gelinas, R. E.; Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone locus: nucleotide
sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics 4: 479-497, 1989.

4. Frankenne, F.; Rentier-Delrue, F.; Scippo, M.-L.; Martial, J.;
Hennen, G.: Expression of the growth hormone variant gene in human
placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 64: 635-637, 1987.

5. Lewis, U. J.; Dunn, J. T.; Bonewald, L. F.; Seavey, B. K.; VanderLaan,
W. P.: A naturally occurring structural variant of human growth hormone. J.
Biol. Chem. 253: 2679-2687, 1978.

6. Liebhaber, S. A.; Urbanek, M.; Ray, J.; Tuan, R. S.; Cooke, N.
E.: Characterization and histologic localization of human growth
hormone-variant gene expression in the placenta. J. Clin. Invest. 83:
1985-1991, 1989.

7. MacLeod, J. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.; MacGillivray, M. H.; Cooke, N.
E.: Identification of a splice-site mutation in the human growth
hormone-variant gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 1168-1174, 1991.

8. MacLeod, J. N.; Worsley, I.; Ray, J.; Friesen, H. G.; Liebhaber,
S. A.; Cooke, N. E.: Human growth hormone variant is a biologically
active somatogen and lactogen. Endocrinology 128: 1298-1302, 1991.

9. Owerbach, D.; Rutter, W. J.; Martial, J. A.; Baxter, J. D.; Shows,
T. B.: Genes for growth hormone, chorionic somatomammotropin and
growth hormone-like genes on chromosome 17 in humans. Science 209:
289-292, 1980.

10. Pavlakis, G. N.; Hizuka, N.; Gorden, P.; Seeburg, P. H.; Hamber,
D. H.: Expression of two human growth hormone genes in monkey cells
infected by simian virus 40 recombinants. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78:
7398-7402, 1981.

11. Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone gene family: nucleotide
sequences show recent divergence and predict a new polypeptide hormone. DNA 1:
239-249, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 03/25/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 03/25/2009
carol: 5/27/2005
mgross: 3/23/1999
mgross: 3/18/1999
alopez: 10/28/1997
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/26/1992
carol: 1/22/1992
carol: 6/21/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

605971	TITLE *605971 RET FINGER PROTEIN-LIKE 3, ANTISENSE; RFPL3S
;;RFP-LIKE 3, ANTISENSE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Natural antisense RNAs (NARs) such as RFPL3S affect diverse activities
in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. For example, NARs regulate
basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2; 134920) negatively in frog and
human oocytes (summary by Seroussi et al., 1999).

CLONING

By analysis of a cosmid genomic clone from 22q12-q13 and by PCR,
Seroussi et al. (1999) obtained cDNAs encoding RET finger protein (RFP;
602165)-like-1 (RFPL1; 605968), RFPL2 (605969), and RFPL3 (605970), as
well as antisense RFPL1S (605972) and RFPL3S. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a 1.2-kb RFPL3S transcript that was strongly
expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Seroussi et al. (1999) determined that the antisense RFPL3S transcript
contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Seroussi et al. (1999) mapped the RFPL3S gene to chromosome 22q12-q13 by
analysis of a mapped cosmid genomic clone.

REFERENCE 1. Seroussi, E.; Kedra, D.; Pan, H.-Q.; Peyrad, M.; Schwartz, C.;
Scambler, P.; Donnai, D.; Roe, B. A.; Dumanski, J. P.: Duplications
on human chromosome 22 reveal a novel Ret finger protein-like gene
family with sense and endogenous antisense transcripts. Genome Res. 9:
803-814, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/25/2001

EDITED alopez: 03/27/2012
alopez: 3/26/2012
mgross: 6/6/2001
mgross: 5/25/2001

612072	TITLE *612072 MIF4G DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; MIF4GD
;;SLBP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; SLIP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Cakmakci et al. (2008) identified a
protein, which they designated SLIP1, that binds to a 15-amino acid
N-terminal region of stem-loop binding protein (SLBP; 602422). This
region of SLBP binds to the 3-prime end of histone mRNA. Cakmakci et al.
(2008) identified 5 conserved residues in this region of SLBP that are
required for histone translation and found that mutations in any of
these residues reduced SLIP1 binding. Coexpression of SLIP1 and SLBP in
Xenopus oocytes stimulated translation of a reporter mRNA with a
stem-loop, as in histone mRNAs, but not of a reporter with a poly(A)
tail. Expression of SLIP1 in HeLa cells also stimulated expression of a
GFP reporter mRNA ending in a stem-loop. Downregulation of endogenous
SLIP1 by siRNA reduced the rate of translation of endogenous histone
mRNA as well as cell viability. Cakmakci et al. (2008) proposed that
SLIP1 stimulates histone mRNA translation by bridging between SLBP and
the 5-prime end of histone mRNA.

MAPPING

Scott (2008) mapped the SLIP1 gene to chromosome 17q25.1 based on an
alignment of the SLIP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AC022211) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.3).

REFERENCE 1. Cakmakci, N. G.; Lerner, R. S.; Wagner, E. J.; Zheng. L.; Marzluff,
W. F.: SLIP1, a factor required for activation of histone mRNA translation
by the stem-loop binding protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 28: 1182-1194,
2008.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/19/2008.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/21/2008

EDITED wwang: 05/21/2008
carol: 5/21/2008

608177	TITLE *608177 EXOSTOSIN GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; EXT1
;;EXOSTOSIN 1;;
EXT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

EXT1 and EXT2 (608210) form a heterooligomeric complex that catalyzes
the polymerization of heparan sulfate. This complex is an essential
factor in a signal transduction cascade for regulation of chondrocyte
differentiation, ossification, and apoptosis (summary by Heinritz et
al., 2009).

CLONING

By screening a human chondrocyte cDNA library with cosmids that spanned
breakpoints on chromosome 8q identified in patients with multiple
exostoses type I (133700) (see Ludecke et al., 1995), Ahn et al. (1995)
identified a cDNA encoding a putative 746-amino acid protein with a
molecular mass of 86.3 kD. Northern blot analysis detected expression of
a 3.4-kb transcript in all tissues tested, with highest levels in liver.
The authors noted that the breakpoint region in the EXT1 gene contains 2
identical polypyrimidine tracts (CCCCCCT) that are known to be deletion
hotspots, similar to the retinoblastoma gene (RB1; 614041) (Lohmann et
al., 1994).

Lin and Wells (1997) cloned and sequenced a mouse cDNA that is
homologous to the human EXT1 gene. Lohmann et al. (1997) showed that the
murine Ext1 gene has a high level of sequence similarity with its human
homolog.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ludecke et al. (1997) reported that the EXT1 gene contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

Ahn et al. (1995) identified the EXT1 gene within the breakpoint regions
of chromosome 8q identified in patients with multiple exostoses type I.
Lohmann et al. (1997) found that the murine Ext1 gene is part of a
conserved linkage group on mouse chromosome 15.

GENE FUNCTION

Ahn et al. (1995) suggested that EXT1 may act as a tumor suppressor
gene. Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) presented evidence
suggesting that the EXT1 gene on chromosome 8 and the EXT2 gene (608210)
on chromosome 11 have tumor suppressor function. They found loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) for markers linked to these 2 genes in
chondrosarcomas originating in individuals with multiple exostoses (see
133700) as well as in sporadic chondrosarcomas. The proteins encoded by
the EXT1 and EXT2 genes play a role in the expression of proteoglycans
on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix. To explain the fact
that normal bone growth occurs concurrently with abnormal exostosis
tumor growth, Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) proposed a
2-hit tumor formation model according to the Knudson hypothesis
(Knudson, 1971). In this model, a single germline mutation results in
the predisposition for disease and a second somatic mutational hit,
usually LOH, allows for aberrant growth. Hecht et al. (1997) noted that
although the EXT1 protein is ubiquitously expressed in many tissues, the
only known effect of mutated or inactivated EXT1 appears to be specific
to actively growing bone, allowing inappropriate bone growth to be
juxtaposed to the growth plate; as the bone continues to grow, the
exostoses appear to migrate toward the diaphysis. At puberty, with
growth plate fusion, linear growth ceases and no new exostoses develop.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that EXT1 is an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-resident type II transmembrane glycoprotein whose expression in
cells results in the alteration of the synthesis and display of cell
surface heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Two EXT1 variants
containing missense mutations related to multiple exostoses failed to
alter cell surface glycosaminoglycans, despite retaining their ER
localization. By testing a cell line with a specific defect in EXT1 in
in vivo and in vitro assays, McCormick et al. (2000) showed that EXT2
does not harbor significant glycosyltransferase activity in the absence
of EXT1. Instead, it appears that EXT1 and EXT2 form a heterooligomeric
complex in vivo that leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the
Golgi apparatus. Remarkably, the Golgi-localized EXT1/EXT2 complex
possesses substantially higher glycosyltransferase activity than EXT1 or
EXT2 alone, suggesting that the complex represents the biologically
relevant form of the enzyme(s). These findings provided a rationale for
the causation of hereditary multiple exostoses by loss of activity in
either of the 2 EXT genes.

Bovee et al. (1999) conducted studies to determine whether inactivation
of both alleles of an EXT gene, according to the tumor suppressor model,
is required for osteochondroma development, or whether a single EXT
germline mutation acts in a single dominant-negative way. They studied
LOH and DNA ploidy in 8 sporadic and 6 hereditary osteochondromas. EXT1
and EXT2 mutation analysis was performed in a total of 34 sporadic and
hereditary osteochondromas and secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas.
They demonstrated that osteochondroma is a true neoplasm, since
aneuploidy was found in 4 of 10 osteochondromas. Furthermore, LOH was
almost exclusively found at the EXT1 locus in 5 of 14 osteochondromas.
Four novel constitutional cDNA alterations were detected in exon 1 of
EXT1. The 2 patients with multiple osteochondromas demonstrated a
germline mutation combined with the loss of the remaining wildtype
allele in 3 osteochondromas, indicating that, in cartilaginous cells of
the growth plate, inactivation of both copies of the EXT1 gene was
required for osteochondroma formation in hereditary cases. In contrast,
no somatic EXT1 cDNA alterations were found in sporadic osteochondromas.
No mutations in the EXT2 gene were found in any of these cases.

Ropero et al. (2004) reported that EXT1 function was abrogated in human
cancer cells by transcriptional silencing associated with CpG island
promoter hypermethylation. Epigenetic inactivation of EXT1 led to loss
of heparan sulfate (HS) synthesis that was reversed by a DNA
demethylating agent. Reintroduction of EXT1 into EXT1
methylation-deficient cancer cells induced tumor suppressor-like
features, including reduced colony formation density and tumor growth in
nude mouse xenograft models. By screening 79 human cancer cell lines and
454 primary tumors from different cell types, the authors found that
EXT1 CpG island hypermethylation was common in leukemia, especially
acute promyelocytic leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and
nonmelanoma skin cancer. Ropero et al. (2004) concluded that EXT1
epigenetic inactivation, leading to abrogation of HS biosynthesis, is an
important step in the processes of tumor onset and progression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Multiple Exostoses Type I

In 2 of 23 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I, Ahn et al.
(1995) identified a 1-bp deletion in the EXT1 gene (608177.0001) that
segregated with the disease. In 4 of 6 EXT families demonstrating
linkage to the EXT1 locus on chromosome 8, Hecht et al. (1997)
identified 3 germline mutations in the EXT1 gene that segregated with
the disease phenotype in each family (608177.0002-608177.0004).

In 7 of 17 families (41%) with EXT, Philippe et al. (1997) identified
mutations in the EXT1 gene, including 5 novel mutations (see, e.g.,
608177.0007 and 608177.0009). Five of the families (29%) had mutations
in the EXT2 gene. Wells et al. (1997) identified 6 mutations in the EXT1
gene in 6 unrelated EXT families showing linkage to chromosome 8. One of
the mutations was the same 1-bp deletion in exon 6 that was previously
reported in 2 independent EXT families (608177.0001). The other 5
mutations were novel. In each case, the mutation was predicted to result
in a truncated or nonfunctional EXT1 protein.

Wuyts et al. (1998) analyzed the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in 26 EXT families
originating from 9 countries. Of the 26 families, 10 had an EXT1
mutation and 10 had an EXT2 mutation. Twelve of these mutations had not
previously been described. From a review of these and previously
reported mutations, Wuyts et al. (1998) concluded that mutations in
either the EXT1 or the EXT2 gene are responsible for most cases of
multiple exostoses. Most of the mutations in these 2 genes cause
premature termination of the EXT proteins, whereas missense mutations
are rare. The authors concluded that the development of exostoses is
mainly due to loss of function of EXT genes, consistent with the
hypothesis that the EXT genes have a tumor suppressor function.

Among 11 isolated cases of exostoses and 20 families with EXT, Raskind
et al. (1998) identified 12 novel EXT1 mutations, including 5 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 1 codon deletion, and 6 single basepair
substitutions, distributed across 8 of the exons. Only 2 of the
mutations were identified in more than 1 family. Three mutations
affected sites in which alterations were previously reported.
Nonchain-terminating missense mutations were identified in codons 280
and 340, both coding for conserved arginine residues. Raskind et al.
(1998) suggested that these residues may be crucial to the function of
this protein. One of the mutations (608177.0008) was identified in a
Chamorro native on Guam, where EXT is unusually frequent. They concluded
that 45% of the isolated cases and 77% of the familial cases could be
attributed to abnormalities in EXT1.

In 23 of 43 Japanese families with hereditary multiple exostoses, Seki
et al. (2001) found 21 mutations, of which 18 were novel. Seventeen
(40%) of the 23 families had a mutation in the EXT1 gene and 6 (14%) had
a mutation in the EXT2 gene. Of the 17 families with EXT1 mutations, 13
had those causing premature termination of the EXT1 protein, and 4
showed missense mutations. All 4 EXT1 missense mutations occurred in the
arginine residue at codon 340 (R340L; 608177.0004). R340 is known as a
critical site for expression of heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans,
suggesting that the region encompassing the arginine residue may play an
important role in the function of the EXT1 protein. In contrast to the
findings of Seki et al. (2001), Xu et al. (1999) detected more mutations
in EXT2 than in EXT1 in Chinese patients (33% and 14%, respectively). An
excess of EXT1 mutations was found in Caucasian patients, however, by
Philippe et al. (1997) and Wuyts et al. (1998). In both Caucasian
patients, as studied by Raskind et al. (1998), and Japanese patients,
more EXT1 mutations were identified in familial cases than in sporadic
cases.

In a study of 82 Japanese patients with hereditary multiple exostoses by
Seki et al. (2001), 4 patients developed malignancy and their mutations
(3 in EXT1 and 1 in EXT2) were all different, suggesting that malignant
transformation is not directly related to a particular mutation in EXT1
or EXT2, but more likely involves other genetic factors. Loss of
heterozygosity has been detected in chondrosarcoma not only at the EXT
loci but also at others such as 10q (RET; 164761) and 3q.

Wuyts and Van Hul (2000) stated that 49 different EXT1 and 25 different
EXT2 mutations had been identified in patients with multiple exostoses
and that mutations in these 2 genes were responsible for over 70% of the
EXT cases. Most of the mutations cause loss of function, which is
consistent with the presumed tumor suppressor function of the EXT genes.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the missense mutations G339D
(608177.0007) and R340C (608177.0009) abrogate the ability of
exostosin-1 to synthesize heparan sulfate (HS). Cheung et al. (2001)
used a functional assay that detects HS expression on the cell surface
of an EXT1-deficient cell line to test other missense mutant exostosin
proteins for their ability to rescue HS biosynthesis in vivo. Their
results showed that EXT1 mutants bearing 6 of these missense mutations
are also defective in HS expression, but surprisingly, 4 missense
mutations that had been considered etiologic were phenotypically
indistinguishable from wildtype EXT1. Three of these 4 'active'
mutations affect amino acids that are not conserved among vertebrates
and invertebrates, whereas all of the HS-biosynthesis null mutations
affect only conserved amino acids. Further, substitution or deletion of
each of these 4 residues does not abrogate HS biosynthesis. Taken
together, these results indicated that several of the reported etiologic
mutant EXT forms retain the ability to synthesize and express HS on the
cell surface. Cheung et al. (2001) suggested that these mutations may
represent rare genetic polymorphisms in the EXT1 gene or may interfere
with functions of EXT1 that are involved in the pathogenesis of
hereditary multiple exostoses.

Hall et al. (2002) reported the direct sequencing and LOH analysis of 12
exostoses in 10 hereditary multiple exostoses families, 4 solitary
exostoses, and their corresponding constitutional DNA. Of the 16
exostoses screened, there was only 1 isolated case in which 2 somatic
mutations, a deletion and an LOH, were present. Hall et al. (2002)
developed alternative models of pathogenesis, including a second
mutational event in genes other than EXT1 and EXT2, such as the EXTL1
(601738), EXTL2 (602411), and EXTL3 (605744) genes. Xu et al. (1999)
found no germline mutations in the EXTL1 and EXTL2 genes of patients
with hereditary multiple exostoses.

In 11 of 23 German patients with multiple exostoses, Heinritz et al.
(2009) identified 11 different novel mutations in the EXT1 gene (see,
e.g., 608177.0012). Eleven patients had mutations in the EXT2 gene, and
1 patient had no detectable mutations.

- Chondrosarcoma

In a patient with chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997) identified an EXT1
mutation in the constitutional DNA (608177.0005), but the tumor tissue
had retained the wildtype allele. In a patient with sporadic
chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997) identified a mutation in the tumor
tissue (608177.0006) which was not present in the constitutional DNA.
LOH analysis of chondrosarcomas and chondroblastomas revealed multiple
LOH events at loci on chromosomes 3q, 8q, 10q, and 19q. The authors
reported that a sporadic chondrosarcoma demonstrated LOH for EXT1 and
EXT3, whereas a second chondrosarcoma underwent LOH for EXT2 and
chromosome 10.

- Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome Type II

Exostoses in the contiguous gene syndrome trichorhinophalangeal syndrome
type II (150230) are caused by loss of functional copies of the EXT1
gene (Ludecke et al., 1995).

ANIMAL MODEL

To define the developmental role of heparan sulfate in mammalian
species, Inatani et al. (2003) conditionally disrupted the heparan
sulfate polymerizing enzyme Ext1 in the embryonic mouse brain. The
Ext1-null brain exhibited patterning defects that were composites of
those caused by mutations of multiple heparan sulfate-binding
morphogens. Furthermore, the Ext1-null brain displayed severe guidance
errors in major commissural tracts, revealing a pivotal role of heparan
sulfate in midline axon guidance. Inatani et al. (2003) concluded that
heparan sulfate is essential for mammalian brain development.

By introducing a hypomorphic mutation in the Ext1 gene, Koziel et al.
(2004) developed mice producing significantly reduced levels of heparan
sulfate. Homozygous mutant embryos survived until embryonic day 14.5 at
a nonmendelian ratio of 14%. Only 4% were recovered at embryonic day
16.5. Mutant embryos were small and edematous. They had heart defects,
reduced skeleton size with fused vertebrae, shortened fore- and
hindlimbs, fused elbow and knee joints, and occasionally syndactylies of
digits. Homozygous mutant mice showed an extended distribution of Ihh
(600726) signaling during embryonic chondrocyte differentiation, and
ectopic heparan sulfate restricted Ihh signaling. The authors concluded
that heparan sulfate binds hedgehog in the extracellular space and
negatively regulates the range of hedgehog signaling in a dose-dependent
manner.

Matsumoto et al. (2010) created a line of mice with random deletion of
Ext1 in a small fraction of chondrocytes. Mutant mice developed
osteochondromas of the wrist, fibula, shoulder, and rib. A high
proportion of mutant animals also showed bowing deformity of the radius,
subluxation/dislocation of the radial head, scoliosis, and mild
abnormalities in the growth plate and joint cartilage. Genotyping showed
that osteochondromas contained a high proportion of wildtype
chondrocytes, in addition to Est1-null chondrocytes. The pattern of gene
expression in osteochondromas more resembled that of ectopic growth
plates than of neoplasms. Matsumoto et al. (2010) hypothesized that
Est1-null chondrocytes are required for initiation of osteochondromas,
but the subsequent growth of osteochondromas is not directly due to
upregulated proliferation of mutant cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP DEL, 2120T

In 2 of 23 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I (133700),
Ahn et al. (1995) identified a 1-bp deletion (2120T) in the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon. The mutation cosegregated with the
disease in the families over 2 and 3 generations, respectively.

.0002
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP DEL, 1364C

In 2 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht
et al. (1997) identified a 1-bp deletion (1364delC) in exon 1 of the
EXT1 gene, resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1403.

.0003
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 4-BP INS, NT1035

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 4-bp insertion (1035ins4) in exon 1 of the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1213.

.0004
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, ARG340LEU

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 1635G-T transversion in exon 2 of the EXT1 gene, resulting
in an arg339-to-leu (R339L) substitution. It was subsequently discovered
that the mutation was a 1670G-T transversion that resulted in an
arg340-to-leu (R340L) substitution (Hogue, 1998).

.0005
CHONDROSARCOMA, SPORADIC
EXT1, 1-BP INS, 2077C

In a patient with sporadic chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 1-bp insertion (2077-2082insC) in the EXT1 gene in the
patient's constitutional DNA, resulting in a frameshift and a premature
stop codon at nucleotide 2208 in exon 6. Interestingly, the tumor tissue
retained the wildtype allele, but had LOH for chromosome 3q.

.0006
CHONDROSARCOMA, SOMATIC
EXT1, 8-BP DEL, NT1178

In the tumor tissue of a patient with sporadic chondrosarcoma, Hecht et
al. (1997) identified an 8-bp deletion (1178del8) in the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1213. This mutation
did not appear in the patient's constitutional DNA, suggesting somatic
origin.

.0007
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, GLY339ASP

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Philippe et al.
(1997) identified a gly339-to-asp (G339D) missense mutation in exon 2 of
the EXT1 gene.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the G339D missense mutation
abrogates HS biosynthesis.

.0008
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, TYR119TER

In a Chamorro native on Guam, Raskind et al. (1998) demonstrated that
multiple exostoses were associated with a 108C-A transversion in exon 1
of the EXT1 gene, leading to a stop codon, tyr119-to-ter (Y119X).
Raskind et al. (1998) suggested that identification of the Chamorro
mutation could allow investigation of a possible founder effect in this
population, which has an unusually high frequency of EXT.

.0009
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, ARG340CYS

Philippe et al. (1997) screened 17 probands with hereditary multiple
exostoses for alterations in the EXT1 or EXT2 (133701) genes. In a
family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Philippe et al. (1997)
identified an arg340-to-cys (R340C) mutation in exon 2 of the EXT1 gene.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the R340C missense mutation
abrogates heparan sulfate biosynthesis.

.0010
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, IVS1DS, G-C

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
multiple exostoses type I (133700), Faiyaz-Ul-Haque et al. (2004)
identified a G-to-C transversion at the conserved splice donor site in
intron 1 of the EXT1 gene, predicted to result in a null allele. All
affected individuals, and no unaffected individuals, had bilateral
overriding of the fourth toe. This feature was present at birth,
allowing earlier diagnosis of the disorder.

.0011
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP INS, 1664A

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
multiple exostoses type I (133700), Faiyaz-Ul-Haque et al. (2004)
identified a 1-bp insertion (1664insA) in exon 8 of the EXT1 gene,
predicted to produce a frameshift at codon 555 resulting in a premature
termination 10 codons downstream. Bilateral overriding of the second or
third toes was observed in all affected individuals except for 1
asymptomatic female and 1 mildly affected female. No unaffected
individuals had this feature, which was present at birth and allowed
earlier diagnosis of the disorder.

.0012
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, IVS1DS, 4-BP DEL

In a German patient with multiple exostoses type I (113700), Heinritz et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 4-bp deletion (962+1-962+4del4) in
the 5-prime splice donor site of intron 1 of the EXT1 gene. The mutation
results in the skipping of exon 2 and a frameshift with premature
termination.

REFERENCE 1. Ahn, J.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Lindow, S.; Horton, W. A.; Lee, B.; Wagner,
M. J.; Horsthemke, B.; Wells, D. E.: Cloning of the putative tumour
suppressor gene for hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT1). Nature
Genet. 11: 137-143, 1995.

2. Bovee, J. V. M. G.; Cleton-Jansen, A.-M.; Wuyts, W.; Caethoven,
G.; Taminiau, A. H. M.; Bakker, E.; Van Hul, W.; Cornelisse, C. J.;
Hogendoorn, P. C. W.: EXT-mutation analysis and loss of heterozygosity
in sporadic and hereditary osteochondromas and secondary chondrosarcomas. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 689-698, 1999.

3. Cheung, P. K.; McCormick, C.; Crawford, B. E.; Esko, J. D.; Tufaro,
F.; Duncan, G.: Etiological point mutations in the hereditary multiple
exostoses gene EXT1: a functional analysis of heparan sulfate polymerase
activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 55-66, 2001.

4. Faiyaz-Ul-Haque, M.; Ahmad, W.; Zaidi, S. H. E.; Hussain, S.; Haque,
S.; Ahmad, M.; Cohn, D. H.; Tsui, L.-C.: Novel mutations in the EXT1
gene in two consanguineous families affected with multiple hereditary
exostoses (familial osteochondromatosis). Clin. Genet. 66: 144-151,
2004.

5. Hall, C. R.; Cole, W. G.; Haynes, R.; Hecht, J. T.: Reevaluation
of a genetic model for the development of exostosis in hereditary
multiple exostosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112: 1-5, 2002.

6. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Strong, L. C.; Hansen, M. F.; Blanton,
S. H.; Wagner, M.: Hereditary multiple exostosis and chondrosarcoma:
linkage to chromosome 11 and loss of heterozygosity for EXT-linked
markers on chromosomes 11 and 8. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 1125-1131,
1995.

7. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Wang, Y.; Blanton, S. H.; Wagner, M.;
Strong, L. C.; Raskind, W.; Hansen, M. F.; Wells, D.: Hereditary
multiple exostoses (EXT): mutational studies of familial EXT1 cases
and EXT-associated malignancies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 80-86, 1997.

8. Heinritz, W.; Huffmeier, U.; Strenge, S.; Miterski, B.; Zweier,
C.; Leinung, S.; Bohring, A.; Mitulla, B.; Peters, U.; Froster, U.
G.: New mutations of EXT1 and EXT2 genes in German patients with
multiple osteochondromas. Ann. Hum. Genet. 73: 283-291, 2009.

9. Hogue, D: Personal Communication. Houston, Tex  2/6/1998.

10. Inatani, M.; Irie, F.; Plump, A. S.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.; Yamaguchi,
Y.: Mammalian brain morphogenesis and midline axon guidance require
heparan sulfate. Science 302: 1044-1046, 2003.

11. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

12. Koziel, L.; Kunath, M.; Kelly, O. G.; Vortkamp, A.: Ext1-dependent
heparan sulfate regulates the range of Ihh signaling during endochondral
ossification. Dev. Cell 6: 801-813, 2004.

13. Lin, X.; Wells, D.: Isolation of the mouse cDNA homologous to
the human EXT1 gene responsible for hereditary multiple exostoses. DNA
Seq. 7: 199-202, 1997.

14. Lohmann, D. R.; Brandt, B.; Hopping, W.; Passarge, E.; Horsthemke,
B.: Spectrum of small length germline mutations in the RB1 gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 2187-2193, 1994.

15. Lohmann, D. R.; Buiting, K.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Horsthemke, B.:
The murine Ext1 gene shows a high level of sequence similarity with
its human homologue and is part of a conserved linkage group on chromosome
15. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 76: 164-166, 1997.

16. Ludecke, H.-J.; Ahn, J.; Lin, X.; Hill, A.; Wagner, M. J.; Schomburg,
L.; Horsthemke, B.; Wells, D. E.: Genomic organization and promoter
structure of the human EXT1 gene. Genomics 40: 351-354, 1997.

17. Ludecke, H.-J.; Wagner, M. J.; Nardmann, J.; La Pillo, B.; Parrish,
J. E.; Willems, P. J.; Haan, E. A.; Frydman, M.; Hamers, G. J. H.;
Wells, D. E.; Horsthemke, B.: Molecular dissection of a contiguous
gene syndrome: localization of the genes involved in the Langer-Giedion
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 31-36, 1995.

18. Matsumoto, K.; Irie, F.; Mackem, S.; Yamaguchi, Y.: A mouse model
of chondrocyte-specific somatic mutation reveals a role for Ext1 loss
of heterozygosity in multiple hereditary exostoses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 10932-10937, 2010.

19. McCormick, C.; Duncan, G.; Goutsos, K. T.; Tufaro, F.: The putative
tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 form a stable complex that accumulates
in the Golgi apparatus and catalyzes the synthesis of heparan sulfate. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 668-673, 2000.

20. McCormick, C.; Leduc, Y.; Martindale, D.; Mattison, K.; Esford,
L. E.; Dyer, A. P.; Tufaro, F.: The putative tumour suppressor EXT1
alters the expression of cell-surface heparan sulfate. Nature Genet. 19:
158-161, 1998.

21. Philippe, C.; Porter, D. E.; Emerton, M. E.; Wells, D. E.; Simpson,
A. H. R. W.; Monaco, A. P.: Mutation screening of the EXT1 and EXT2
genes in patients with hereditary multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 520-528, 1997.

22. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U.; Chansky, H.; Matsushita, M.: Loss
of heterozygosity in chondrosarcomas for markers linked to hereditary
multiple exostoses loci on chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
1132-1139, 1995.

23. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U., III; Matsushita, M.; Wijsman, E.
M.; Wells, D. E.; Chapman, N.; Sandell, L. J.; Wagner, M.; Houck,
J.: Evaluation of locus heterogeneity and EXT1 mutations in 34 families
with hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum. Mutat. 11: 231-239, 1998.

24. Ropero, S.; Setien, F.; Espada, J.; Fraga, M. F.; Herranz, M.;
Asp, J.; Benassi, M. S.; Franchi, A.; Patino, A.; Ward, L. S.; Bovee,
J.; Cigudosa, J. C.; Wim, W.; Esteller, M.: Epigenetic loss of the
familial tumor-suppressor gene exostosin-1 (EXT1) disrupts heparan
sulfate synthesis in cancer cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2753-2765,
2004.

25. Seki, H.; Kubota, T.; Ikegawa, S.; Haga, N.; Fujioka, F.; Ohzeki,
S.; Wakui, K.; Yoshikawa, H.; Takaoka, K.; Fukushima, Y.: Mutation
frequencies of EXT1 and EXT2 in 43 Japanese families with hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Med. Genet. 99: 59-62, 2001.

26. Wells, D. E.; Hill, A.; Lin, X.; Ahn, J.; Brown, N.; Wagner, M.
J.: Identification of novel mutations in the human EXT1 tumor suppressor
gene. Hum. Genet. 99: 612-615, 1997.

27. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.: Molecular basis of multiple exostoses:
mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes. Hum. Mutat. 15: 220-227, 2000.

28. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; De Boulle, K.; Hendrickx, J.; Bakker,
E.; Vanhoenacker, F.; Mollica, F.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Sayli, B. S.; Pazzaglia,
U. E.; Mortier, G.; Hamel, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Matsushita, M.; Raskind,
W. H.; Willems, P. J.: Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 346-354, 1998.

29. Xu, L.; Xia, J.; Jiang, H.; Zhou, J.; Li, H.; Wang, D.; Pan, Q.;
Long, Z.; Fan, C.; Deng, H.-X.: Mutation analysis of hereditary multiple
exostoses in the Chinese. Hum. Genet. 105: 45-50, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/22/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/3/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/17/2003

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
carol: 9/19/2013
mgross: 11/13/2012
terry: 11/13/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 12/8/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
wwang: 5/30/2007
terry: 5/22/2007
carol: 2/8/2007
carol: 8/1/2006
mgross: 3/16/2006
wwang: 4/28/2005
wwang: 4/25/2005
terry: 4/20/2005
mgross: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/9/2004
alopez: 12/9/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
tkritzer: 11/21/2003
carol: 10/30/2003
ckniffin: 10/29/2003

601873	TITLE *601873 BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 1; B4GALNT1
;;BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE; GALGT;;
GalNAcT;;
GM2/GD2 SYNTHASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The B4GALNT1 gene encodes beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase-1
(EC 2.4.1.92), an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of complex
gangliosides (G), which are mono- (M), di- (D), and tri- (T) sialic
acid-containing glycosphingolipids generated by sequential
glycosylations. Gangliosides are part of the larger family of
glycosphingolipids and are components of the synaptic plasma membrane
involved in synaptic plasticity, signal transduction, and endocytosis
and then are critical for central nervous system development. B4GALNT1
catalyzes the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine into GM3, GD3, and
globotriaosylceramide by a beta-1,4 linkage (summary by Boukhris et al.,
2013).

CLONING

Nagata et al. (1992) used expression cloning to isolate the cDNA for
beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GalNAcT), or G(M2)/G(D2)
synthase. The cDNA encodes a 561-amino acid polypeptide. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the gene is expressed as 2 differently sized
transcripts in all cells tested that expressed G(MS), G(D2), or both.
These findings indicate that the cDNAs catalyze the transfer of GalNAc
into G(M3) and G(D3) by a beta-1,4 linkage, resulting in the synthesis
of G(M2) and G(D2), respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furukawa et al. (1996) examined the genomic structure of the human
GalNAcT gene and found that it contains more than 11 exons spanning over
8 kb of genomic DNA. They reported that the gene has at least 3 distinct
transcription initiation sites that may be involved in cell
type-specific gene expression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Furukawa et al. (1996) mapped the GALGT gene to 12q13.3. Hamlin
et al. (1998) mapped the GALGT and KIF5A (602821) genes to 12q13 by
FISH. They found that these genes are contained within the same
approximately 200-kb YAC insert as the GLI (165220) and DDIT3 (126337)
genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By exome sequencing of 5 families with autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified 5
different homozygous mutations in the B4GALNT1 gene. The mutations
segregated with the disorder in the families and were not found in large
control databases. Subsequent analysis of this gene identified
pathogenic mutations in 2 of 65 additional probands with a similar
disorder. All mutations were truncating, except for 2 missense mutations
that occurred at highly conserved residues (see, e.g.,
601873.0001-601873.0005). No functional studies were performed. The
phenotype was characterized by onset in the first 2 decades of life of
gait abnormalities due to lower limb spasticity and muscle weakness.
Some patients had upper limb involvement. Additional features included
intellectual disability, peripheral neuropathy, dysarthria, cerebellar
signs, extrapyramidal signs, and cortical atrophy. The disorder was
slowly progressive.

ANIMAL MODEL

Takamiya et al. (1996) found that mice with a disrupted B4galnt1 gene
lacked all complex gangliosides, but did did not show any major
histologic defects in their nervous systems or in gross behavior.
Electrophysiologic studies showed a slight reduction in the neural
conduction velocity from the tibial nerve to the somatosensory cortex,
but not to the lumbar spine. The findings suggested that complex
gangliosides are required in neuronal functions, such as synaptic
transmission, but not in the morphogenesis and organogenesis of the
brain. Higher levels of GM3 and GD3 expressed in the brains of these
mutant mice may have been able to compensate for the lack of complex
gangliosides.

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC; 257220) is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene (607623)
and characterized by intracellular accumulation of cholesterol and
sphingolipids. To determine the relative contribution of ganglioside
accumulation in the neuropathogenesis of Niemann-Pick C disease, Liu et
al. (2000) bred NPC model mice with mice carrying a targeted mutation in
GalNAcT. Unlike the NPC model mice, the double mutant mice did not
exhibit central nervous system accumulation of gangliosides GM2 or of
glycolipids GA1 and GA2. Histologic analysis revealed that the
characteristic neuronal storage pathology of NPC disease was
substantially reduced in the double mutant mice. By contrast, visceral
pathology was similar in the NPC and double mutant mice. Most notably,
the clinical phenotype of the double mutant mice, in the absence of CNS
ganglioside accumulation and associated neuronal pathology, did not
improve. The authors concluded that complex ganglioside storage, while
responsible for much of the neuronal pathology, did not significantly
influence the clinical phenotype of the NPC model.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DEL, 395C

In 3 Spanish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive spastic paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (c.395delC) in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Pro132GlnfsTer7).
The mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in the family and was not present in several large control
databases.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ARG228TER

In 2 Brazilian sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous c.682C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in an arg228-to-ter (R228X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing, was not present in several large control
databases or in 2 unaffected sibs. Three additional sibs were reportedly
affected.

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DUP, 263G

In an Algerian patient, born of consanguineous parents, with SPG26
(609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified a homozygous 1-bp
duplication (c.263dupG), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination (Leu89ProfsTer13). No other family members were available
for study.

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, GLN120TER

In 4 members of a Portuguese family with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.358C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a gln120-to-ter (Q120X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing and was not present in several large
control databases, segregated with the disorder in the family.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ASP433ALA

In 3 German sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified
a homozygous c.1298A-C transversion in the B4GALNT1 gene, resulting in
an asp433-to-ala (D433A) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, was not found in several
large control databases and segregated with the disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Boukhris, A.; Schule, R.; Loureiro, J. L.; Lourenco, C. M.; Mundwiller,
E.; Gonzalez, M. A.; Charles, P.; Gauthier, J.; Rekik, I.; Acosta
Lebrigio, R. F.; Gaussen, M.; Speziani, F.; and 21 others: Alteration
of ganglioside biosynthesis responsible for complex hereditary spastic
paraplegia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 118-123, 2013.

2. Furukawa, K.; Soejima, H.; Niikawa, N.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.
: Genomic organization and chromosomal assignment of the human beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 20836-20844, 1996.

3. Hamlin, P. J.; Jones, P. F.; Leek, J. P.; Bransfield, K.; Lench,
N. J.; Aldersley, M. A.; Howdle, P. D.; Markham, A. F.; Robinson,
P. A.: Assignment of GALGT encoding beta-1,4N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase
(GalNAc-T) and KIF5A encoding neuronal kinesin (D12S1889) to human
chromosome band 12q13 by assignment to ICI YAC 26EG10 and in situ
hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 267-268, 1998.

4. Liu, Y.; Wu, Y.-P.; Wada, R.; Neufeld, E. B.; Mullin, K. A.; Howard,
A. C.; Pentchev, P. G.; Vanier, M. T.; Suzuki, K.; Proia, R. L.:
Alleviation of neuronal ganglioside storage does not improve the clinical
course of the Niemann-Pick C disease mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1087-1092, 2000.

5. Nagata, Y.; Yamashiro, S.; Yodoi, J.; Lloyd, K. O.; Shiku, H.;
Furukawa, K.: Expression cloning of beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
cDNAs that determine the expression of G(M2) and G(D2) gangliosides. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 12082-12089, 1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
269: 7045 only, 1994.

6. Takamiya, K.; Yamamoto, A.; Furukawa, K.; Yamashiro, S.; Shin,
M.; Okada, M.; Fukumoto, S.; Haraguchi, M.; Takeda, N.; Fujimura,
K.; Sakae, M.; Kishikawa, M.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.; Aizawa, S.
: Mice with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides
but exhibit only subtle defects in their nervous system. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 93: 10662-10667, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/18/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/10/1997

EDITED carol: 09/09/2013
carol: 8/6/2013
carol: 8/5/2013
ckniffin: 8/1/2013
carol: 4/3/2013
carol: 6/16/2006
carol: 11/14/2003
carol: 3/13/2003
alopez: 5/12/2000
mgross: 2/25/2000
psherman: 2/18/2000
carol: 6/16/1998
alopez: 1/28/1998

604456	TITLE *604456 INTERFERON-INDUCED TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; IFITM1
;;INTERFERON-INDUCED PROTEIN 17; IFI17;;
LEU13;;
CD225
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In addition to their role in the defense against microbial infections,
interferons (IFNs; see, for example, 147570) exhibit antiproliferative
and differentiating activities that may confer on them potential as
antitumor agents. Exposure to IFNs leads to a modulation in the levels
of many cellular proteins that mediate the pleiotropic effects of
interferons. These effects may be mediated by soluble factors or by
cell-cell interactions involving specific membrane proteins. Deblandre
et al. (1995) identified a 17-kD membrane protein, IFI17, that was
inducible on tumor cell lines by interferon-alpha (147660) and, usually
to a lesser extent, by interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570). Expression as
detected by FACS analysis or immunoprecipitation was correlated with
sensitivity of the cell lines to growth suppression by interferon. Using
mRNA extracted from HeLa cells incubated with interferon-alpha, the
authors screened a cDNA expression library by panning with a monoclonal
anti-IFI17. They obtained a cDNA sequence encoding a protein that is
identical except for 1 residue to the 125-amino acid protein 9-27 that
Reid et al. (1989) had isolated from a lymphoid cell cosmid library.

By whole-mount in situ hybridization, Lange et al. (2003) found that
expression of mouse fragilis, fragilis-2, and fragilis-3 was restricted
to the epiblast at embryonic days 5.5 and 6.5. By embryonic day 7.5, all
3 transcripts showed variable expression in a cluster of founder
premordial germ cells, and at embryonic days 11.5 and 12.5, all 3
transcripts were detected in gonadal germ cells. The 3 transcripts
showed unique patterns of expression in other tissues during mouse
development.

GENE FUNCTION

Reid et al. (1989) showed that transcription of the IFITM1 gene is
controlled by a 13-bp IFN-stimulated response element in the 5-prime
flanking region of the gene.

To determine precisely how germ cells are specified, Saitou et al.
(2002) performed a genetic screen between single nascent germ cells and
their somatic neighbors that share common ancestry. They demonstrated
that fragilis, a member of the IFN-inducible transmembrane protein
family, marks the onset of germ cell competence, and they proposed that
through homotypic association, it demarcates germ cells from somatic
neighbors. Using single cell gene expression profiles, Saitou et al.
(2002) showed that only those cells with the highest expression of
fragilis subsequently express 'stella' (see 608408), a murine gene that
was detected exclusively in lineage-restricted germ cells. The
stella-positive nascent germ cells exhibited repression of HOXB1
(142968), which may explain their escape from a somatic cell fate and
the retention of pluripotency.

Tanaka et al. (2005) determined that mouse Ifitm1 and Ifitm3 are
expressed on the cell surface of primordial germ cells in a
developmentally-regulated manner and that they appear to modulate cell
adhesion and influence cell differentiation. Ifitm1 activity was
required for primordial germ cell transit, and Ifitm1 acted as a
repulsive molecule, repelling non-Ifitm1-expressing primordial germ
cells from the mesoderm into the endoderm. In contrast, Ifitm3 was
expressed in migratory primordial germ cells and behaved as a homing
signal, enabling the cells to respond to environmental cues that guided
their localization. The guidance activities of Ifitm1 and Ifitm3 were
mediated by their unique N-terminal domains.

GENE STRUCTURE

Reid et al. (1989) found that the IFITM1 gene contains 2 exons.

Perry et al. (1999) found that the promoter of the bovine ISG17 gene was
similar to that of the ISG15 gene (147571) in placement of a tandem
IFN-stimulatory response element (ISRE) at position -90, but unique in
the presence of 3 additional ISREs at positions -123, -332, and -525.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lange et al. (2003) mapped the IFITM1 gene
to an IFITM gene cluster on chromosome 11p15.5. The order of the genes,
from telomere to centromere, is IFITM5 (614757), IFITM2 (605578),
IFITM1, and IFITM3 (605579), and the cluster spans about 26.5 kb. Lange
et al. (2003) stated that IFITM2 maps to the plus strand and that all
other IFITM genes map to the minus strand. However, Gross (2012)
determined that, in addition to IFITM2, the IFITM1 gene maps to the plus
strand based on an alignment of the IFITM1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
BC000897) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Lange et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Ifitm gene cluster to a region of
chromosome 7F5 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
11p15.5. The mouse Ifitm gene cluster contains 5 genes, whereas the
human cluster contains only 4 genes.

EVOLUTION

By phylogenetic analysis, Lange et al. (2003) found that only 2 mouse
fragilis genes, fragilis-4 (Ifitm5) and either fragilis (Ifitm3),
fragilis-2 (Ifitm1), or fragilis-3 (Ifitm2), have been conserved from
mouse to human. They suggested that subsequent gene duplications may
have occurred independently in both species.

REFERENCE 1. Deblandre, G. A.; Marinx, O. P.; Evans. S. S.; Majjaj, S.; Leo,
O.; Caput, D.; Huez, G. A.; Wathelet, M. G.: Expression cloning of
an interferon-inducible 17-kDa membrane protein implicated in the
control of cell growth. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 23860-23866, 1995.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2012.

3. Lange, U. C.; Saitou, M.; Western, P. S.; Barton, S. C.; Surani,
M. A.: The fragilis interferon-inducible gene family of transmembrane
proteins is associated with germ cell specification in mice. BMC
Dev. Biol. 3: 1, 2003. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Perry, D. J.; Austin, K. J.; Hansen, T. R.: Cloning of interferon-stimulated
gene 17: the promoter and nuclear proteins that regulate transcription. Molec.
Endocr. 13: 1197-1206, 1999.

5. Reid, L. E.; Brasnett, A. H.; Gilbert, C. S.; Porter, A. C.; Gewert,
D. R.; Stark, G. R.; Kerr, I. M.: A single DNA response element can
confer inducibility by both alpha- and gamma interferons. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 86: 840-844, 1989.

6. Saitou, M.; Barton, S. C.; Surani, M. A.: A molecular programme
for the specification of germ cell fate in mice. Nature 418: 293-300,
2002.

7. Tanaka, S. S.; Yamaguchi, Y. L.; Tsoi, B.; Lickert, H.; Tam, P.
P. L.: IFITM/Mil/Fragilis family proteins IFITM1 and IFITM3 play
distinct roles in mouse primordial germ cell homing and repulsion. Dev.
Cell 9: 745-756, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 08/10/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/24/2000

EDITED mgross: 08/10/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
carol: 6/6/2006
alopez: 2/16/2006
terry: 1/17/2006
alopez: 7/15/2005
cwells: 7/25/2002
mgross: 1/24/2001
mgross: 9/22/2000
alopez: 2/23/2000
carol: 1/31/2000

604260	TITLE *604260 SIGNAL TRANSDUCER AND ACTIVATOR OF TRANSCRIPTION 5B; STAT5B
STAT5B/RARA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

STAT5A (601511) and STAT5B are activated in response to a variety of
cytokines (Wang et al., 1996).

CLONING

Ambrosio et al. (2002) cloned the human STAT5B gene. They identified 2
alternatively spliced STAT5B transcripts that differ only in their
noncoding promoter sequences. The deduced 787-amino acid STAT5B protein
has an N-terminal DNA-binding domain, followed by a 4-helix bundle, a
DNA-binding specificity domain, a connector region, an SH2 domain, and a
C-terminal transactivation domain. RT-PCR detected the STAT5B transcript
containing promoter I in all tissues and cell lines examined.
Transcripts containing promoter II were highly expressed in placenta and
could be detected at weaker levels in spleen, brain, and heart, as well
as in some cell lines.

Wang et al. (1996) demonstrated that carboxy-truncated variant Stat5a
and Stat5b proteins of 77 and 80 kD, respectively, naturally occur in
mouse. These truncated Stat5a and Stat5b forms are derived from
incompletely spliced Stat5a and Stat5b transcripts.

By Northern blot analysis, Miyoshi et al. (2001) found that mouse Stat5b
is expressed from 2 promoters. Expression from the distal promoter was
ubiquitous, whereas expression from the proximal promoter was restricted
to liver, muscle, and mammary tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (1996) showed that the truncated mouse Stat5a and Stat5b
proteins are inducibly tyrosine phosphorylated in the response to
several cytokines. These truncated Stat5 proteins form heterodimers with
both the full-length wildtype Stat5a and Stat5b proteins. Wang et al.
(1996) demonstrated that recombinant truncated forms of Stat5a and
Stat5b can be tyrosine phosphorylated and can bind to DNA. The tyrosine
phosphorylation of the carboxy-truncated forms was considerably more
stable than that of the wildtype Stat5a and Stat5b proteins.
Overexpression of a carboxy-truncated Stat5a protein in cells resulted
in the specific inhibition of the IL3 (147740)-induced transcriptional
activation of the oncostatin M gene (OSM; 165095) and the
cytokine-inducible SH2 domain-encoding gene (Cis), both of which have
been shown to be normally regulated by Stat5a. Although the truncated
Stat5a protein dominantly suppressed the induction of these genes, no
effects on cell proliferation were observed. Wang et al. (1996) stated
that their results demonstrate the natural existence of potential
dominantly suppressive variants of Stat5a and Stat5b, and implicate the
carboxyl domains of Stat5a and Stat5b proteins in transcriptional
regulation and functions related to dephosphorylation.

Boucheron et al. (1998) examined the DNA-binding domains of mouse Stat5a
and Stat5b and determined that the difference in their DNA-binding
specificities depends on a critical glycine residue in Stat5b and a
critical glutamic residue at a similar position in Stat5a.

Mak et al. (2002) studied the role of STAT5 as a component of the
differentiation of endometrium in response to ovarian hormone
stimulation in vivo. The abundance and subcellular distribution of STAT5
in endometrial stromal cells after a decidualization stimulus of cAMP
plus medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) had been investigated in vitro.
Western blot analysis revealed an increase in the apparent abundance of
STAT5A and STAT5B in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions at 2, 3, and 4
days after stimulation. The potential functional relevance of this
increase in STAT5 was suggested by the ability of transiently
transfected STAT5A or STAT5B to significantly enhance the response of
the decidual PRL (176760) promoter to cAMP/MPA acetate and attenuation
of the response to cAMP/MPA by dominant-negative STAT5. Mak et al.
(2002) concluded that regulated expression of STAT5 is therefore a
component of decidual differentiation of human endometrial stromal cells
and contributes significantly to activation of the decidual PRL
promoter. Alteration of this process by an antiphospholipid antibody
component suggested decidual differentiation as a potential clinical
target in recurrent early miscarriages.

In the Drosophila male germline, local activation of the Janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak-STAT)
pathway maintains stem cells; germline stem cells lacking Jak-STAT
signaling differentiate into spermatogonia without self-renewal. By
conditionally manipulating Jak-STAT signaling using a
temperature-sensitive allele of Stat92e, the Drosophila homolog of
STAT5B, Brawley and Matunis (2004) demonstrated that spermatogonia that
have initiated differentiation and are undergoing limited mitotic
(transit-amplifying) divisions can repopulate the niche and revert to
stem cell identity. Thus, Brawley and Matunis (2004) have shown that in
the appropriate microenvironment, transit-amplifying cells
dedifferentiate, becoming functional stem cells during tissue
regeneration.

Wawersik et al. (2005) showed that the JAK/STAT pathway provides a
sex-specific signal from the soma to the germline in Drosophila
embryonic gonads. The somatic gonad expresses a JAK/STAT ligand,
'unpaired' (upd), in a male-specific manner, and activates the JAK/STAT
pathway in male germ cells at the time of gonad formation. Furthermore,
the JAK/STAT pathway is necessary for male-specific germ cell behavior
during early gonad development, and is sufficient to activate aspects of
male germ cell behavior in female germ cells. Wawersik et al. (2005)
found that Drosophila Stat92e was upregulated specifically in male, but
not female, germ cells at the time of gonad formation. This reflects
male-specific activation of the JAK/STAT pathway because the activated
form of Stat92e (phosphorylated Stat92e) was also detected only in male
germ cells, and JAK activity was necessary and sufficient for Stat92e
expression. Wawersik et al. (2005) concluded that their findings
provided direct evidence that the JAK/STAT pathway mediates a key signal
from the somatic gonad that regulates male germline sexual development.

Vignudelli et al. (2010) found that overexpression of ZFP36L1 (601064)
in human CD34 (142230)-positive cord blood-derived stem/progenitor cells
inhibited their erythroid differentiation and colony formation, which
appeared to be due to downregulation of STAT5B protein levels through
degradation of STAT5B mRNA. Overexpression of ZFP36 (190700) also
inhibited erythroid differentiation, and overexpression of both ZFP36
and ZFP36L1 had a cumulative effect. Both ZFP36 and ZFP36L1 directly
bound a canonical AU-rich element II in the 3-prime UTR of STAT5B mRNA.
Vignudelli et al. (2010) concluded that ZFP36L1 negatively regulates
erythroid differentiation by interfering with the STAT5B pathway in
human hematopoietic stem cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ambrosio et al. (2002) determined that the STAT5B gene contains 19
exons. It has 2 alternate first exons, 1a and 1b, which are separated by
about 1.3 kb. A CpG island covers exon 1a and extends into the 5-prime
flanking region. Exon 2 contains the ATG start codon.

Miyoshi et al. (2001) determined that the mouse Stat5b gene contains 20
exons and spans more than 50 kb. The translation initiation codon is in
exon 2, and the stop codon is in exon 19. Stat5b has 2 promoters
separated by more than 20 kb.

Crispi et al. (2004) determined that both the STAT5A and STAT5B genes
lack TATA and CAAT elements, but both have binding sites for
transcription factors common in TATA-less promoters. Using a reporter
assay, they determined that gene fragments containing the CpG islands
were the most transcriptionally active fragments. Sp1 (189906) enhanced
expression of the basal promoters, and DNA methylation interfered with
Sp1-induced transcription. Cross-species sequence comparison identified
a bidirectional negative cis-acting regulatory element in the STAT5
intergenic region.

MAPPING

By FISH, Lin et al. (1996) mapped the STAT5A (601511) and STAT5B genes
to 17q11.2. In their FISH analysis, Arnould et al. (1999) found that the
STAT5B and RARA genes are very close to each other in 17q21.1-q21.2.
Ambrosio et al. (2002) determined that the STAT5A and STAT5B genes are
in an inverted orientation, with their 5-prime ends about 11 kb apart.

Miyoshi et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Stat5b gene to chromosome 11. The
promoters of the Stat5a and Stat5b genes are located head to head and
are separated by 10 kb. The order and orientation of genes at this
locus, Ptrf (603189)--Stat3 (102582)--Stat5a--Stat5b--Lgp1
(608587)--Hcrt (602358), are identical in the syntenic region of human
chromosome 17q21.

CYTOGENETICS

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) exhibits a characteristic t(15;17)
translocation that fuses the promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML; 102578)
on 15q22 to the retinoic acid receptor-alpha gene (RARA; 180240) on
17q12-q21.1. In a small subset of acute promyelocytic-like leukemias
(APLL), RARA is fused to a different partner: the promyelocytic leukemia
zinc finger gene (PLZF; 176797) on 11q23, the nucleophosmin gene (NPM1;
164040) on 5q35, or the nuclear mitotic apparatus-1 gene (NUMA1; 164009)
on 11q13. Arnould et al. (1999) reported the molecular characterization
of a RARA gene rearrangement in a patient with APLL and demonstrated
that the partner fused to RARA was the STAT5B gene, which belongs to the
Janus kinase (JAK)/STAT signaling pathway. Remarkably, the STAT5B
component of the chimeric protein was delocalized from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus, where it displayed a microspeckled pattern. Therefore,
unusual features of this APLL might result from dysregulation of the
JAK/STAT5 signal transducing pathways in the leukemic cells of the
patient. This was the first example of a human tumor bearing a
structurally abnormal STAT gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kofoed et al. (2003) noted that signal transduction involving the growth
hormone receptor (GHR; 600946) occurs by means of at least 3
well-established pathways: STAT, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (see
PIK3R1, 171833), and mitogen-activated protein kinase (see MAPK1,
176948) pathways. Collectively, these pathways mediate the
growth-promoting and metabolic actions of growth hormone (GH; 139250).
Kofoed et al. (2003) described a patient with the clinical and
biochemical characteristics of growth hormone insensitivity (245590), a
normal GHR gene, and a homozygous ala630-to-pro mutation (A630P;
604260.0001) in the STATB gene. The patient had a combined phenotype of
GH insensitivity and immunodeficiency consistent with the presence of a
defect in the JAK/STAT system.

Cohen et al. (2006) studied the patient originally reported by Kofoed et
al. (2003) and observed immune dysregulation with decreased numbers of
regulatory CD4+ (186940)/CD25 (IL2RA; 147730)-high T cells (Tregs). The
patient's Tregs showed low expression of FOXP3 (300292) and were
impaired in their ability to suppress proliferation of or to kill
CD4+/CD25- cells. CD25 expression was also reduced after IL2 (147680)
stimulation, although IL2-mediated upregulation of IL2RG (308380),
perforin (PRF1; 170280), and CD154 (CD40LG; 300386) was normal. The
immunologic phenotype of the patient's heterozygous parents tended to be
normal or intermediate.

In a 16.4-year-old Turkish girl with postnatal growth retardation and
insensitivity to growth hormone, who also had recurrent pulmonary
infections and a bleeding diathesis due to defective thrombocyte
aggregation, Hwa et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp
insertion in the STAT5B gene (604260.0002).

In a 30-year-old man born in the Dutch Antilles who had short stature
and delayed puberty with normal GH and GHBP levels, an elevated plasma
prolactin (176760) level, and extremely low levels of IGF1, IGFBP3
(146732), and acid-labile subunit (ALS; 601489), Vidarsdottir et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion in the STAT5B gene
(604260.0003). The authors stated that the patient was diagnosed with
congenital ichthyosis at birth (see 242300) and had hemorrhagic
varicella at 16 years of age, but had no history of pulmonary or
immunologic problems.

In a 16-year-old girl with severe postnatal growth failure, GH
insensitivity, and immunodeficiency, Bernasconi et al. (2006) identified
homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the STAT5B gene (604260.0004).
Immunologic analysis revealed a moderate T-cell lymphopenia, normal
CD4/CD8 ratio, and very low numbers of natural killer and gamma-delta
(see 186970) T cells, and the T cells had a chronically hyperactivated
phenotype. In vitro T-cell proliferation and interleukin-2 (147680)
signaling were impaired, and CD4+/CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) were
significantly diminished. Bernasconi et al. (2006) concluded that STAT5B
is a key protein for T-cell function in humans.

In 2 Kuwaiti sisters with severe postnatal growth retardation, normal GH
and GHBP levels, and no mutation in the GH receptor gene, Hwa et al.
(2007) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the STAT5B gene
(604260.0005). The 3.9-year-old sister had recently been diagnosed with
bronchiectasis and interstitial pneumonitis, and her 2-year-old sister
had been diagnosed with idiopathic juvenile arthritis.

ANIMAL MODEL

STAT5 is activated in a broad spectrum of human hematologic
malignancies. Using a genetic approach, Schwaller et al. (2000)
addressed whether activation of STAT5 is necessary for the myelo- and
lymphoproliferative disease induced by the TEL (600618)/JAK2 (147796)
fusion gene. Whereas mice transplanted with bone marrow transduced with
retrovirus expressing TEL/JAK2 developed a rapidly fatal myelo- and
lymphoproliferative syndrome, reconstitution with bone marrow derived
from Stat5a/b-deficient mice expressing TEL/JAK2 did not induce disease.
Disease induction in the Stat5a/b-deficient background was rescued with
a bicistronic retrovirus encoding TEL/JAK2 and Stat5a. Furthermore,
myeloproliferative disease was induced by reconstitution with bone
marrow cells expressing a constitutively active mutant, Stat5a, or a
single Stat5a target, murine Osm. These data defined a critical role for
STAT5A/B and OSM in the pathogenesis of TEL/JAK2 disease.

Snow et al. (2003) observed that a subset of mice deficient in both
Stat5a and Stat5b had dramatic alterations in several bone marrow
progenitor populations, along with cellular infiltration of colon,
liver, and kidney and early death. The pathology and increased mortality
in these mice were abrogated when Rag1 (179615) was also deleted. The
phenotype was similar to that in mice defective in Il2 (147680)
signaling and correlated with a reduction in the number of Cd4
(186940)-positive/Cd25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive regulatory T cells. Snow
et al. (2003) concluded that STAT5 is critical for maintenance of
tolerance in vivo and that STAT5 is probably activated by IL2R.

Cui et al. (2004) conditionally deleted the 110-kb Stat5 locus, which
spans both the Stat5a and Stat5b genes, to study the functions of the
Stat5 genes during mouse mammary gland development. Loss of the Stat5
genes prior to pregnancy prevented epithelial proliferation and
differentiation. Deletion of Stat5 during pregnancy, after mammary
epithelium had entered Stat5-mediated differentiation, resulted in
premature cell death, indicating that mammary epithelial cell
proliferation, differentiation, and survival require Stat5.

Yao et al. (2006) compared mice with a complete deletion of Stat5a and
Stat5b (Stat5 -/-) with mice having an N-terminally truncated, partially
functional Stat5 protein (Stat5delN) and mice lacking Il7r (146661),
Jak3 (600173), or the common gamma chain, Il2rg (308380). Stat5 -/- mice
died before or shortly after birth. Examination of day-18.5 Stat5 -/-
embryos showed a severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID; see 601457)
phenotype with significantly fewer thymocytes and splenocytes than
wildtype controls. The thymocyte deficit in Stat5 -/- embryos was
similar in magnitude to that in Il7r- or Il2rg-deficient embryos,
whereas Stat5delN embryos had significantly more thymocytes. The
splenocyte reduction in Stat5 -/- embryos was more severe than that in
Il7r- or IL2rg-deficient mice. B-cell proportions were particularly low
in Stat5 -/- embryos compared with controls, similar to Il7r -/- mice.
Tcra (see 186880) and Tcrb (see 186930) rearrangement was normal in
Stat5 -/- mice, but Tcrg (see 186970) rearrangement was defective. As in
Jak3 -/- mice, there was a marked reduction in CD8-positive T cells. Yao
et al. (2006) concluded that STAT5 deficiency results in SCID, similar
in many respects to what occurs in IL7R, JAK3, or IL2RG deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, ALA630PRO

In a 16.5-year-old Argentinian girl with short stature and growth
hormone insensitivity (245590), Kofoed et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in exon 15 of the STAT5B gene,
result in an ala630-to-pro (A630P) substitution. Both parents were
heterozygous for the mutation; there was no family history of growth
failure, and the girl's younger sisters were of normal stature. The
patient also had recurrent pulmonary infections; biopsy revealed
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia and Pneumocystis carinii was isolated
from the tissue. Kofoed et al. (2003) concluded that the combined
phenotype of growth hormone insensitivity and immunodeficiency was
consistent with the presence of a defect in the JAK/STAT signaling
system.

Fang et al. (2006) studied the molecular mechanisms underlying the
growth hormone (GH; 139250) insensitivity and IGF1 (147440) deficiency
caused by A630P-mutated STAT5B. The A630P mutation disrupts the SRC
homology 2 (SH2) architecture such that mutant STAT5B most likely cannot
dock to phosphotyrosines on ligand-activated receptors, and stable
interactions with DNA are prevented. Fang et al. (2006) concluded that
because A630P-mutant STAT5B is an inefficient signal transducer and
transcription factor, the detrimental impact on signaling pathways
important for normal growth and immunity explains, in part, the complex
clinical phenotype of GH insensitivity and immune dysfunction.

.0002
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, 1-BP INS, 1191G

In a 16.4-year-old Turkish girl with postnatal growth retardation and
insensitivity to growth hormone (245590), born of second-cousin parents,
Hwa et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion
(1191insG) in exon 10 of the STAT5B gene, resulting in an asp398-to-glu
(N398E) substitution and predicted to cause a stop codon 15 amino acids
downstream with loss of the C terminus. The mutation was not found in 50
controls. The patient also had recurrent pulmonary infections and a
bleeding diathesis due to defective thrombocyte aggregation.

.0003
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, 1-BP INS, 1102C

In a 30-year-old man, born in the Dutch Antilles of nonconsanguineous
parents, who had short stature and delayed puberty with growth hormone
insensitivity (245590), Vidarsdottir et al. (2006) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion (1102insC) in the STAT5b gene, causing
a frameshift predicted to result in a truncated protein lacking most of
the DNA-binding domain and the SH2 domain. The patient's parents,
brother, and sister were all heterozygous carriers of the mutation. The
authors stated that the patient was diagnosed with congenital ichthyosis
at birth (see 242300) and had hemorrhagic varicella at 16 years of age,
but had no history of pulmonary or immunologic problems.

.0004
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, ARG152TER

In a 16-year-old girl with severe postnatal growth failure, growth
hormone insensitivity, and immunodeficiency (245590), Bernasconi et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a C-T transition in exon 5 of the
STAT5B gene, resulting in an arg152-to-ter (R152X) substitution
predicted to cause complete absence of protein expression. The patient's
parents and brother were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0005
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, 1-BP DEL, EXON 13/INTRON 13 JUNCTION

In 2 Kuwaiti sisters, born of consanguineous parents, who had severe
postnatal growth retardation but normal growth hormone (139250) and
growth hormone-binding protein (see 600946) levels, Hwa et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for the deletion of a single G at the exon
13/intron 13 junction of the STAT5B gene, predicted to cause a
frameshift and alternative splicing. The parents, who were of normal
stature, were heterozygous for the mutation. The older sister, aged 3.9
years, had recently been diagnosed with bronchiectasis and interstitial
pneumonitis, and her 2-year-old sister had been diagnosed with
idiopathic juvenile arthritis.

REFERENCE 1. Ambrosio, R.; Fimiani, G.; Monfregola, J.; Sanzari, E.; De Felice,
N.; Salerno, M. C.; Pignata, C.; D'Urso, M.; Ursini, M. V.: The structure
of human STAT5A and STAT5B genes reveals two regions of nearly identical
sequence and an alternative tissue specific STAT5B promoter. Gene 285:
311-318, 2002.

2. Arnould, C.; Philippe, C.; Bourdon, V.; Gregoire, M. J.; Berger,
R.; Jonveaux, P.: The signal transducer and activator of transcription
STAT5b gene is a new partner of retinoic acid receptor alpha in acute
promyelocytic-like leukaemia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 1741-1749, 1999.

3. Bernasconi, A.; Marino, R.; Ribas, A.; Rossi, J.; Ciaccio, M.;
Oleastro, M.; Ornani, A.; Paz, R.; Rivarola, M. A.; Zelazko, M.; Belgorosky,
A.: Characterization of immunodeficiency in a patient with growth
hormone insensitivity secondary to a novel STAT5b gene mutation. Pediatrics 118:
e1584, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Boucheron, C.; Dumon, S.; Santos, S. C. R.; Moriggl, R.; Hennighausen,
L.; Gisselbrecht, S.; Gouilleux, F.: A single amino acid in the DNA
binding regions of STAT5A and STAT5B confers distinct binding specificities. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 33936-33941, 1998.

5. Brawley, C.; Matunis, E.: Regeneration of male germline stem cells
by spermatogonial dedifferentiation in vivo. Science 304: 1331-1334,
2004.

6. Cohen, A. C.; Nadeau, K. C.; Tu, W.; Hwa, V.; Dionis, K.; Bezrodnik,
L.; Teper, A.; Gaillard, M.; Heinrich, J.; Krensky, A. M.; Rosenfeld,
R. G.; Lewis, D. B.: Decreased accumulation and regulatory function
of CD4+CD25(high) T cells in human STAT5b deficiency. J. Immun. 177:
2770-2774, 2006.

7. Crispi, S.; Sanzari, E.; Monfregola, J.; De Felice, N.; Fimiani,
G.; Ambrosio, R.; D'Urso, M.; Ursini, M. V.: Characterization of
the human STAT5A and STAT5B promoters: evidence of a positive and
negative mechanism of transcriptional regulation. FEBS Lett. 562:
27-34, 2004.

8. Cui, Y.; Riedlinger, G.; Miyoshi, K.; Tang, W.; Li, C.; Deng, C.-X.;
Robinson, G. W.; Hennighausen, L.: Inactivation of Stat5 in mouse
mammary epithelium during pregnancy reveals distinct functions in
cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24:
8037-8047, 2004.

9. Fang, P.; Kofoed, E. M.; Little, B. M.; Wang, X.; Ross, R. J. M.;
Frank, S. J.; Hwa, V.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: A mutant signal transducer
and activator of transcription 5b, associated with growth hormone
insensitivity and insulin-like growth factor-I deficiency, cannot
function as a signal transducer or transcription factor. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 91: 1526-1534, 2006.

10. Hwa, V.; Camacho-Hubner, C.; Little, B. M.; David, A.; Metherell,
L. A.; El-Khatib, N.; Savage, M. O.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: Growth hormone
insensitivity and severe short stature in siblings: a novel mutation
at the exon 13-intron 13 junction of the STAT5b gene. Horm. Res. 68:
218-224, 2007.

11. Hwa, V.; Little, B.; Adiyaman, P.; Kofoed, E. M.; Pratt, K. L.;
Ocal, G.; Berberoglu, M.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: Severe growth hormone
insensitivity resulting from total absence of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 4260-4266,
2005.

12. Kofoed, E. M.; Hwa, V.; Little, B.; Woods, K. A.; Buckway, C.
K.; Tsubaki, J.; Pratt, K. L.; Bezrodnik, L.; Jasper, H.; Tepper,
A.; Heinrich, J. J.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: Growth hormone insensitivity
associated with a STAT5b mutation. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 1139-1147,
2003.

13. Lin, J.-X.; Mietz, J.; Modi, W. S.; John, S.; Leonard, W. J.:
Cloning of human Stat5B: reconstitution of interleukin-2-induced Stat5A
and Stat5B DNA binding activity in COS-7 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
10738-10744, 1996.

14. Mak, I. Y. H.; Brosens, J. J.; Christian, M.; Hills, F. A.; Chamley,
L.; Regan, L.; White, J. O.: Regulated expression of signal transducer
and activator of transcription, Stat5, and its enhancement of PRL
expression in human endometrial stromal cells in vitro. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 87: 2581-2588, 2002.

15. Miyoshi, K.; Cui, Y.; Riedlinger, G.; Robinson, P.; Lehoczky,
J.; Zon, L.; Oka, T.; Dewar, K.; Hennighausen, L.: Structure of the
mouse Stat 3/5 locus: evolution from Drosophila to zebrafish to mouse. Genomics 71:
150-155, 2001.

16. Schwaller, J.; Parganas, E.; Wang, D.; Cain, D.; Aster, J. C.;
Williams, I. R.; Lee, C.-K.; Gerthner, R.; Kitamura, T.; Frantsve,
J.; Anastasiadou, E.; Loh, M. L.; Levy, D. E.; Ihle, J. N.; Gilliland,
D. G.: Stat5 is essential for the myelo- and lymphoproliferative
disease induced by TEL/JAK2. Molec. Cell 6: 693-704, 2000.

17. Snow, J. W.; Abraham, N.; Ma, M. C.; Herndier, B. G.; Pastuszak,
A. W.; Goldsmith, M. A.: Loss of tolerance and autoimmunity affecting
multiple organs in STAT5A/5B-deficient mice. J. Immun. 171: 5042-5050,
2003.

18. Vidarsdottir, S.; Walenkamp, M. J. E.; Pereira, A. M.; Karperien,
M.; van Doorn, J.; van Duyvenvoorde, H. A.; White, S.; Bruening, M.
H.; Roelfsema, F.; Kruithof, M. F.; van Dissel, J.; Janssen, R.; Wit,
J. M.; Romijn, J. A.: Clinical and biochemical characteristics of
a male patient with a novel homozygous STAT5b mutation. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 91: 3482-3485, 2006.

19. Vignudelli, T.; Selmi, T.; Martello, A.; Parenti, S.; Grande,
A.; Gemelli, C.; Zanocco-Marani, T.; Ferrari, S.: ZFP36L1 negatively
regulates erythroid differentiation of CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells
by interfering with the Stat5b pathway. Molec. Biol. Cell 21: 3340-3351,
2010.

20. Wang, D.; Stravopodis, D.; Teglund, S.; Kitazawa, J.; Ihle, J.
N.: Naturally occurring dominant negative variants of Stat5. Molec.
Cell Biol. 16: 6141-6148, 1996.

21. Wawersik, M.; Milutinovich, A.; Casper, A. L.; Matunis, E.; Williams,
B.; Van Doren, M.: Somatic control of germline sexual development
is mediated by the JAK/STAT pathway. (Letter) Nature 436: 563-567,
2005.

22. Yao, Z.; Cui, Y.; Watford, W. T.; Bream, J. H.; Yamaoka, K.; Hissong,
B. D.; Li, D.; Durum, S. K.; Jiang, Q.; Bhandoola, A.; Hennighausen,
L.; O'Shea, J. J.: Stat5a/b are essential for normal lymphoid development
and differentiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 1000-1005, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/22/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/17/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/14/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/9/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/16/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/8/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/10/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/4/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/11/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 6/26/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/26/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
mgross: 1/11/2012
terry: 12/22/2011
alopez: 6/2/2009
terry: 7/17/2007
carol: 7/17/2007
alopez: 5/14/2007
mgross: 3/14/2007
terry: 3/9/2007
mgross: 5/8/2006
terry: 5/5/2006
mgross: 4/4/2006
terry: 3/16/2006
alopez: 8/19/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
mgross: 10/5/2004
alopez: 6/9/2004
terry: 6/8/2004
mgross: 4/16/2004
terry: 4/1/2004
carol: 10/27/2003
tkritzer: 10/21/2003
terry: 10/10/2003
cwells: 2/4/2003
mgross: 10/11/2000
mcapotos: 7/14/2000
psherman: 6/26/2000
mgross: 10/26/1999

611859	TITLE *611859 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L55; MRPL55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL55
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl55 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL55. They also identified MRPL55 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL55 share 71.7% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MRPL55 gene to chromosome 1q42.13 based on an
alignment of the MRPL55 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY358771) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/5/2008.

2. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2008

611698	TITLE *611698 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 22, MEMBER 24; SLC22A24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SLC22A24 belongs to a large family of transmembrane proteins that
function as uniporters, symporters, and antiporters to transport organic
ions across cell membranes (Jacobsson et al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching a human database for SLC22 family members, Jacobsson et al.
(2007) identified SLC22A24. The deduced 322-amino acid protein has 12
putative transmembrane domains. Quantitative real-time PCR detected high
expression of rat Slc22a24 in liver and skeletal muscle and in coronal
sections taken from the olfactory bulb and forebrain. Expression was
weaker in other cortical sections, and none was detected in other
specific brain regions or in peripheral tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jacobsson et al. (2007) determined that the SLC22A24 gene contains 4
exons.

MAPPING

Jacobsson et al. (2007) stated that the SLC22A24 gene maps to chromosome
11q12.3; the mouse Slc22a24 gene maps to chromosome 19qA.

REFERENCE 1. Jacobsson, J. A.; Haitina, T.; Lindblom, J.; Fredriksson, R.:
Identification of six putative human transporters with structural
similarity to the drug transporter SLC22 family. Genomics 90: 595-609,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/21/2007

EDITED carol: 08/15/2008
carol: 12/21/2007

601621	TITLE *601621 T-BOX 3; TBX3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of studying the 12q24.1 region where linkage studies
indicated that the Holt-Oram syndrome (142900) is located, Li et al.
(1997) and Basson et al. (1997) identified the genes TBX3 and TBX5
(601620). The latter gene was found to be the site of mutations
responsible for Holt-Oram syndrome.

The cloning of new TBX3 cDNAs allowed Bamshad et al. (1999) to complete
the characterization of the TBX3 gene and to identify alternatively
transcribed TBX3 transcripts, including 1 that interrupts the T-box. The
complete open reading frame of the TBX3 gene encodes a predicted
723-amino acid protein, of which 255 amino acids are encoded by newly
identified exons. Comparison of other T-box genes to TBX3 indicated
regions of substantial homology outside the DNA-binding domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Sowden et al. (2001) examined the role of Drosophila 'optomotor blind'
(omb)-related T-box genes in the development of human and mouse retina.
Murine Tbx2 (600747), Tbx3, and Tbx5 and human TBX2 cDNAs were isolated
from retina cDNA libraries by hybridization to the Drosophila omb gene.
Human and mouse TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 were expressed asymmetrically
across the embryonic neural retina, with highest levels of mRNA within
dorsal and peripheral retina. The dorsoventral gradient of TBX2
expression disappeared before the ganglion cell layer (GCL) formed. Its
expression became restricted to the inner neuroblastic retina and later
to the GCL and inner nuclear layer (INL). The dorsal expression domains
of TBX5 and TBX3 were maintained during formation of the GCL. As the
retina matured, TBX3 expression was restricted to the INL, and TBX5 was
expressed within the GCL. The authors concluded that the expression
patterns of TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 within the developing retina support
the idea that the encoded transcription factors play a role in providing
positional information important for topographic mapping in
differentiation of distinct cell types across the laminar axis of the
retina.

Hoogaars et al. (2007) found that the sinoatrial node of mouse heart was
formed by proliferation of Tbx3-positive precursor cells and not from
bordering atrial cells. Tbx3 deficiency resulted in expansion of atrial
gene expression into the sinoatrial node domain and partial loss of
sinoatrial node-specific gene expression. Ectopic expression of Tbx3 in
mice repressed the atrial phenotype and imposed the pacemaker phenotype
on the atria, resulting in development of functional ectopic pacemakers.

Niwa et al. (2009) showed that 2 LIF (159540) signaling pathways are
each connected to the core circuitry required to maintain pluripotency
via different transcription factors. In mouse embryonic stem cells, Klf4
(602253) is mainly activated by the Jak-Stat3 pathway and preferentially
activates Sox2 (184429), whereas Tbx3 is preferentially regulated by the
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase-Akt and mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways and predominantly stimulates Nanog (607937). In the
absence of Lif, artificial expression of Klf4 or Tbx3 was sufficient to
maintain pluripotency while maintaining the expression of Oct3/4
(164177). Notably, overexpression of Nanog supported Lif-independent
self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells in the absence of Klf4 and
Tbx3 activity. Therefore, Niwa et al. (2009) concluded that KLF4 and
TBX3 are involved in mediating LIF signaling to the core circuitry but
are not directly associated with the maintenance of pluripotency,
because embryonic stem cells keep pluripotency without their expression
in the particular context.

Using genetic lineage analysis, knockout studies, and explant assays,
Wiese et al. (2009) found that Tbx18 (604613) was required to establish
the large head structure of the mouse sinoatrial node from mesenchymal
precursors. Subsequently, Tbx3 induced expression of pacemaker genes for
pacemaker function.

Han et al. (2010) showed that the transcription factor Tbx3
significantly improves the quality of induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells. iPS cells generated with Klf4 and Tbx3 were superior in both germ
cell contribution to the gonads and germline transmission frequency.
However, global gene expression profiling could not distinguish between
the 2 groups of iPS cells. Genomewide chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing analysis of Tbx3-binding sites in embryonic stem cells
suggested that Tbx3 regulates pluripotency-associated and reprogramming
factors, in addition to sharing many common downstream regulatory
targets with Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, and Smad1 (601595). Han et al. (2010)
concluded that their study underscored the intrinsic qualitative
differences between iPS cells generated by different methods, and
highlighted the need to rigorously characterize iPS cells beyond in
vitro studies.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yi et al. (2000) determined that the TBX3 gene contains at least 6 exons
and spans more than 9.0 kb.

MAPPING

The human TBX3 and TBX5 genes map to chromosome 12q24.1, and the murine
homologs, Tbx3 and Tbx5, map to chromosome 5 (Li et al., 1997; Basson et
al., 1997).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Li et al. (1997) pointed out that TBX3 may be a candidate gene for
Noonan syndrome (163950) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS; 181450). The
latter possibility indeed proved to be the case; Bamshad et al. (1997)
demonstrated mutations in TBX3 in 2 families with ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Each mutation was predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of
TBX3, implying that critical levels of this transcription factor are
required for morphogenesis of several organs. Limb abnormalities of
ulnar-mammary syndrome involve posterior elements. Mutations in TBX5
cause anterior limb abnormalities in Holt-Oram syndrome. Because of
similarities in structure and function of TBX3 and TBX5 and because of
close linkage, Bamshad et al. (1997) proposed that these genes
originated from a common ancestral gene, each having acquired specific
complementary roles in patterning the mammalian upper limb.

Bamshad et al. (1999) identified novel mutations in the TBX3 gene in all
of 8 newly reported families with UMS, including 5 mutations downstream
of the region encoding the T-box. This suggested that a domain (or
domains) outside the T-box was highly conserved and important for the
function of TBX3. Bamshad et al. (1999) found no obvious phenotypic
differences between those who had missense mutations and those who had
deletions or frameshifts.

To determine how C-terminal mutations may affect transcription, Carlson
et al. (2001) created a series of fusion proteins to map regions that
conferred transcriptional activity, nuclear localization, and
DNA-binding properties of Tbx3. Tbx3 binds the canonic brachyury binding
site as a monomer and represses transcription. A key repression domain
(RD1) resides in the Tbx3 C terminus that can function as a portable
repression domain. Most UMS-associated C-terminal mutants lack the RD1
and exhibit decreased or loss of transcriptional repression activity. A
cluster of basic amino acids at residues 292-297 serves as a nuclear
localization signal. Two C-terminal truncation mutants exhibited
increased rates of protein decay. The RD1 repression domain of Tbx3 was
also shown to be capable of immortalizing primary embryo fibroblasts.

Borozdin et al. (2006) reported a Czech mother and 2 daughters who were
diagnosed with Holt-Oram syndrome, in whom they identified a 2.19 to
2.27-Mb contiguous deletion encompassing the TBX5 and TBX3 genes.
Clinical reexamination confirmed the presence of features of
ulnar-mammary syndrome that were previously unrecognized. Borozdin et
al. (2006) noted that the contiguous deletion also included the RBM19
gene, but commented that it was unlikely to contribute to or modify the
phenotype since all the anomalies present in the affected individuals
could be explained by either TBX5 or TBX3 haploinsufficiency.

Klopocki et al. (2006) sequenced the TBX3 gene in a 3.5-year-old girl
with an ulnar-mammary-like phenotype, dysmorphic facies, and mental
retardation, but did not detect any mutation. Microarray CGH revealed
heterozygosity for an interstitial 1.28-Mb deletion on chromosome
12q24.21, encompassing the TBX3 gene. The deletion and TBX3
haploinsufficiency were confirmed by FISH. Neither parent carried the
deletion. Klopocki et al. (2006) stated that this was the first
description of TBX3 haploinsufficiency caused by a genomic deletion in a
patient with ulnar-mammary syndrome and suggested that the facial
changes and mental retardation observed in this patient might be due to
involvement of neighboring genes.

In a boy and his mother with ulnar-mammary syndrome, Linden et al.
(2009) identified heterozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the TBX3
gene (601621.0005).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using the development of the 4-digit chick leg as a model system, Suzuki
et al. (2004) studied the role of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in specifying digit
identities along the anterior-posterior axis. Misexpression of Tbx2 and
Tbx3 induced posterior homeotic transformation of digit III to digit IV
and digit II to digit III, respectively. Conversely, misexpression of
constitutively active mutants induced anterior transformation. In both
cases, alterations in the expression of several markers, including Bmp2
(112261), Shh (600725), and HoxD genes (see 142987), were observed. In
addition, Tbx2 and Tbx3 rescued Noggin (602991)-mediated inhibition of
interdigital BMP signaling, which was pivotal in establishing digit
identities. Suzuki et al. (2004) concluded that, in the developing
chick, Tbx3 specifies digit III and the combination of Tbx2 and Tbx3
specifies digit IV, acting together with the interdigital BMP signaling
cascade.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, 1-BP DEL, 227T

In a mother and son with ulnar-mammary syndrome (181450), Bamshad et al.
(1997) found that the TBX3 gene had deletion of nucleotide 227, a
thymidine, resulting in shift of the reading frame and a premature
termination codon after 11 novel amino acids. A hand x-ray in the mother
showed complete absence of the fourth digit (metacarpal and phalanges)
and fusion of the capitate and hamate bones on the right. The mutated
protein in this family was predicted to encode a markedly truncated
protein containing only 86 amino acids and lacking the entire T-box
domain. This mutant protein should be incapable of binding DNA. Affected
members of this family demonstrated limb and apocrine anomalies.

.0002
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, IVS2DS, G-C, +1

In a mother and daughter with ulnar-mammary syndrome (181450), Bamshad
et al. (1997) demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in
the first nucleotide of intron 2. This substitution altered the
consensus splice donor site and was predicted to alter gene splicing.
This family exhibited limb, apocrine, and genital anomalies.

.0003
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, LYS273TER

In a Japanese mother and her 2 sons with ulnar-mammary syndrome
(181450), Sasaki et al. (2002) found a heterozygous 817A-T mutation in
exon 4 of the TBX3 gene, leading to a lys273-to-ter substitution. The
mutation is expected to impair the DNA-binding capacity of the TBX3
protein.

.0004
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, 1-BP INS, 88A

Wollnik et al. (2002) reported a large Turkish family in which 10
members spanning 3 generations had autosomal dominant ulnar-mammary
syndrome (181450). The phenotypic expression of the disease was highly
variable among the affected family members showing posterior (ulnar or
postaxial) limb deficiencies and/or duplications, mammary gland
hypoplasia, apocrine dysfunction, and dental and genital abnormalities.
Mutation analysis identified a 1-bp insertion (88insA) in the TBX3 gene.
The truncated protein lacked almost all functionally important parts of
TBX3 and probably had complete loss of function.

.0005
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, GLN331TER

In a boy and his mother with ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS; 181450),
Linden et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a 991C-T transition
in exon 5 of the TBX3 gene, resulting in a gln331-to-ter (Q331X)
substitution. The boy had phenotypic features not theretofore described
in UMS, including hypoplastic anterior pituitary and ectopic posterior
pituitary gland, ventricular septal defect, and cardiac conduction
defects consistent with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (see 194200). In
addition, the boy's mother did not show the classic features of UMS,
supporting the variable expressivity of UMS within the same family.

REFERENCE 1. Bamshad, M.; Le, T.; Watkins, W. S.; Dixon, M. E.; Kramer, B. E.;
Roeder, A. D.; Carey, J. C.; Root, S.; Schinzel, A.; Van Maldergem,
L.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Lin, R. C.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.;
Wallerstein, R.; Moran, E.; Sutphen, R.; Campbell, C. E.; Jorde, L.
B.: The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: genotype/phenotype relationship
in ulnar-mammary syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1550-1562, 1999.

2. Bamshad, M.; Lin, R. C.; Law, D. J.; Watkins, W. S.; Krakowiak,
P. A.; Moore, M. E.; Franceschini, P.; Lala, R.; Holmes, L. B.; Gebuhr,
T. C.; Bruneau, B. G.; Schinzel, A.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.;
Jorde, L. B.: Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital
development in ulnar-mammary syndrome. Nature Genet. 16: 311-315,
1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 19: 102 only, 1998.

3. Basson, C. T.; Bachinsky, D. R.; Lin, R. C.; Levi, T.; Elkins,
J. A.; Soults, J.; Grayzel, D.; Kroumpouzou, E.; Traill, T. A.; Leblanc-Straceski,
J.; Renault, B.; Kucherlapati, R.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.
: Mutations in human TBX5 cause limb and cardiac malformation in Holt-Oram
syndrome. Nature Genet. 15: 30-35, 1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet.
15: 411 only, 1997.

4. Borozdin, W.; Bravo-Ferrer Acosta, A. M.; Seemanova, E.; Leipoldt,
M.; Bamshad, M. J.; Unger, S.; Kohlhase, J.: Contiguous hemizygous
deletion of TBX5, TBX3, and RBM19 resulting in a combined phenotype
of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1880-1886, 2006.

5. Carlson, H.; Ota, S.; Campbell, C. E.; Hurlin, P. J.: A dominant
repression domain in Tbx3 mediates transcriptional repression and
cell immortalization: relevance to mutations in Tbx3 that cause ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2403-2413, 2001.

6. Han, J.; Yuan, P.; Yang, H.; Zhang, J.; Soh, B. S.; Li, P.; Lim,
S. L.; Cao, S.; Tay, J.; Orlov, Y. L.; Lufkin, T. Hg, H.-H.; Tam,
W.-L.; Lim, B.: Tbx3 improves the germ-line competency of induced
pluripotent stem cells. Nature 463: 1096-1100, 2010.

7. Hoogaars, W. M. H.; Engel, A.; Brons, J. F.; Verkerk, A. O.; de
Lange, F. J.; Wong, L. Y. E.; Bakker, M. L.; Clout, D. E.; Wakker,
V.; Barnett, P.; Ravesloot, J. H.; Moorman, A. F. M.; Verheijck, E.
E.; Christoffels, V. M.: Tbx3 controls the sinoatrial node gene program
and imposes pacemaker function on the atria. Genes Dev. 21: 1098-1112,
2007.

8. Klopocki, E.; Neumann, L. M.; Tonnies, H.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mundlos,
S.; Ullmann, R.: Ulnar-mammary syndrome with dysmorphic facies and
mental retardation caused by a novel 1.28 Mb deletion encompassing
the TBX3 gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 1274-1279, 2006.

9. Li, Q. Y.; Newbury-Ecob, R. A.; Terrett, J. A.; Wilson, D. I.;
Curtis, A. R. J.; Yi, C. H.; Gebuhr, T.; Bullen, P. J.; Robson, S.
C.; Strachan, T.; Bonnet, D.; Lyonnet, S.; Young, I. D.; Raeburn,
J. A.; Buckler, A. J.; Law, D. J.; Brook, J. D.: Holt-Oram syndrome
is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the Brachyury (T) gene
family. Nature Genet. 15: 21-29, 1997.

10. Linden, H.; Williams, R.; King, J.; Blair, E.; Kini, U.: Ulnar
mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A:
2809-2812, 2009.

11. Niwa, H.; Ogawa, K.; Shimosato, D.; Adachi, K.: A parallel circuit
of LIF signalling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES cells. Nature 460:
118-122, 2009.

12. Sasaki, G.; Ogata, T.; Ishii, T.; Hasegawa, T.; Sato, S.; Matsuo,
N.: Novel mutation of TBX3 in a Japanese family with ulnar-mammary
syndrome: implication for impaired sex development. Am. J. Med. Genet. 110:
365-369, 2002.

13. Sowden, J. C.; Holt, J. K. L.; Meins, M.; Smith, H. K.; Bhattacharya,
S. S.: Expression of Drosophila omb-related T-box genes in the developing
human and mouse neural retina. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 42: 3095-3102,
2001.

14. Suzuki, T.; Takeuchi, J.; Koshiba-Takeuchi, K.; Ogura, T.: Tbx
genes specify posterior digit identity through Shh and BMP signaling. Dev.
Cell 6: 43-53, 2004. Note: Erratum: Dev. Cell 8: 971-972, 2005.

15. Wiese, C.; Grieskamp, T.; Airik, R.; Mommersteeg, M. T. M.; Gardiwal,
A.; de Gier-de Vries, C.; Schuster-Gossler, K.; Moorman, A. F. M.;
Kispert, A.; Christoffels, V. M.: Formation of the sinus node head
and differentiation of sinus node myocardium are independently regulated
by Tbx18 and Tbx3. Circ. Res. 104: 388-397, 2009.

16. Wollnik, B.; Kayserili, H.; Uyguner, O.; Tukel, T.; Yuksel-Apak,
M.: Haploinsufficiency of TBX3 causes ulnar-mammary syndrome in a
large Turkish family. Ann. Genet. 45: 213-217, 2002.

17. Yi, C.-H.; Russ, A.; Brook, J. D.: Virtual cloning and physical
mapping of a human T-box gene, TBX4. Genomics 67: 92-95, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/13/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/2/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/20/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2004
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 10/4/2002
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/8/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/27/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/10/1997

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 9/13/2012
alopez: 6/14/2012
terry: 6/13/2012
terry: 5/10/2012
alopez: 4/9/2010
terry: 4/8/2010
mgross: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/8/2009
alopez: 8/27/2009
terry: 8/25/2009
mgross: 7/24/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
wwang: 3/8/2007
terry: 3/2/2007
wwang: 10/20/2006
mgross: 5/7/2004
mgross: 4/21/2004
tkritzer: 1/29/2004
terry: 1/23/2004
carol: 10/4/2002
mgross: 7/8/2002
cwells: 5/14/2002
cwells: 5/3/2002
mgross: 6/3/1999
terry: 5/27/1999
carol: 2/17/1999
mark: 7/7/1997
terry: 7/3/1997
mark: 6/17/1997
mark: 2/25/1997
terry: 2/24/1997
jenny: 1/14/1997
mark: 1/10/1997

116890	TITLE *116890 CATHEPSIN E; CTSE
;;CATE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cathepsin E, an endolysosomal aspartic proteinase predominantly
expressed in cells of the immune system, has an important role in immune
responses (Yanagawa et al., 2007).

CLONING

Taggart et al. (1989) used sets of complementary oligonucleotide probes
specific for the highly conserved active site region of aspartic
proteinases to isolate cDNA clones encoding novel enzymes of this class.
They identified 6 classes of cDNA clones in a gastric adenocarcinoma
cDNA library using a set of 18-mer probes. One of the cDNAs, designated
AGS402, was shown by DNA analysis to correspond to the predicted coding
sequence of cathepsin E. Couvreur et al. (1989, 1990) also isolated a
full-length CTSE cDNA clone from a gastric adenocarcinoma cDNA library.

Azuma et al. (1989, 1989) reported the amino acid sequence of CTSE
predicted on the basis of the cDNA sequence and compared the sequence
with that of other aspartic proteinases. Azuma et al. (1992)
demonstrated that multiple transcripts result from alternative
polyadenylation of the primary transcripts of the single CTSE gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Azuma et al. (1992) determined that the CTSE gene contains 9 exons and
spans 17.5 kb. The size and placement of the exons are highly conserved
relative to other aspartic proteinases.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Taggart et al. (1989) mapped the CTSE
gene to chromosome 1. Azuma et al. (1989, 1989) also assigned the CTSE
gene to chromosome 1.

Couvreur et al. (1989, 1990) mapped the CTSE gene to chromosome
1q23-qter by analysis of human/rodent hybrid cell lines containing
different X;1 translocations. CTSE was further localized to chromosome
1q31 by in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yanagawa et al. (2007) found that cathepsin E deficiency in mice
resulted in a lysosome storage disorder in macrophages that was
characterized by accumulation of major lysosomal membrane
sialoglycoproteins, including Lamp1 (153330), Lamp2 (309060), and Limp2
(SCARB2; 602257), and elevated lysosomal pH. Trafficking of soluble
lysosomal proteins to lysosomes was also partially impaired in Cate -/-
macrophages. Treatment of wildtype macrophages with a cathepsin E
inhibitor also led to accumulation of these lysosomal proteins and
elevated pH. Since vacuolar-type H(+) ATPase (see 603097) activity was
not altered in Cate -/- macrophages, Yanagawa et al. (2007) hypothesized
that the elevated lysosomal pH in Cate -/- macrophages was likely due to
the accumulation of the highly acidic lysosomal sialoglycoproteins.

REFERENCE 1. Azuma, T.; Liu, W. G.; Vander Laan, D. J.; Bowcock, A. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Human gastric cathepsin E gene: multiple transcripts result
from alternative polyadenylation of the primary transcripts of a single
gene locus at 1q31-q32. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 1609-1614, 1992.

2. Azuma, T.; Pals, G.; Mohandas, T. K.; Couvreur, J. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Cathepsin E: molecular cloning and characterization using
aspartyl proteinase active site probes. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45
(suppl.): A171 only, 1989.

3. Azuma, T.; Pals, G.; Mohandas, T. K.; Couvreur, J. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Human gastric cathepsin E: predicted sequence, localization
to chromosome 1, and sequence homology with other aspartic proteinases. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 16748-16753, 1989.

4. Couvreur, J. M.; Azuma, T.; Miller, D. A.; Rocchi, M.; Mohandas,
T. K.; Boudi, F. A.; Taggart, R. T.: Assignment of cathepsin E (CTSE)
to human chromosome region 1q31 by in situ hybridization and analysis
of somatic cell hybrids. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53: 137-139, 1990.

5. Couvreur, J. M.; Johnson, M. P.; Azuma, T.; Boudi, F. A.; Rocchi,
M.; Mohandas, T. K.; Miller, D. A.; Taggart, R. T.: Cathepsin E:
localization of a single gene locus to 1q31 by restriction analysis
of X;1 translocation somatic cell hybrids, and in situ hybridization.
(Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A135 only, 1989.

6. Taggart, R. T.; Azuma, T.; Couvreur, J. M.; Mohandas, T. K.: Isolation
and mapping genes identified with probes specific for the conserved
active site of aspartic proteinases. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1088 only, 1989.

7. Yanagawa, M.; Tsukuba, T.; Nishioku, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Okamoto,
K.; Takii, R.; Terada, Y.; Nakayama, K. I.; Kadowaki, T.; Yamamoto,
K.: Cathepsin E deficiency induces a novel form of lysosomal storage
disorder showing the accumulation of lysosomal membrane sialoglycoproteins
and the elevation of lysosomal pH in macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
1851-1862, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/25/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1989

EDITED mgross: 10/03/2007
mgross: 10/3/2007
terry: 9/25/2007
carol: 1/13/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 9/28/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/1/1989
carol: 11/10/1989

607865	TITLE *607865 SET DOMAIN PROTEIN, BIFURCATED, 2; SETDB2
;;CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA DELETION REGION GENE 8; CLLD8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteins that contain a SET domain, such as SETDB2, modulate gene
expression epigenetically through histone H3 (see 602810) methylation.
SETDB2 is likely a histone H3 methyltransferase, as it contains both the
active site and flanking cysteine residues required for catalytic
activity (Zhang et al., 2003).

CLONING

Mabuchi et al. (2001) assembled a high-resolution physical map spanning
the critical region deleted in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(109543) on chromosome 13q14 and identified SETDB2, which they
designated CLLD8. The deduced 719-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 82 kD. SETDB2 contains a methyl-CpG-binding
domain, a preSET domain, and a SET domain that is bifurcated by a
218-amino acid insertion. SETDB2 shares 45% identity with SETDB1
(604396). Northern blot analysis detected a 3.3-kb transcript in nearly
all tissues and tumor cell lines examined, with highest expression in
heart, testis, and ovary.

Using a positional cloning approach, Zhang et al. (2003) cloned SETDB2
from a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma (147050). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.0-kb transcript in all tissues examined. Higher molecular
mass bands were also detected at lower levels.

- SETDB2/PHF11 Fusion Transcripts

Using primers designed from exons utilized by SETDB2 and PHF11 (607796),
Zhang et al. (2003) amplified PCR products that spanned both and
represented 3 alternatively spliced fusion transcripts. Expression of
each transcript was tissue specific and was detected in nearly all
tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mabuchi et al. (2001) determined that the SETDB2 gene contains 15 exons
and spans 49 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mabuchi et al. (2001) mapped the SETDB2
gene to chromosome 13q14. It is centromeric to and transcribed in the
same direction as the PHF11 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Mabuchi, H.; Fujii, H.; Calin, G.; Alder, H.; Negrini, M.; Rassenti,
L.; Kipps, T. J.; Bullrich, F.; Croce, C. M.: Cloning and characterization
of CLLD6, CLLD7, CLLD8, novel candidate genes for leukemogenesis at
chromosome 13q14, a region commonly deleted in B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Cancer Res. 61: 2870-2877, 2001.

2. Zhang, Y.; Leaves, N. I.; Anderson, G. G.; Ponting, C. P.; Broxholme,
J.; Holt, R.; Edser, P.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Dunham, A.; Adcock, I.
M.; Pulleyn, L.; Barnes, P. J.; and 11 others: Positional cloning
of a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma. Nature Genet. 34: 181-186, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 6/9/2003

603580	TITLE *603580 PROTOCADHERIN 8; PCDH8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The protocadherins are a subfamily of calcium-dependent cell adhesion
and recognition proteins of the cadherin superfamily. See 602988.
Protocadherin-8 belongs to a subclass of protocadherins that share a
highly conserved 17-amino acid cytoplasmic motif (Wolverton and Lalande,
2001).

CLONING

During a screen for genes in the 13q14.3-q21.1 region, Strehl et al.
(1998) identified an exonic region encoding a cadherin-related protein.
The full-length PCDH8 sequence encodes a 936-amino acid polypeptide with
a single putative transmembrane domain and 6 cadherin repeats. Genomic
analysis demonstrated that PCDH8 is encoded by 3 exons spanning 5 kb of
genomic DNA. Northern blot analysis revealed that PCDH8 is expressed as
a 4-kb mRNA exclusively in fetal and adult brain.

MAPPING

By inclusion in a PAC/BAC contig on human chromosome 13, Strehl et al.
(1997) determined that the PCDH8 gene maps to the band boundary region
between 13q14.3 and 13q21.1, about 1 Mb distal to the ATP7B gene
(606882), which is mutated in Wilson disease (277900). Strehl et al.
(1998) localized the mouse Pcdh8 and Pcdh9 (603581) genes to the distal
part of chromosome 14, in a region of known homology of synteny with
human 13q14.3.

REFERENCE 1. Strehl, S.; Glatt, K.; Liu, Q. M.; Glatt, H.; Lalande, M.: Characterization
of two novel protocadherins (PCDH8 and PCDH9) localized on human chromosome
13 and mouse chromosome 14. Genomics 53: 81-89, 1998.

2. Strehl, S.; LaSalle, J. M.; Lalande, M.: High-resolution analysis
of DNA replication domain organization across an R/G-band boundary. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 17: 6157-6166, 1997.

3. Wolverton, T.; Lalande, M.: Identification and characterization
of three members of a novel subclass of protocadherins. Genomics 76:
66-72, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/26/2003

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 2/23/1999

EDITED carol: 11/26/2003
carol: 4/29/2002
alopez: 2/24/1999
alopez: 2/23/1999

606274	TITLE *606274 CASEIN KINASE I, GAMMA-1; CSNK1G1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Casein kinase I is the most abundant serine/threonine kinase in
eukaryotic cell extracts. Multiple isoforms of the enzyme exist. The
gamma-1 isoform is involved in growth and morphogenesis of eukaryotic
cells.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of rat Csnk1g1 and by
screening a testis cDNA library, Kusuda et al. (2000) obtained cDNAs
encoding short and long splice variants of human CSNK1G1, which they
called CSNK1G1S and CSNK1G1L, respectively. Sequence analysis predicted
that the 422-amino acid CSNK1G1L protein possesses a C-terminal most
terminal sequence motif (MTM), which it shares with CSNK1G2 (602214) and
CSNK1G3 (604253). The CSNK1G1S protein contains 393 amino acids and is
95%, 81%, and 84% homologous to rat Csnk1g1, Csnk1g2, and Csnk1g3,
respectively; it does not have the MTM. RT-PCR analysis detected
ubiquitous expression of CSNK1G1L, whereas expression of CSNK1G1S was
restricted to testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a protein modification screen for regulators of LRP6 (603507),
Davidson et al. (2005) described the identification of Xenopus casein
kinase 1-gamma (CSNK1G1), a membrane-bound member of the casein kinase-1
(CK1) family. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments showed
that CSNK1G1 is both necessary and sufficient to transduce LRP6
signaling in vertebrates and Drosophila cells. In Xenopus embryos,
CSNK1G1 was required during anterio-posterior patterning to promote
posteriorizing Wnt/beta-catenin (164820/116806) signaling. CSNK1G1 is
associated with LRP6, which has multiple, modular CK1 phosphorylation
sites. Wnt treatment induced the rapid CK1-gamma-mediated
phosphorylation of these sites within LRP6, which, in turn, promoted the
recruitment of the scaffold protein Axin (603816). Davidson et al.
(2005) concluded that their results reveal an evolutionarily conserved
mechanism that couples Wnt receptor activation to the cytoplasmic signal
transduction apparatus.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Kusuda et al. (2000) mapped the CSNK1G1 gene to
15q22.1-q22.31.

REFERENCE 1. Davidson, G.; Wu, W.; Shen, J.; Bilic, J.; Fenger, U.; Stannek,
P.; Glinka, A.; Niehrs, C.: Casein kinase 1-gamma couples Wnt receptor
activation to cytoplasmic signal transduction. Nature 438: 867-872,
2005.

2. Kusuda, J.; Hirai, M.; Tanuma, R.; Hashimoto, K.: Cloning, expression
analysis and chromosome mapping of human casein kinase 1 gamma-1 (CSNK1G1):
identification of two types of cDNA encoding the kinase protein associated
with heterologous carboxy-terminal sequences. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90:
298-302, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/21/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/07/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
mgross: 9/21/2001

602338	TITLE *602338 PRECURSOR mRNA-PROCESSING FACTOR 4, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF, B; PRPF4B
;;PRP4, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Prp4 gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe encodes a protein kinase that
appears to be involved in pre-mRNA splicing (Gross et al., 1997). Based
on kinase domain sequence, Prp4 belongs to the Clk (CDC-like kinase)
family. Using a PCR approach, Gross et al. (1997) identified human and
mouse Prp4 homologs. The human and mouse amino acid sequences are 98%
identical, and the mammalian sequence shared 44% identity with that of
the S. pombe protein. Gross et al. (1997) demonstrated that Prp4 and a
recombinant fusion protein consisting of the yeast N terminus with the
mouse kinase domain phosphorylated the human arginine/serine-rich
splicing factor SFRS2 (600813) in vitro.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PRP4
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-6524).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, T.; Lutzelberger, M.; Wiegmann, H.; Klingenhoff, A.; Shenoy,
S.; Kaufer, N. F.: Functional analysis of the fission yeast Prp4
protein kinase involved in pre-mRNA splicing and isolation of a putative
mammalian homologue. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 1028-1035, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/29/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/10/1998

EDITED joanna: 09/10/2009
joanna: 8/29/2002
dholmes: 2/19/1998
alopez: 2/10/1998

609575	TITLE *609575 ACYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE, VERY LONG-CHAIN; ACADVL
;;VLCAD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ACADVL gene encodes very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD)
(EC 1.3.99.13). VLCAD is unique among the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases in its
size, structure, and intramitochondrial distribution (Aoyama et al.,
1995).

CLONING

Izai et al. (1992) identified and purified a novel acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase, Acadvl, from rat liver mitochondria.

Aoyama et al. (1995) cloned and sequenced 2 overlapping cDNA clones
corresponding to human mitochondrial VLCAD. The cDNA encodes a 655-amino
acid protein with a 40-amino acid leader peptide, yielding a mature
615-residue protein.

Whereas the other acyl-CoA dehydrogenases are homotetramers of a 43- to
45-kD subunit, VLCAD purified from human liver was shown by Aoyama et
al. (1995) to be a 154-kD homodimer of a 70-kD subunit. VLCAD was
loosely bound to the mitochondrial inner membrane and required detergent
for stabilization. In contrast, the other 3 acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
others were readily extractable into the soluble fraction without
detergent, indicating that they are located in the mitochondrial matrix.

Andresen et al. (1996) isolated cDNA clones for human VLCAD by using rat
Vlcad cDNA sequences to identify an EST from human fetal brain in the
GenBank database, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime rapid amplification of
cDNA ends (RACE) to identify overlapping clones. Sequence analysis of
the coding region and the 5-prime noncoding region of the VLCAD cDNA
showed no differences with the sequence published by Aoyama et al.
(1995). Andresen et al. (1996) found 26 to 33% homology between VLCAD
and other human acyl-CoA dehydrogenases. Northern blot analysis detected
a 2.4-kb mRNA transcript in a variety of human tissues.

By real-time RT-PCR, Zhou and Blumberg (2003) detected VLCAD expression
in all tissues examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal
muscle, followed by placenta and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Izai et al. (1992) found that the properties of Acadvl purified from rat
liver mitochondria differed from those of the short (ACADS; 606885)-,
medium (ACADM; 607008)-, and long (ACADL; 609576)-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenases. Acadvl was active toward very long-chain fatty acids.

Aoyama et al. (1995) found that human VLCAD had 10 times higher specific
activity toward palmitoyl-CoA than did LCAD. The enzyme was found to
catalyze the major part of mitochondrial palmitoyl-CoA dehydrogenation
in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and skin fibroblasts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Strauss et al. (1995) determined that the ACADVL gene contains 20 exons.
The ACADVL gene is about 5.4 kb long (Zhou and Blumberg, 2003).

Zhang et al. (2003) noted that the VLCAD and the DLG4 (602887) genes are
located in a head-to-head orientation on chromosome 17p. The transcribed
regions of the 2 genes overlap by about 220 bp. Using serial promoter
partial deletion constructs in a reporter gene assay, they found that
the essential promoter activity of DLG4 is carried within a region of
about 400 bp and covers the entire VLCAD minimal promoter, which spans
about 270 bp. The results from di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
(DEHP)-treated HepG2 cells revealed that the minimal VLCAD promoter can
upregulate VLCAD expression in response to DEHP treatment. Site-directed
mutagenesis experiments showed that a mutated AP2 (107580)-binding site
markedly reduced the transcriptional activity of both the VLCAD and DLG4
promoters and abolished the minimal VLCAD promoter's response to DEHP
treatment.

Independently, Zhou and Blumberg (2003) determined that the VLCAD and
DLG4 genes overlap. The 2 genes share 245 nucleotides at their 5-prime
ends, and the transcription start site for DLG4 extends into the coding
region of VLCAD exon 1. The upstream regions of the VLCAD and DLG4
genes, including the overlapping region, contain 2 potential TATA-less
promoters with potential binding sites for several common transcription
factors. RT-PCR detected unique patterns of expression for VLCAD and
DLG4, indicating that, although they share common regulatory elements,
VLCAD and DLG4 also have distinct tissue-specific elements. The mouse
Dlg4 and Vlcad genes are oriented in a head-to-head manner, but they do
not overlap and are separated by almost 3.5 kb.

MAPPING

Andresen et al. (1996) mapped the ACADVL gene to human chromosome
17p13.1-p11.2 by analysis of rodent-human hybrids.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Orii et al. (1997) mapped the
murine Acadvl gene to chromosome 11 in a region of synteny to human
17p13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In cultured fibroblasts of 2 patients with VLCAD deficiency (201475),
Aoyama et al. (1995) identified a 105-bp deletion in the ACADVL gene
(609575.0001).

Andresen et al. (1996) identified 9 different mutations in the ACADVL
gene in 4 unrelated patients with VLCAD deficiency. Two patients carried
3 different mutations. Different mutations were observed in each of the
patients. Western blot analysis on fibroblasts from 3 of the patients
revealed severe quantitative reduction in VLCAD protein.

Mathur et al. (1999) identified 21 different mutations in the ACADVL
gene in 18 of 37 children with cardiomyopathy, nonketotic hypoglycemia
and hepatic dysfunction, skeletal myopathy, or sudden death in infancy
with hepatic steatosis. Sixty-seven percent of children had severe
dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at presentation. In 7 patients,
only 1 mutation was found despite direct sequencing of all exons.
Missense, frameshift, and splice consensus sequence mutations were seen,
as well as in-frame deletions. Eighty percent of these mutations were
associated with cardiomyopathy. The authors concluded that infantile
cardiomyopathy is the most common clinical phenotype for VLCAD
deficiency and highlighted the marked allelic heterogeneity in this
disorder.

Since VLCAD-deficient patients frequently harbor missense mutations with
unpredictable effects on enzyme activity, Gobin-Limballe et al. (2007)
investigated the response to bezafibrate as a function of genotype in 33
VLCAD-deficient fibroblast cell lines representing 45 different
mutations. Treatment with bezafibrate (400 microM for 48 hours) resulted
in a marked increase in FAO capacities, often leading to restoration of
normal values, for 21 genotypes that mainly corresponded to patients
with the myopathic phenotype. In contrast, bezafibrate induced no
changes in FAO for 11 genotypes corresponding to severe neonatal or
infantile phenotypes. This pattern of response was not due to
differential inductions of VLCAD mRNA, as shown by quantitative
real-time PCR, but reflected variable increases in measured VLCAD
residual enzyme activity in response to bezafibrate. Genotype
cross-analysis allowed the identification of alleles carrying missense
mutations, which could account for these different pharmacologic
profiles and, on this basis, led to the characterization of 9 mild and
11 severe missense mutations. The responses to bezafibrate reflected the
severity of the metabolic blockage in various genotypes, which appeared
to be correlated with the phenotype. This study emphasized the potential
of bezafibrate, a widely prescribed hypolipidemic drug, for the
correction of VLCAD deficiency and exemplified the integration of
molecular information in a therapeutic strategy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Cox et al. (2001) generated mice with VLCAD deficiency (Vlcad -/-) and
compared their pathologic and biochemical phenotypes to mice with Lcad
deficiency (Lcad -/-) and wildtype mice. Vlcad -/- mice had milder fatty
acid change in liver and heart. Dehydrogenation of various acyl-CoA
substrates by liver, heart, and skeletal muscle mitochondria differed
among the 3 genotypes. The results for liver were most informative as
Vlcad -/- mice had a reduction in activity toward palmitoyl-CoA and
oleoyl-CoA (58% and 64% of wildtype, respectively), whereas Lcad -/-
mice showed a more profoundly reduced activity toward these substrates
(35% and 32% of wildtype, respectively), with a significant reduction of
activity toward the branched chain substrate 2,6-dimethylheptanoyl-CoA.
C16 and C18 acylcarnitines were elevated in bile, blood, and serum of
fasted Vlcad -/- mice, whereas abnormally elevated C12 and C14
acylcarnitines were prominent in Lcad -/- mice. Progeny with the
combined Lcad +/+//Vlcad +/- genotype were overrepresented in offspring
from sires and dams heterozygous for both Lcad and Vlcad mutations. In
contrast, no live mice with a compound Lcad -/-/Vlcad -/- genotype were
detected, suggesting that this genotype may be lethal in utero or in the
periparturient period.

To define the onset and molecular mechanism of myocardial disease, Exil
et al. (2003) generated Vlcad-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. They found that Vlcad-deficient hearts had microvesicular
lipid accumulation and marked mitochondrial proliferation, and
demonstrated facilitated induction of polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia, without antecedent stress. The expression of acyl-CoA
synthetase-1 (ACS1; 152425), adipophilin, Ap2, cytochrome c, and the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PPARGC1;
604517) were increased immediately after birth, preceding overt
histologic lipidosis, whereas Acs1 expression was markedly downregulated
in the adult heart. Exil et al. (2003) concluded that mice with Vlcad
deficiency have altered expression of a variety of genes in the fatty
acid metabolic pathway from birth, reflecting metabolic feedback
circuits, with progression to ultrastructural and physiologic correlates
of the associated human disease in the absence of stress.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 105-BP DEL

In 2 patients with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Aoyama et al. (1995)
identified a 105-bp deletion encompassing bases 1078-1182 in the VLCAD
cDNA. The deletion was thought to result from exon skipping and was
predicted to result in the in-frame deletion of 35 amino acids,
beginning with val360 of the precursor VLCAD. Using the vaccinia viral
system, Aoyama et al. (1995) performed quantitative cDNA expression of
normal human VLCAD in the patients' fibroblasts and demonstrated that
raising VLCAD activity to approximately 20% of normal control fibroblast
activity raised palmitic acid beta-oxidation flux to the level found in
control fibroblasts. The mutation described in these patients has
consequences for enzyme folding and assembly that are similar to those
for the well-characterized A985G mutation (lys329-to-glu; 607008.0001)
found in approximately 90% of the mutant alleles in patients with MCAD
deficiency (201450).

.0002
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, IVS11, G-A, +1

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475) associated with infantile
cardiomyopathy and sudden death, Strauss et al. (1995) identified a
homozygous G-to-A transition in the consensus dinucleotide of the donor
splice site in intron 11 of the ACADVL gene, resulting in the skipping
of exon 11.

.0003
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG613TRP

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: a
1837C-T transition, resulting in an arg613-to-trp (R613W) amino acid
substitution, and a 135-bp deletion of nucleotides 343-477, resulting in
the loss of 45 amino acids from the VLCAD protein (609575.0005).

.0004
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, IVS5, 1-BP DEL, G, -1

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475) associated with infantile
cardiomyopathy and sudden death, Strauss et al. (1995) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: R613W
(609575.0003) and a 1-bp deletion of one of the 2 guanine nucleotides
forming the intron-exon 6 boundary. The normal sequence is ccccagGAA and
the mutant sequence was cccaGAA. The authors noted that the most likely
consequence of this deletion would be an alternation in splicing because
of loss of the conserved ag dinucleotide at the splice acceptor site.
Alternatively, splicing at this site might occur but this would result
in loss of a single nucleotide in exon 6, causing a shift in the mRNA
reading frame. In either event, this mutation would most likely result
in an unstable mRNA and lack of VLCAD protein expression from the mutant
allele.

.0005
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 135-BP DEL

See 609575.0003 and Souri et al. (1996).

.0006
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 3-BP DEL, GLU130DEL

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion in the ACADVL gene, resulting in
deletion of glu130. In another patient, Souri et al. (1996) found the
3-bp deletion mutation in compound heterozygosity with the K382Q
mutation (609575.0008).

.0007
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 3-BP DEL, LYS299DEL

In an infant with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996) found
deletion of nucleotides 895 and 897 in the ACADVL gene, resulting in
deletion of lys299 (K299X).

.0008
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, LYS382GLN

In an infant with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified a 1144A-C transversion in the ACADVL gene, resulting in a
lys382-to-gln (K382Q) amino acid substitution.

.0009
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, GLY401ASP

In a 42-year-old woman with late-onset VLCAD deficiency (201475), Smelt
et al. (1998) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
ACADVL gene: a G-to-A transition in exon 13, resulting in a
gly401-to-asp (G401D) substitution, and a G-to-A transition in exon 14,
resulting in an arg410-to-his (R410H; 609575.0010) substitution. The
patient had recurrent rhabdomyolysis and markedly elevated levels of
tetradecadienoic acid and hexadecadienoic acid.

.0010
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG410HIS

See 609575.0009 and Smelt et al. (1998).

.0011
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, PRO65LEU AND LYS247GLN

In an Israeli patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Watanabe et al.
(2000) found homozygosity for a complex mutant allele with pro65-to-leu
(P65L) and lys247-to-gln (K247Q) mutations in the ACADVL gene. The P65L
mutation resulted in the skipping of exon 3. The nucleotide substitution
causing the P65L amino acid change was a 194C-T transition located 11
bases upstream of the normal splice donor site of intron 3. This is an
example of an exonic mutation that affects exon splicing; a similar
situation had been described in the ACAT1 gene (see 203750.0009). RT-PCR
showed 2 cDNA fragments of different sizes. One had the expected size
and the other was shorter by 66 basepairs. In the case of P65L, the
amino acid change did not reduce enzyme activity, whereas the K247Q
mutation reduced it drastically.

.0012
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, PHE458LEU

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Cox et al. (1998)
identified a 1372T-C transition in the ACADVL gene, resulting in a
phe458-to-leu (F458L) substitution.

.0013
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ALA416THR

In a 14-year-old Japanese girl with very mild manifestations of VLCAD
deficiency (201475), Fukao et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: 1 resulting in an
ala416-to-thr (A416T) substitution, and the other resulting in an
arg450-to-his (R450H; 609575.0014) substitution. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that both mutant proteins retained residual
activity at 30 degrees Celsius. Fukao et al. (2001) concluded that the
temperature-sensitive mild mutations resulted in the milder phenotype in
this patient.

.0014
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG450HIS

See 609575.0013 and Fukao et al. (2001).

REFERENCE 1. Andresen, B. S.; Bross, P.; Vianey-Saban, C.; Divry, P.; Zabot,
M.-T.; Roe, C. R.; Nada, M. A.; Byskov, A.; Kruse, T. A.; Neve, S.;
Kristiansen, K.; Knudsen, I.; Corydon, M. J.; Gregersen, N.: Cloning
and characterization of human very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
cDNA, chromosomal assignment of the gene and identification in four
patients of nine different mutations within the VLCAD gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 461-472, 1996. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
5: 1390 only, 1996.

2. Aoyama, T.; Souri, M.; Ueno, I.; Kamijo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.; Rhead,
W. J.; Tanaka, K.; Hashimoto, T.: Cloning of human very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase and molecular characterization of its
deficiency in two patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 273-283, 1995.

3. Aoyama, T.; Souri, M.; Ushikubo, S.; Kamijo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.;
Kelley, R. I.; Rhead, W. J.; Uetake, K.; Tanaka, K.; Hashimoto, T.
: Purification of human very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
and characterization of its deficiency in seven patients. J. Clin.
Invest. 95: 2465-2473, 1995.

4. Cox, G. F.; Souri, M.; Aoyama, T.; Rockenmacher, S.; Varvogli,
L.; Rohr, F.; Hashimoto, T.; Korson, M. S.: Reversal of severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and excellent neuropsychologic outcome in very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency. J. Pediat. 133: 247-253,
1998.

5. Cox, K. B.; Hamm, D. A.; Millington, D. S.; Matern, D.; Vockley,
J.; Rinaldo, P.; Pinkert, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Lindsey, J. R.; Wood,
P. A.: Gestational, pathologic and biochemical differences between
very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and long-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency in the mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2069-2077,
2001.

6. Exil, V. J.; Roberts, R. L.; Sims, H.; McLaughlin, J. E.; Malkin,
R. A.; Gardner, C. D.; Ni, G.; Rottman, J. N.; Strauss, A. W.: Very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency in mice. Circ. Res. 93:
448-455, 2003.

7. Fukao, T.; Watanabe, H.; Orii, K. E.; Takahashi, Y.; Hirano, A.;
Kondo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.; Aoyama, T.; Kondo, N.: Myopathic form of
very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: evidence for temperature-sensitive
mild mutations in both mutant alleles in a Japanese girl. Pediat.
Res. 49: 227-231, 2001.

8. Gobin-Limballe, S.; Djouadi, F.; Aubey, F.; Olpin, S.; Andresen,
B. S.; Yamaguchi, S.; Mandel, H.; Fukao, T.; Ruiter, J. P. N.; Wanders,
R. J. A.; McAndrew, R.; Kim, J. J.; Bastin, J.: Genetic basis for
correction of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency
by bezafibrate in patient fibroblasts: toward a genotype-based therapy. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 81: 1133-1143, 2007.

9. Izai, K.; Uchida, Y.; Orii, T.; Yamamoto, S.; Hashimoto, T.: Novel
fatty acid beta-oxidation enzymes in rat liver mitochondria. I. Purification
and properties of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 1027-1033, 1992.

10. Mathur, A.; Sims, H. F.; Gopalakrishnan, D.; Gibson, B.; Rinaldo,
P.; Vockley, J.; Hug, G.; Strauss, A. W.: Molecular heterogeneity
in very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing pediatric
cardiomyopathy and sudden death. Circulation 99: 1337-1343, 1999.

11. Orii, K. O.; Saito-Ohara, F.; Ikeuchi, T.; Orii, T.; Kondo, N.;
Aoyama, T.; Hashimoto, T.: Assignment of the gene for very-long-chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (Acadvl) to mouse chromosome band 11B2-B5 by
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 25-26, 1997.

12. Smelt, A. H. M.; Poorthuis, B. J. H. M.; Onkenhout, W.; Scholte,
H. R.; Andresen, B. S.; van Duinen, S. G.; Gregersen, N.; Wintzen,
A. R.: Very long chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency with
adult onset. Ann. Neurol. 43: 540-544, 1998.

13. Souri, M.; Aoyama, T.; Orii, K.; Yamaguchi, S.; Hashimoto, T.
: Mutation analysis of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
(VLCAD) deficiency: identification and characterization of mutant
VLCAD cDNAs from four patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 97-106, 1996.

14. Strauss, A. W.; Powell, C. K.; Hale, D. E.; Anderson, M. M.; Ahuja,
A.; Brackett, J. C.; Sims, H. F.: Molecular basis of human mitochondrial
very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing cardiomyopathy
and sudden death in childhood. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 10496-10500,
1995.

15. Watanabe, H.; Orii, K. E.; Fukao, T.; Song, X.-Q.; Aoyama, T.;
IJlst, L.; Ruiter, J.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Kondo, N.: Molecular basis
of very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in three Israeli
patients: identification of a complex mutant allele with P65L and
K247Q mutations, the former being an exonic mutation causing exon
3 skipping. Hum. Mutat. 15: 430-438, 2000.

16. Zhang, L.-F.; Ding, J.-H.; Yang, B.-Z.; He, G.-C.; Roe, C.: Characterization
of the bidirectional promoter region between the human genes encoding
VLCAD and PSD-95. Genomics 82: 660-668, 2003.

17. Zhou, C.; Blumberg, B.: Overlapping gene structure of human VLCAD
and DLG4. Gene 305: 161-166, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/8/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/28/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 9/12/2005

EDITED carol: 02/13/2012
carol: 5/3/2011
terry: 5/2/2011
mgross: 10/12/2009
terry: 10/8/2009
terry: 6/6/2008
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/28/2007
carol: 9/22/2005
ckniffin: 9/14/2005

611053	TITLE *611053 RUN AND SH3 DOMAIN-CONTAINING 2; RUSC2
;;KIAA0375;;
IPORIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA library, Nagase
et al. (1997) cloned a partial RUSC2 cDNA, which they called KIAA0375.
RT-PCR detected high expression in human kidney, ovary, and testis,
followed by moderate expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, and
skeletal muscle, and low expression in prostate and small intestine.

By yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human placental cDNA library with mutant
Rab1b (612565) as prey, Bayer et al. (2005) identified RUSC2, which they
called iporin. The deduced 1516-amino acid protein contains a RUN domain
and an SH3 domain, as well as proline and glutamic acid-rich regions.
The mouse homolog shares 84% similarity to human RUSC2. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 5.5-kb
transcript, with highest levels in brain and testis. The RUN domain of
RUSC2 mediated binding to Rab1. Western blot analysis detected a 220-kD
protein mainly associated with membrane fractions. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed a cytosolic distribution with punctate perinuclear
enrichment. RUSC2 interacted with the Rab1-binding protein GM130
(GOLGA2; 602580) on yeast 2-hybrid and in vitro binding assays.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bayer et al., 2005 determined that the RUSC2 gene contains 11 exons and
spans about 14 kb.

MAPPING

Bayer et al. (2005) noted that the RUSC2 gene maps to chromosome 9p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bayer, M.; Fischer, J.; Kremerskothen, J.; Ossendorf, E.; Matanis,
T.; Konczal, M.; Weide, T.; Barnekow, A.: Identification and characterization
of iporin as a novel interaction partner for rab1. BMC Cell Biol. 6:
15, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 5/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2009
wwang: 5/23/2007

607376	TITLE *607376 DYNACTIN 2; DCTN2
;;DYNAMITIN;;
DYNACTIN COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT; DCTN50
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN2 is a 50-kD subunit of dynactin, a multiprotein complex associated
with dynein. Cytoplasmic dynein is a molecular motor responsible for
minus-end-directed movement along microtubules. See DCTN1 (601143) and
DNCH1 (600112) for additional information about the dynactin complex and
dynein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DCTN2
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP RH70660).

ANIMAL MODEL

LaMonte et al. (2002) generated a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS; 105400) by overexpressing dynamitin in postnatal motor
neurons of transgenic mice. They found that dynamitin overexpression
disrupted the dynein-dynactin complex, resulting in an inhibition of
retrograde axonal transport. The authors observed a late-onset, slowly
progressive motor neuron degenerative disease in the transgenic mice and
concluded that their mouse model confirms the critical role of disrupted
axonal transport in the pathogenesis of motor neuron degenerative
disease.

REFERENCE 1. LaMonte, B. H.; Wallace, K. E.; Holloway, B. A.; Shelly, S. S.;
Ascano, J.; Tokito, M.; Van Winkle, T.; Howland, D. S.; Holzbaur,
E. L. F.: Disruption of dynein/dynactin inhibits axonal transport
in motor neurons causing late-onset progressive degeneration. Neuron 34:
715-727, 2002.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 11/22/2002

EDITED mgross: 11/22/2002

607376	TITLE *607376 DYNACTIN 2; DCTN2
;;DYNAMITIN;;
DYNACTIN COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT; DCTN50
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN2 is a 50-kD subunit of dynactin, a multiprotein complex associated
with dynein. Cytoplasmic dynein is a molecular motor responsible for
minus-end-directed movement along microtubules. See DCTN1 (601143) and
DNCH1 (600112) for additional information about the dynactin complex and
dynein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DCTN2
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP RH70660).

ANIMAL MODEL

LaMonte et al. (2002) generated a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS; 105400) by overexpressing dynamitin in postnatal motor
neurons of transgenic mice. They found that dynamitin overexpression
disrupted the dynein-dynactin complex, resulting in an inhibition of
retrograde axonal transport. The authors observed a late-onset, slowly
progressive motor neuron degenerative disease in the transgenic mice and
concluded that their mouse model confirms the critical role of disrupted
axonal transport in the pathogenesis of motor neuron degenerative
disease.

REFERENCE 1. LaMonte, B. H.; Wallace, K. E.; Holloway, B. A.; Shelly, S. S.;
Ascano, J.; Tokito, M.; Van Winkle, T.; Howland, D. S.; Holzbaur,
E. L. F.: Disruption of dynein/dynactin inhibits axonal transport
in motor neurons causing late-onset progressive degeneration. Neuron 34:
715-727, 2002.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 11/22/2002

EDITED mgross: 11/22/2002

611659	TITLE *611659 SPRY DOMAIN- AND SOCS BOX-CONTAINING 3; SPSB3
;;SPRY DOMAIN-CONTAINING SOCS BOX PROTEIN 3; SSB3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, Wang et al. (2005) identified SPSB3, which they
called SSB3. The deduced 348-amino acid protein shares 16% amino acid
identity with SPSB1 (611657) and has a long N-terminal extension. SPSB3
contains a central SPRY domain and a C-terminal SOCS box.
Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that SPSB3 interacted with MET
(164860).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SPSB3
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP RH103022).

REFERENCE 1. Wang, D.; Li, Z.; Messing, E. M.; Wu, G.: The SPRY domain-containing
SOCS box protein 1 (SSB-1) interacts with MET and enhances the hepatocyte
growth factor-induced Erk-Elk-1-serum response element pathway. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 16393-16401, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/11/2007

EDITED wwang: 12/11/2007

601589	TITLE *601589 RAS p21 PROTEIN ACTIVATOR 2; RASA2
;;GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN OF RAS; GAP1M
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Maekawa et al. (1994) isolated a mammalian GTPase-activating protein of
RAS from rat (GAP1M) that shows sequence similarity to the suppressor of
RAS (see 190020) function in Drosophila, known as Gap1 (Gaul et al.,
1992). Expression was relatively high in brain, placenta, and kidney but
lower in other tissues. A recombinantly expressed protein containing the
GAP-related domain was shown to stimulate GTPase activity of RAS.

Li et al. (1996) isolated the human homolog of rat GAP1M from a brain
cDNA library. The deduced 853-amino acid protein is 89.4% identical to
the rat protein.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic cell hybrid DNAs, Li et al. (1996) mapped the
human GAP1M gene to chromosome 3. By fluroescence in situ hybridization,
they mapped GAP1M to 3q22-q23.

REFERENCE 1. Gaul, U.; Mardon, G.; Rubin, G. M.: A putative Ras GTPase activating
protein acts as a negative regulator of signaling by the Sevenless
receptor tyrosine kinase. Cell 68: 1007-1019, 1992.

2. Li, S.; Satoh, H.; Watanabe, T.; Nakamura, S.; Hattori, S.: cDNA
cloning and chromosomal mapping of a novel human GAP (GAP1M), a GTPase-activating
protein of Ras. Genomics 35: 625-627, 1996.

3. Maekawa, M.; Li, S.; Iwamatsu, A.; Morishita, T.; Yokota, K.; Imai,
Y.; Kohsaka, S.; Nakamura, S.; Hattori, S.: A novel mammalian Ras
GTPase-activating protein which has phospholipid-binding and Btk homology
regions. Molec. Cell. Biol. 14: 6879-6885, 1994.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 12/18/1996

EDITED carol: 06/08/2010
psherman: 8/12/1999
jamie: 1/6/1997
jamie: 12/19/1996

607764	TITLE *607764 3-@BETA-HYDROXY-DELTA-5-C27-STEROID OXIDOREDUCTASE; HSD3B7
;;C27-3-BETA-HSD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Schwarz et al. (2000) used expression cloning to isolate cDNAs encoding
a microsomal 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase that is
expressed predominantly in the liver. The predicted product showed 34%
sequence identity with the C19 and C21 3-beta-HSD enzymes, which
participate in steroid hormone metabolism. Schwarz et al. (2000)
observed that, when transfected into cultured cells, the enzyme encoded
by the C27 3-beta-HSD cDNA was active against four 7-alpha-hydroxylated
sterols, indicating that a single C27 3-beta-HSD enzyme can participate
in all pathways of bile acid synthesis known to that time. The expressed
enzyme did not metabolize several different C19/21 steroids as
substrates. The levels of hepatic C27 3-beta-HSD mRNA in the mouse were
not sexually dimorphic and did not change in response to dietary
cholesterol or to changes in bile acid pool size. The human C27
3-beta-HSD gene encodes a protein of 369 amino acids that is about 86%
identical to the mouse protein.

MAPPING

Schwarz et al. (2000) mapped the human HSD3B7 gene to chromosome
16p12-p11.2 by analysis of radiation hybrid panels.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schwarz et al. (2000) determined that the HSD3B7 gene contains 6 exons
and spans 3 kb of DNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Schwarz et al. (2000) observed that the C27 3-beta-HSD enzymes are
active only against 7-alpha hydroxylated sterol substrates. Human C27
3-beta-HSD enzymes were active against the 7-alpha hydroxylated forms of
24-hydroxycholesterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol, and 27-hydroxycholesterol
and showed no preference for any of those compounds. Northern blot
analysis identified a single 2.4-kb species present at high levels in
liver, pancreas, and kidney, and at lower levels in heart, skeletal
muscle, and placenta.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schwarz et al. (2000) identified a 2-bp deletion in the C27 3-beta-HSD
gene (607764.0001) in a patient with a congenital defect in bile acid
synthesis (CBAS1; 607765) and neonatal cholestasis.

Cheng et al. (2003) performed a molecular analysis of 15 additional
patients from 13 kindreds with C27 3-beta-HSD deficiency deficiency and
identified 12 different mutations in the HSD3B7 gene (see, e.g.,
607764.0001-607764.0005). They studied 10 mutations in detail; these
were shown to cause complete loss of enzyme activity and, in 2 cases,
alterations in the size or amount of the transcribed RNA. Mutations were
homozygous in 13 patients from 10 families and heterozygous in 4
patients from 3 families. Cheng et al. (2003) concluded that a diverse
spectrum of HSD3B7 mutations underlies this rare form of neonatal
cholestasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, 2-BP DEL, NT1057

In a Saudi Arabian boy with neonatal progressive intrahepatic
cholestasis (607765), the fifth child of consanguineous parents in the
family originally described by Clayton et al. (1987), Schwarz et al.
(2000) identified a 2-bp deletion in exon 6 of the HSD3B7 gene. This
mutation was found in homozygosity and was not present in 25 healthy
controls. It was predicted to shift the translational reading frame,
causing premature termination and the removal of 23 amino acids from the
carboxy terminus of the protein. In vitro studies showed that the
protein carrying the 2-bp deletion prevented the production of enzyme
capable of isomerizing and oxidizing the 7-alpha-hydroxylated forms of
24-hydroxycholesterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol, and 27-hydroxycholesterol.

Cheng et al. (2003) confirmed this mutation in the family of Clayton et
al. (1987) and found it in a second consanguineous Saudi family. They
determined that the 1057deltaCT mutation gives rise to a protein in
which the first 346 amino acids of the normal protein are fused to a
5-residue extension. The mutation was found to produce mRNAs that were
similar in size and amount to those derived from the normal gene but
failed to encode an active enzyme when introduced into HEK293 cells. It
was not known whether inactivation resulted from elimination of the
normal C-terminal sequences or addition of the spurious residues.

.0002
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, 1-BP INS, 310C

In a Chilean family with neonatal cholestasis caused by C27 3-beta-HSD
deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found a deletion of a C
nucleotide at position 310 in exon 1 of the HSD3B7 gene.

.0003
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, IVS2, 340G-T, +1

In a French family with neonatal cholestasis caused by C27 3-beta-HSD
deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found a splice junction
mutation in intron 2 of the HSD3B7 gene, 340+1G-T.

.0004
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, GLU147LYS

In 2 French families with neonatal cholestasis caused by C27 3-beta-HSD
deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found a missense mutation in
HSD3B7, glu147 to lys (E147K). The amino acid substitution resulted from
a G-to-A transition in exon 4. Although an apparently stable mRNA of
normal abundance was transcribed from the mutant gene, no enzyme
activity was detected in transfected cells. Glutamate-147 is conserved
among all members of the 3-beta-HSD enzyme family in human, mouse, and
rat.

.0005
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, 2-BP DEL, 63AG

In a British and a Canadian family with neonatal cholestasis caused by
C27 3-beta-HSD deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found deletion
of AG at nucleotide 63 in exon 1 of the HSD3B7 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, J. B.; Jacquemin, E.; Gerhardt, M.; Nazer, H.; Cresteil,
D.; Heubi, J. E.; Setchell, K. D. R.; Russell, D. W.: Molecular genetics
of 3-beta-hydroxy-D5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase deficiency in 16 patients
with loss of bile acid synthesis and liver disease. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 88: 1833-1841, 2003.

2. Clayton, P. T.; Leonard, J. V.; Lawson, A. M.; Setchell, K. D.
R.; Andersson, S.; Egestad, B.; Sjovall, J.: Familial giant cell
hepatitis associated with synthesis of 3-beta,7-alpha-dihydroxy- and
3-beta,7-alpha,12-alpha-trihydroxy-5-cholenoic acids. J. Clin. Invest. 79:
1031-1038, 1987.

3. Schwarz, M.; Wright, A. C.; Davis, D. L.; Nazer, H.; Bjorkhem,
I.; Russell, D. W.: The bile acid synthetic gene 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid
oxidoreductase is mutated in progressive intrahepatic cholestasis. J.
Clin. Invest. 106: 1175-1184, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/8/2004

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 5/8/2003

EDITED carol: 09/03/2013
carol: 6/14/2006
ckniffin: 6/6/2006
ckniffin: 2/24/2006
alopez: 9/8/2004
alopez: 5/8/2003

209901	TITLE *209901 BBS1 GENE; BBS1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BBS1 is 1 of 7 BBS proteins that form the stable core of a protein
complex required for ciliogenesis (Nachury et al., 2007).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Mykytyn et al. (2002) identified the gene that is
mutant in Bardet-Biedl syndrome-1 (see 209900). It was selected for
further examination because its encodes protein with modest similarity
to the BBS2 protein (606151). The gene consists of 3,370 bp with an open
reading frame of 593 codons. By Northern blot analysis, Mykytyn et al.
(2002) demonstrated that BBS1 was ubiquitously expressed, including
expression in fetal tissues, testis, retina, and adipose tissue. The
pattern of expression was similar to those seen for BBS2, BBS4 (600374),
and BBS6 (MKKS; 604896).

GENE STRUCTURE

Mykytyn et al. (2002) found that the BBS1 gene contains 17 exons and
spans approximately 23 kb. Mykytyn et al. (2003) showed that the BBS1
gene is highly conserved between mouse and human.

MAPPING

Mykytyn et al. (2002) identified the BBS1 gene within the critical
region defined for Bardet-Biedl syndrome-1 on chromosome 11q34.

Based on genomic sequence analysis, Sheffield (2003) assigned the mouse
Bbs1 gene to chromosome 19.

GENE FUNCTION

Nachury et al. (2007) found that BBS1, BBS2 (606151), BBS4 (600374),
BBS5 (603650), BBS7 (607590), BBS8 (TTC8; 608132), and BBS9 (607968)
copurified in stoichiometric amounts from human retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) cells and from mouse testis. PCM1 (600299) and
alpha-tubulin (see 602529)/beta-tubulin (191130) copurified in
substoichiometric amounts. The apparent molecular mass of the complex,
which Nachury et al. (2007) called the BBSome, was 438 kD, and it had a
sedimentation coefficient of 14S. The complex localized with PCM1 to
nonmembranous centriolar satellites in the cytoplasm and, in the absence
of PCM1, to the ciliary membrane. Cotransfection and immunoprecipitation
experiments suggested that BBS9 was the complex-organizing subunit and
that BBS5 mediated binding to phospholipids, predominantly
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate. BBS1 mediated interaction with RABIN8
(RAB3IP; 608686), the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the small G
protein RAB8 (RAB8A; 165040). Nachury et al. (2007) found that RAB8
promoted ciliary membrane growth through fusion of exocytic vesicles to
the base of the ciliary membrane. They concluded that BBS proteins
likely function in membrane trafficking to the primary cilium.

Loktev et al. (2008) found that BBIP10 (613605) copurified and
cosedimented with the BBS protein complex from RPE cells. Knockdown of
BBIP10 in RPE cells via small interfering RNA compromised assembly of
the BBS protein complex and caused failure of ciliogenesis. Knockdown of
BBS1, BBS5, or PCM1 resulted in a similar failure of ciliogenesis in RPE
cells. Depletion of BBIP10 or BBS8 increased the frequency of centrosome
splitting in interphase cells. BBIP10 also had roles in cytoplasmic
microtubule stabilization and acetylation that appeared to be
independent of its role in assembly of the BBS protein complex.

Using a protein pull-down assay with homogenized bovine retina, Jin et
al. (2010) showed that ARL6 (608845) bound the BBS protein complex.
Depletion of ARL6 in human RPE cells did not affect assembly of the
complex, but it blocked its localization to cilia. Targeting of ARL6 and
the protein complex to cilia required GTP binding by ARL6, but not ARL6
GTPase activity. When in the GTP-bound form, the N-terminal amphipathic
helix of ARL6 bound brain lipid liposomes and recruited the BBS protein
complex. Upon recruitment, the complex appeared to polymerize into an
electron-dense planar coat, and it functioned in lateral transport of
test cargo proteins to ciliary membranes.

Ishizuka et al. (2011) reported that phosphorylation of DISC1 (605210)
acts as a molecular switch from maintaining proliferation of mitotic
progenitor cells to activating migration of postmitotic neurons in mice.
Unphosphorylated DISC1 regulates canonical Wnt signaling via an
interaction with GSK3-beta (605004), whereas specific phosphorylation at
serine-710 triggers the recruitment of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (see
209900) proteins to the centrosome. In support of this model, loss of
BBS1 (209901) leads to defects in migration, but not proliferation,
whereas DISC1 knockdown leads to deficits in both. A phospho-dead mutant
can only rescue proliferation, whereas a phospho-mimic mutant rescues
exclusively migration defects. Ishizuka et al. (2011) concluded that
their data highlight a dual role for DISC1 in corticogenesis and
indicate that phosphorylation of this protein at serine-710 activates a
key developmental switch.

By mass spectrometric analysis of transgenic mouse testis, Seo et al.
(2011) found that Lxtfl1 (606568) copurified with human BBS4 and with
the core mouse BBS complex subunits Bbs1, Bbs2, Bbs5, Bbs7, Bbs8, and
Bbs9. Immunohistochemical analysis of human RPE cells showed
colocalization of LXTFL1 and BBS9 in cytoplasmic punctae. Use of small
interfering RNA revealed distinct functions for each BBS subunit in BBS
complex assembly and trafficking. LZTFL1 depletion and overexpression
studies showed a negative role for LZTFL1 in BBS complex trafficking,
but no effect of LZTFL1 on BBS complex assembly. Mutation analysis
revealed that the C-terminal half of Lztfl1 interacted with with the
C-terminal domain of Bbs9 and that the N-terminal half of Lztfl1
negatively regulated BBS complex trafficking. Depletion of several BBS
subunits and LZTFL1 also altered Hedgehog (SHH; 600725) signaling, as
measured by GLI1 (GLI; 165220) expression and ciliary trafficking of SMO
(SMOH; 601500).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using computational analysis, Jin et al. (2010) found that the BBS
protein complex shares structural features with the canonical coat
complexes COPI (601924), COPII (see 610511), and clathrin AP1 (see
603531). BBS4 and BBS8 consist almost entirely of tetratricopeptide
repeats (TPRs) (13 and 12.5 TPRs, respectively), which are predicted to
fold into extended rod-shaped alpha solenoids. BBS1, BBS2, BBS7, and
BBS9 each have an N-terminal beta-propeller fold followed by an
amphipathic helical linker and a gamma-adaptin (AP1G1; 603533) ear
motif. In BBS2, BBS7, and BBS9, the ear motif is followed by an
alpha/beta platform domain and an alpha helix. In BBS1, a 4-helix bundle
is inserted between the second and third blades of the beta propeller.
BBS5 contains 2 pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology domains and a 3-helix
bundle, while BBIP10 consists of 2 alpha helices. Jin et al. (2010)
concluded that the abundance of beta propellers, alpha solenoids, and
appendage domains inside the BBS protein complex suggests that it shares
an evolutionary relationship with canonical coat complexes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mykytyn et al. (2002) sequenced the BBS1 gene in the probands from 6
families (5 of Puerto Rican and 1 of Turkish ancestry) showing linkage
to the BBS1 region on chromosome 11. In a consanguineous Puerto Rican
family, they found a homozygous G-to-T transversion in exon 16 that
results in a nonsense mutation, glu549 to ter (E549X; 209901.0002). In a
second consanguineous Puerto Rican family, they found a homozygous
T-to-G transversion in exon 12, predicted to result in a nonconservative
substitution from methionine to arginine at codon 390 (M390R;
209901.0001). Two additional Puerto Rican families were compound
heterozygotes with respect to the E549X and M390R mutations. Analysis of
a fifth Puerto Rican revealed the presence of a heterozygous E549X
mutation and a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the +1 position of the
splice donor site in exon 4 (432+1G-A; 209901.0003). Affected
individuals in the consanguineous Turkish family showed a homozygous
deletion of 1 bp in exon 10, resulting in a premature termination at
codon 288 (tyr284fsX288; 209901.0004). In an evaluation of 60 unrelated
North American probands with BBS of mostly northern European ancestry
for the presence of the 4 mutations identified in the extended families,
using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, Mykytyn
et al. (2002) identified 22 individuals who had at least 1 copy of the
M390R mutation. Of these 22 individuals, 16 were homozygous with respect
to this variant (allele frequency = 0.32). A sequence variant was not
detected in 192 control chromosomes from individuals of mostly northern
European ancestry.

Mykytyn et al. (2002) found that in their families with BBS1 the
disorder segregated as an autosomal recessive disease, with no evidence
of involvement of the common M390R mutation in triallelic inheritance.
See the INHERITANCE section of 209900 for a full discussion. Badano et
al. (2003) found heterozygous mutation in BBS1 (209901.0006) and
homozygous mutation in BBS7 (607590.0002) in affected individuals,
raising the possibility that BBS7 may interact genetically with other
loci to produce the BBS phenotype.

Beales et al. (2003) presented a comprehensive analysis of the spectrum,
distribution, and involvement in nonmendelian trait transmission of
mutant alleles in BBS1, the most common BBS locus. Analyses of 259
independent families segregating a BBS phenotype indicated that BBS1
participates in complex inheritance and that, in different families,
mutations in BBS1 can interact genetically with mutations at each of the
other known BBS genes, as well as genes at unknown loci, to cause the
phenotype. Consistent with this model, they identified homozygous M390R
alleles (209901.0001), the most frequent BBS1 mutation, in asymptomatic
individuals in 2 families. Moreover, their statistical analyses
indicated that the prevalence of the M390R allele in the general
population is consistent with an oligogenic rather than a recessive
model of disease transmission. Although all BBS alleles appeared to be
capable of interacting genetically with each other, some genes,
especially BBS2 and BBS6, are more likely to participate in triallelic
inheritance, suggesting a variable ability of the BBS proteins to
interact genetically with each other.

Mykytyn et al. (2003) evaluated the involvement of the BBS1 gene in a
cohort of 129 probands with BBS and reported 10 novel BBS1 mutations,
including a leu518-to-pro (L518P; 209901.0005) mutation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Davis et al. (2007) generated a knockin mouse model of the BBS1 M390R
mutation. Mice homozygous for M390R recapitulated aspects of the human
phenotype, including retinal degeneration, male infertility, and
obesity. Morphologic evaluation of Bbs1 mutant brain revealed
ventriculomegaly of the lateral and third ventricles, thinning of the
cerebral cortex, and reduced volume of the corpus striatum and
hippocampus. Ultrastructural examination of the ependymal cell cilia
that lined the enlarged third ventricle of Bbs1 mutant brains showed
that, whereas the 9+2 arrangement of axonemal microtubules was intact,
elongated cilia and cilia with abnormally swollen distal ends were
present. Davis et al. (2007) concluded that the M390R mutation does not
affect axonemal structure, but it may play a role in regulation of cilia
assembly and/or function.

Using mice lacking Bbs2, Bbs4, or Bbs6 and mice with the M390R mutation
in Bbs1, Shah et al. (2008) showed that expression of BBS proteins was
not required for ciliogenesis, but their loss caused structural defects
in a fraction of cilia covering airway epithelia. The most common
abnormality was bulges filled with vesicles near the tips of cilia, and
this same misshapen appearance was present in airway cilia from all
mutant mouse strains. Cilia of Bbs4-null and Bbs1 mutant mice beat at a
lower frequency than wildtype cilia. Neither airway hyperresponsiveness
nor inflammation increased in Bbs2- or Bbs4-null mice immunized with
ovalbumin compared with wildtype mice. Instead, mutant animals were
partially protected from airway hyperresponsiveness.

By immunostaining for axonemal proteins, Tan et al. (2007) demonstrated
that mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons contain cilia. Bbs1-null and
Bbs4-null mice demonstrated behavioral deficits in thermosensation and
mechanosensation associated with alterations in the trafficking of the
thermosensory channel Trpv1 (602076) and the mechanosensory channel
Stoml3 (608327) within sensory neurons. The findings were replicated in
C. elegans lacking Bbs7 or Bbs8 (TTC8; 608132). Detailed examination of
9 patients with BBS showed a noticeable decrease in peripheral sensation
in most of them.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, MET390ARG

Mykytyn et al. (2002) identified a met390-to-arg (M390R) mutation in the
BBS1 gene in affected members of a consanguineous Puerto Rican family
with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900). The substitution results from a
T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1169 (1169T-G) in exon 12 (Mykytyn,
2002). Two other Puerto Rican families carried this mutation and the
glu549-to-ter mutation (209901.0002) in compound heterozygosity. Mykytyn
et al. (2002) found the M390R mutation in 22 of 60 unrelated North
American probands with Bardet-Biedl syndrome of mostly northern European
ancestry. Sixteen of the 22 individuals were homozygous for the variant
(allele frequency = 0.32).

Mykytyn et al. (2003) found that the M390R mutation accounts for
approximately 80% of all BBS1 mutations and is found on a similar
genetic background across populations.

Beales et al. (2003) identified homozygous M390R alleles in asymptomatic
individuals in 2 separate families. They interpreted this as consistent
with an oligogenic rather than a recessive model of disease
transmission, as seen in triallelic inheritance.

Fan et al. (2004) reported the cases of 2 sisters homozygous for the
M390R mutation. One sister, who was also heterozygous for a G169A
mutation in the BBS3 gene (600151.0002), was more severely affected than
the sister without the additional mutation, suggesting a modifying
effect of the mutation in BBS3.

.0002
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, GLU549TER

In a consanguineous Puerto Rican family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome
(209900), Mykytyn et al. (2002) found a homozygous G-to-T transversion
at nucleotide 1655 (1655G-T) in exon 16 of the BBS1 gene that resulted
in a glu549-to-ter (E549X) nonsense mutation.

.0003
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, IVS4, G-A, +1

In a Puerto Rican family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), Mykytyn et
al. (2002) found a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the +1 position of
the splice donor site in exon 4 of the BBS1 gene (432+1G-A). Affected
individuals were compound heterozygous for the E549X mutation
(209901.0002).

.0004
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, 1-BP DEL, 851A

In a consanguineous Turkish family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900),
Mykytyn et al. (2002) found a homozygous deletion of 1 bp in exon 10 of
the BBS1 gene (851delA), resulting in premature termination at codon 288
(tyr284fsX288).

.0005
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, LEU518PRO

One of 10 novel mutations in the BBS1 gene reported by Mykytyn et al.
(2003) was a 1553T-C transition in exon 15 of the cDNA, resulting in a
leu518-to-pro (L518P) change. It was detected in 3 patients with
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), all in combination with the M390R
mutation (209901.0001), and in none of 96 control subjects.

.0006
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 7
BBS1, GLU234LYS

In a family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), Badano et al. (2003)
found a heterozygous glu234-to-lys (E234K) mutation in the BBS1 gene in
all 3 affected members. These individuals were also homozygous for a
thr211-to-ile (T211I) amino acid substitution in the BBS7 gene
(607590.0002), raising the possibility that the BBS1 and BBS7 loci
interact. Since none of the unaffected sibs was homozygous for the
defect in BBS7, it was considered equally likely that the third mutant
allele (in BBS1) is either required for pathogenesis of the BBS7
phenotype or modifies the phenotype.

.0007
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, 1-BP DEL, 1650C

In 2 sisters with BBS1 (209900), Badano et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for mutations in the BBS1 gene: a 1-bp deletion
in exon 16, 1650delC, resulting in a frameshift at codon 548 and a
premature stop at codon 579, and met390-to-arg (M390R; 209901.0001). The
more severely affected sister was heterozygous for a thr325-to-pro
substitution in the MKKS gene (T325P; 604896.0014).

REFERENCE 1. Badano, J. L.; Ansley, S. J.; Leitch, C. C.; Lewis, R. A.; Lupski,
J. R.; Katsanis, N.: Identification of a novel Bardet-Biedl syndrome
protein, BBS7, that shares structural features with BBS1 and BBS2. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 72: 650-658, 2003.

2. Badano, J. L.; Kim, J. C.; Hoskins, B. E.; Lewis, R. A.; Ansley,
S. J.; Cutler, D. J.; Castellan, C.; Beales, P. L.; Leroux, M. R.;
Katsanis, N.: Heterozygous mutations in BBS1, BBS2 and BBS6 have
a potential epistatic effect on Bardet-Biedl patients with two mutations
at a second BBS locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1651-1659, 2003.

3. Beales, P. L.; Badano, J. L.; Ross, A. J.; Ansley, S. J.; Hoskins,
B. E.; Kirsten, B.; Mein, C. A.; Froguel, P.; Scambler, P. J.; Lewis,
R. A.; Lupski, J. R.; Katsanis, N.: Genetic interaction of BBS1 mutations
with alleles at other BBS loci can result in non-mendelian Bardet-Biedl
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 1187-1199, 2003.

4. Davis, R. E.; Swiderski, R. E.; Rahmouni, K.; Nishimura, D. Y.;
Mullins, R. F.; Agassandian, K.; Philp, A. R.; Searby, C. C.; Andrews,
M. P.; Thompson, S.; Berry, C. J.; Thedens, D. R.; Yang, B.; Weiss,
R. M.; Cassell, M. D.; Stone, E. M.; Sheffield, V. C.: A knockin
mouse model of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 M390R mutation has cilia
defects, ventriculomegaly, retinopathy, and obesity. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 19422-19427, 2007.

5. Fan, Y.; Esmail, M. A.; Ansley, S. J.; Blacque, O. E.; Boroevich,
K.; Ross, A. J.; Moore, S. J.; Badano, J. L.; May-Simera, H.; Compton,
D. S.; Green, J. S.; Lewis, R. A.; van Haelst, M. M.; Parfrey, P.
S.; Baillie, D. L.; Beales, P. L.; Katsanis, N.; Davidson, W. S.;
Leroux, M. R.: Mutations in a member of the Ras superfamily of small
GTP-binding proteins causes Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Nature Genet. 36:
989-993, 2004.

6. Ishizuka, K.; Kamiya, A.; Oh, E. C.; Kanki, H.; Seshadri, S.; Robinson,
J. F.; Murdoch, H.; Dunlop, A. J.; Kubo, K.; Furukori, K.; Huang,
B.; Zeledon, M.; Hayashi-Takagi, A.; Okano, H.; Nakajima, K.; Houslay,
M. D.: Katsanis, N.; Sawa, A.: DISC1-dependent switch from progenitor
proliferation to migration in the developing cortex. Nature 473:
92-96, 2011.

7. Jin, H.; White, S. R.; Shida, T.; Schulz, S.; Aguiar, M.; Gygi,
S. P.; Bazan, J. F.; Nachury, M. V.: The conserved Bardet-Biedl syndrome
proteins assemble a coat that traffics membrane proteins to cilia. Cell 141:
1208-1219, 2010.

8. Loktev, A. V.; Zhang, Q.; Beck, J. S.; Searby, C. C.; Scheetz,
T. E.; Bazan, J. F.; Slusarski, D. C.; Sheffield, V. C.; Jackson,
P. K.; Nachury, M. V.: A BBSome subunit links ciliogenesis, microtubule
stability, and acetylation. Dev. Cell 15: 854-865, 2008.

9. Mykytyn, K.: Personal Communication. Iowa City, Iowa  11/18/2002.

10. Mykytyn, K.; Nishimura, D. Y.; Searby, C. C.; Beck, G.; Bugge,
K.; Haines, H. L.; Cornier, A. S.; Cox, G. F.; Fulton, A. B.; Carmi,
R.; Iannaccone, A.; Jacobson, S. G.; and 9 others: Evaluation of
complex inheritance involving the most common Bardet-Biedl syndrome
locus (BBS1). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 429-437, 2003.

11. Mykytyn, K.; Nishimura, D. Y.; Searby, C. C.; Shastri, M.; Yen,
H.; Beck, J. S.; Braun, T.; Streb, L. M.; Cornier, A. S.; Cox, G.
F.; Fulton, A. B.; Carmi, R.; Luleci, G.; Chandrasekharappa, S. C.;
Collins, F. S.; Jacobson, S. G.; Heckenlively, J. R.; Weleber, R.
G.; Stone, E. M.; Sheffield, V. C.: Identification of the gene (BBS1)
most commonly involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a complex human obesity
syndrome. Nature Genet. 31: 435-438, 2002.

12. Nachury, M. V.; Loktev, A. V.; Zhang, Q.; Westlake, C. J.; Peranen,
J.; Merdes, A.; Slusarski, D. C.; Scheller, R. H.; Bazan, J. F.; Sheffield,
V. C.; Jackson, P. K.: A core complex of BBS proteins cooperates
with the GTPase Rab8 to promote ciliary membrane biogenesis. Cell 129:
1201-1213, 2007.

13. Seo, S.; Zhang, Q.; Bugge, K.; Breslow, D. K.; Searby, C. C.;
Nachury, M. V.; Sheffield, V. C.: A novel protein LZTFL1 regulates
ciliary trafficking of the BBSome and Smoothened. PLoS Genet. 7:
e1002358, 2011. Note: Electronic Article.

14. Shah, A. S.; Farmen, S. L.; Moninger, T. O.; Businga, T. R.; Andrews,
M. P.; Bugge, K.; Searby, C. C.; Nishimura, D.; Brogden, K. A.; Kline,
J. N.; Sheffield, V. C.; Welsh, M. J.: Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome
proteins alters the morphology and function of motile cilia in airway
epithelia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3380-3385, 2008.

15. Sheffield, V. C.: Personal Communication. Iowa City, Iowa
3/6/2003.

16. Tan, P. L.; Barr, T.; Inglis, P. N.; Mitsuma, N.; Huang, S. M.;
Garcia-Gonzalez, M. A.; Bradley, B. A.; Coforio, S.; Albrecht, P.
J.; Watnick, T.; Germino, G. G.; Beales, P. L.; Caterina, M. J.; Leroux,
M. R.; Rice, F. L.; Katsanis, N.: Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins
causes defects in peripheral sensory innervation and function. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 17524-17529, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/12/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/13/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/24/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/1999
Michael J. Wright - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/14/1994

EDITED carol: 12/21/2012
mgross: 11/12/2012
alopez: 7/8/2011
mgross: 10/15/2010
terry: 10/13/2010
wwang: 8/22/2008
ckniffin: 8/12/2008
mgross: 5/21/2008
mgross: 3/14/2008
mgross: 3/13/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
tkritzer: 5/24/2005
alopez: 9/14/2004
terry: 9/10/2004
carol: 8/19/2004
cwells: 6/9/2003
terry: 6/4/2003
terry: 3/12/2003
carol: 3/6/2003
alopez: 2/28/2003
tkritzer: 2/28/2003
terry: 2/27/2003
alopez: 11/19/2002
alopez: 9/16/2002
joanna: 7/25/2002
alopez: 7/18/2002
cwells: 7/16/2002
alopez: 10/5/2001
alopez: 4/2/2001
mgross: 1/18/2000
terry: 1/13/2000
mgross: 1/11/2000
terry: 12/20/1999
mgross: 7/6/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
mark: 4/14/1997
terry: 4/10/1997
mark: 3/6/1997
terry: 3/4/1997
terry: 10/18/1994
carol: 5/12/1994
mimadm: 4/29/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994

602330	TITLE *602330 ACTIN-BINDING LIM PROTEIN FAMILY, MEMBER 1; ABLIM1
;;ABLIM;;
LIM ACTIN-BINDING PROTEIN 1; LIMAB1;;
LIMATIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ABLIM1 encodes limatin, an actin-binding LIM domain protein (Roof et
al., 1997). LIM domains play key roles in the regulation of
developmental pathways. They were first identified as cysteine-rich
motifs found in 3 proteins: Lin-11, Isl-1 (ISL1; 600366), and Mec-3 (Kim
et al., 1997).

CLONING

By screening a human retina cDNA library with the sequence of dematin
(EPB49; 125305) as probe, Roof et al. (1997) identified a novel cDNA,
designated ABLIM. The deduced ABLIM protein, which the authors called
limatin (LIM + dematin), contains an N-terminal region with 4 double
zinc finger motifs (LIM domains) and a C-terminal cytoskeletal domain
that is approximately 50% identical to that of dematin, an
actin-bundling protein of the erythroid cytoskeleton. The ABLIM protein
exists in 3 alternatively spliced isoforms, all varying in the number of
LIM domains, with widespread tissue distribution. The full-length
778-amino acid protein is found exclusively in the retina and is
enriched in biochemical extracts of retinal rod inner segments.

GENE FUNCTION

Roof et al. (1997) found that all 3 limatin isoforms bind to actin
filaments in vitro through the dematin-like sequence. They also found
that limatin undergoes extensive phosphorylation in light-adapted
retinas in vivo and that its developmental expression in the retina
coincides with the elaboration of photoreceptor inner and outer
segments.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Kim et al. (1997) mapped the
human ABLIM gene to 10q25. Radiation hybrid mapping placed the gene in a
37-cR interval between markers D10S554 and D10S2390. By RFLP analysis,
they mapped the mouse Ablim gene to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, A. C.; Peters, L. L.; Knoll, J. H. M.; Van Huffel, C.; Ciciotte,
S. L.; Kleyn, P. W.; Chisti, A. H.: Limatin (LIMAB1), an actin-binding
LIM protein, maps to mouse chromosome 19 and human chromosome 10q25,
a region frequently deleted in human cancers. Genomics 46: 291-293,
1997.

2. Roof, D. J.; Hayes, A.; Adamian, M.; Chishti, A. H.; Li, T.: Molecular
characterization of abLIM, a novel actin-binding and double zinc finger
protein. J. Cell Biol. 138: 575-588, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1998

EDITED carol: 06/23/2009
carol: 1/16/2009
carol: 1/5/2009
mgross: 8/6/2007
mgross: 7/2/1999
alopez: 8/3/1998
dholmes: 3/9/1998
mark: 2/9/1998

300222	TITLE *300222 INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEIN 2A; ITM2A
;;E25A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential screening of a cDNA library constructed from in vitro
cultured condyles, Deleersnijder et al. (1996) isolated a novel gene in
the mouse, which they called E25A, or integral membrane protein-2
(Itm2). The full-length E25A cDNA was predicted to encode a type II
integral membrane protein of 263 amino acid residues. In situ
hybridization showed that E25A is expressed in the outer perichondrial
rim of the postnatal mandibular condyle, which contains the
proliferating progenitor cells, but not in the deeper layers of the
condyle containing the more differentiated chondroblasts and
chondrocytes. Strong in situ hybridization signals were also detected on
bone trabeculae of mature bone, in tooth germs, and in hair follicles.
Northern blot analysis showed strong expression in osteogenic tissues,
such as neonatal mouse calvaria, paws, and tail, and in skin. Homology
searches of DNA databanks showed that E25A belongs to a novel multigene
family, containing at least 3 members in both man and mouse.

Mao et al. (1998) found that the human homolog of murine E25A is
expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.

By subtractive hybridization for sequences differentially expressed by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, Rissoan et al. (2002) detected ITM2A,
which they designated BRI3. The deduced type II transmembrane protein
contains an N-terminal cytosolic domain, an uncleaved signal anchor
sequence, and a tyrosine-rich C-terminal extracellular domain. The
312-amino acid mouse Itm2a protein shares 91% homology with human ITM2A.
RT-PCR of human lymphoid cells showed higher expression of ITM2A in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells than in monocytes and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells. A faint band was detected in CD34-derived dendritic
cells. Northern blot analysis revealed a 2.1-kb transcript in several
lymphoid tissues, including appendix, peripheral blood leukocytes, bone
marrow, fetal liver, with lower levels in spleen, lymph nodes, and
thymus.

MAPPING

Deleersnijder et al. (1996) mapped the mouse E25A gene to the X
chromosome.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Pittois et al. (1999) mapped the
mouse Itm2a gene to chromosome XA2-A3 and the human homolog to
Xq13.3-q21.2.

REFERENCE 1. Deleersnijder, W.; Hong, G.; Cortvrindt, R.; Poirier, C.; Tylzanowski,
P.; Pittois, K.; Van Marck, E.; Merregaert, J.: Isolation of markers
for chondro-osteogenic differentiation using cDNA library subtraction:
Molecular cloning and characterization of a gene belonging to a novel
multigene family of integral membrane proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
19475-19482, 1996.

2. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

3. Pittois, K.; Wauters, J.; Bossuyt, P.; Deleersnijder, W.; Merregaert,
J.: Genomic organization and chromosomal localization of the Itm2a
gene. Mammalian Genome 10: 54-56, 1999.

4. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/3/1999

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 12/1/1999

EDITED mgross: 01/27/2003
terry: 1/17/2003
terry: 12/3/1999
carol: 12/3/1999
carol: 12/2/1999

603501	TITLE *603501 POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) GLYCOHYDROLASE; PARG
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The synthesis and rapid turnover of ADP-ribose polymers is an immediate
cellular response to DNA damage. Once synthesized by PARP (173870),
polymers are rapidly turned over and converted to free ADP-ribose by the
action of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG).

CLONING

By PCR with degenerate primers based on the partial protein sequence of
bovine PARG, Lin et al. (1997) isolated bovine PARG cDNAs. The protein
had a calculated molecular mass of 111 kD, nearly twice the size of the
59-kD enzymatically active PARG isolated from bovine thymus. Using an
activity gel assay of extracts from bacteria expressing PARG, the
authors determined that cDNA encoded proteins of approximately 115 and
59 kD. The larger protein was sensitive to proteolysis, yielding a
protein of approximately 59 kD. The enzymatically active 59-kD PARG
corresponded to the C-terminal portion of the protein. The authors
suggested that proteolysis explains the presence of PARG activity with a
molecular mass of approximately 74 and 59 kD in bovine thymus
preparations, and previous reports of a 74-kD PARG in guinea pig liver
and human placenta. Using the sequence of the bovine cDNA, they searched
sequence databases and identified human and rat PARG cDNAs.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Slade et al. (2011) showed that filamentous fungi and a number of
bacteria possess a divergent form of PARG that has all the main
characteristics of the human PARG enzyme. Slade et al. (2011) presented
the first PARG crystal structure (derived from the bacterium
Thermomonospora curvata), which revealed that the PARG catalytic domain
is a distant member of the ubiquitous ADP-ribose-binding macrodomain
family. High-resolution structures of T. curvata PARG in complexes with
ADP-ribose and the PARG inhibitor ADP-HPD, complemented by biochemical
studies, allowed the authors to propose a model for PAR binding and
catalysis by PARG.

GENE FUNCTION

The poly(ADP ribose) polymerase PARP1 (173870) and the apoptosis factor
AIF (AIFM1; 300169) are members of an apoptotic signaling cascade.
Andrabi et al. (2006) and Yu et al. (2006) demonstrated that PARP1
activity induces cell death through its product, poly(ADP ribose) (PAR)
polymer. Andrabi et al. (2006) showed that degradation of PAR polymer by
Parg or phosphodiesterase-1 (see PDE1A, 171890) prevented PAR
polymer-induced cell death in cultured neurons, and increased Parg
expression in mice reduced damage caused by ischemia following middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Yu et al. (2006) showed that Parg prevented
Parp1-dependent Aif release from mitochondria in mouse cortical neurons
and prevented its accumulation in nuclei.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ame et al. (1999) mapped the PARG
gene to human chromosome 10q11.23 and mouse chromosome 14B.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hanai et al. (2004) described a loss-of-function mutant in Drosophila.
The mutant lacked the conserved catalytic domain of poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase and was associated with lethality in the larval stages at
the normal development temperature of 25 degrees centigrade. However,
one-fourth of the mutants progressed to adult stage at 29 degrees
centigrade but showed progressive neurodegeneration with reduced
locomotor activity and a short life span. In association with this,
extensive accumulation of poly(ADP-ribose) could be detected in the
central nervous system. These results suggested that poly(ADP-ribose)
metabolism is required for maintenance of the normal function of
neuronal cells. Hanai et al. (2004) suggested that the phenotypes
observed in the Parg mutant might be useful to understand
neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer and Parkinson disease,
which are caused by abnormal accumulation of substances in nerve tissue.

REFERENCE 1. Ame, J.-C.; Apiou, F.; Jacobson, E. L.; Jacobson, M. K.: Assignment
of the poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase gene (PARG) to human chromosome
10q11.23 and mouse chromosome 14B by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 85: 269-270, 1999.

2. Andrabi, S. A.; Kim, N. S.; Yu, S.-W.; Wang, H.; Koh, D. W.; Sasaki,
M.; Klaus, J. A.; Otsuka, T.; Zhang, Z.; Koehler, R. C.; Hurn, P.
D.; Poirier, G. G.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Poly(ADP-ribose)
(PAR) polymer is a death signal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18308-18313,
2006.

3. Hanai, S.; Kanai, M.; Ohashi, S.; Okamoto, K.; Yamada, M.; Takahashi,
H.; Miwa, M.: Loss of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase causes progressive
neurodegeneration in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
82-86, 2004.

4. Lin, W.; Ame, J.-C.; Aboul-Ela, N.; Jacobson, E. L.; Jacobson,
M. K.: Isolation and characterization of the cDNA encoding bovine
poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 11895-11901,
1997.

5. Slade, D.; Dunstan, M. S.; Barkauskaite, E.; Weston, R.; Lafite,
P.; Dixon, N.; Ahel, M.; Leys, D.; Ahel, I.: The structure and catalytic
mechanism of a poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase. Nature 477: 616-620,
2011.

6. Yu, S.-W.; Andrabi, S. A.; Wang, H.; Kim, N. S.; Poirier, G. G.;
Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L.: Apoptosis-inducing factor mediates
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymer-induced cell death. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 18314-18319, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2004
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/1/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/8/1999

EDITED alopez: 03/09/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
wwang: 5/4/2010
alopez: 2/4/2007
terry: 10/12/2005
cwells: 2/10/2004
terry: 2/6/2004
terry: 3/27/2002
carol: 10/1/1999
alopez: 2/8/1999

606417	TITLE *606417 WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 11; WDR11
;;WDR15;;
KIAA1351;;
BROMODOMAIN- AND WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2, FORMERLY; BRWD2,
FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

WDR11 is a member of the WD repeat-containing protein family. For
background information on this family, see 604734.

CLONING

Allelic deletions in 10q25-q26 and 19q13.3-q13.4 are common genetic
alterations in glial tumors. Chernova et al. (2001) identified a
balanced t(10;19) reciprocal translocation in a glioblastoma cell line
that involved both critical regions on chromosomes 10 and 19. By
positional cloning of the translocation breakpoint, they identified a
novel WD-repeat gene on chromosome 10, which they designated WDR11.
WDR11 encodes a deduced 1,224-amino acid polypeptide with a calculated
molecular mass of 137 kD. It contains 6 putative WD40 repeats, a
predicted transmembrane region, and a tyrosine kinase phosphorylation
site. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of 3 major
transcripts (4.5, 2.7 and 2.0 kb) in all tissues tested. Chernova et al.
(2001) determined that the translocation resulted in deletion of exon 5
and fusion of intron 4 of WDR11 to the 3-prime untranslated region of
ZNF320 (606427), a novel member of the Kruppel-like zinc finger gene
family on chromosome 19. Since ZNF320 is oriented toward the centromere
of chromosome 19, both genes appeared on the same derivative chromosome,
der(10). The chimeric transcript encodes an aberrant WDR11 polypeptide,
which is truncated after the second of the 6 WD repeats. Because of the
localization of WDR11 in a region frequently showing loss of
heterozygosity in glioblastoma (see DMBT1; 601969) and because WDR11 is
inactivated in glioblastoma cells, Chernova et al. (2001) considered
WDR11 to be a candidate tumor suppressor gene involved in tumorigenesis
of glial and other tumors.

To investigate developmental expression of Wdr11, Kim et al. (2010)
performed whole-mount in situ hybridization analysis in mouse embryos
from days E10.5 to E14.5. As early as E10.5, the entire developing
central nervous system, except for the spinal cord, revealed Wdr11
expression. The neuroepithelium, including the diencephalic region that
gives rise to hypothalamic neurons where GnRH (152760) neurons reside,
stained strongly for Wdr11 at E11.5 and E12.5. At E14.5, high levels of
Wdr11 expression were particularly noteworthy in the developing cortex
and olfactory bulb. In the adult brain, intense Wdr11 expression was
restricted to the olfactory bulb, the olfaction-related piriform cortex,
the granule cell layer of the cerebellum, and neurons of the hippocampal
formation. Kim et al. (2010) noted that the pattern of expression was
consistent with a role for WDR11 in both normosmic and anosmic forms of
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chernova et al. (2001) determined that the WDR11 gene contains 29 exons
distributed over 58 kb and is oriented towards the telomere.

MAPPING

By positional cloning, Chernova et al. (2001) mapped the WDR11 gene to
chromosome 10q26.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Kim et al. (2010) identified EMX1
(600034) as a WDR11 binding partner. The interaction was confirmed in
mammalian cells by coimmunoprecipitation assays and further confirmed by
GST pull-down analysis. Kim et al. (2010) generated WDR11 deletion
mutants and performed GST pull-down assays to assess binding, which
demonstrated that both the N terminus and the central portion of WDR11
bind to EMX1, whereas the C terminus does not. Immunostaining in a
physiologically relevant human cell system consisting of immortalized
human embryonic olfactory GnRH neuroblasts isolated from olfactory
epithelium of an 8- to 12-week-old human embryo (FCNB4-hTERT cells)
localized WDR11 to the cytoplasm. Fluorescence microscopy of transfected
U2OS cells also showed a cytoplasmic localization for WDR11, whereas
EMX1 localized to the nucleus. However, after treatment with leptomycin
B, an inhibitor of nuclear export, both EMX1 and WDR11 colocalized in
the nucleus, suggesting that WDR11 might be shuttling between nucleus
and cytoplasm.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kim et al. (2010) screened 201 normosmic and hyposmic/anosmic patients
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH14; 614858) for mutations in the
candidate gene WDR11 (606417) and identified 5 different heterozygous
missense mutations in 6 unrelated probands, including 5 normosmic
patients (see, e.g., 606417.0001 and 606417.0002) and 1 anosmic patient
(606417.0003). DNA from the parents was unavailable, but the mutations
were not found in more than 400 controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 14 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
WDR11, PHE1150LEU

In a man with incomplete hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and an unrelated
woman with complete HH, both of whom were normosmic (HH14; 614858), Kim
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 3450T-G transversion in
exon 28 of the WDR11 gene, resulting in a phe1150-to-leu (F1150L)
substitution at a highly conserved residue near the C terminus. The
mutation was not found in 420 white controls. Haplotype analysis
indicated a shared haplotype around WDR11, suggesting that the 2
patients were likely to be descended from a recent common ancestor.

.0002
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 14 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
WDR11, ALA435THR

In a Turkish man with complete hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, who had
bilateral cryptorchidism and a normal sense of smell (HH14; 614858), Kim
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1303G-A transition in exon
10 of the WDR11 gene, resulting in an ala435-to-thr (A435T) substitution
at a highly conserved residue within the sixth WD domain. Transfection
studies in HEK293 cells demonstrated that the A435T mutation abolishes
EMX1 (600034) binding. The mutation was not found in 402 Turkish
controls or 426 white controls.

.0003
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 14 WITH ANOSMIA
WDR11, HIS690GLN

In a man with anosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH14; 614858), Kim
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 2070T-A transversion in
exon 16 of the WDR11 gene, resulting in a his690-to-gln (H690Q)
substitution at a highly conserved residue within the ninth WD domain.
Transfection studies in HEK293 cells demonstrated that the H690Q
mutation abolishes EMX1 (600034) binding. The mutation was not found in
420 white controls.

REFERENCE 1. Chernova, O. B.; Hunyadi, A.; Malaj, E.; Pan, H.; Crooks, C.; Roe,
B.; Cowell, J. K.: A novel member of the WD-repeat gene family, WDR11,
maps to the 10q26 region and is disrupted by a chromosome translocation
in human glioblastoma cells. Oncogene 20: 5378-5392, 2001.

2. Kim, H.-G.; Ahn, J.-W.; Kurth, I.; Ullmann, R.; Kim, H.-T.; Kulharya,
A.; Ha, K.-S.; Itokawa, Y.; Meliciani, I.; Wenzel, W.; Lee, D.; Rosenberger,
G.; and 12 others: WDR11, a WD protein that interacts with transcription
factor EMX1, is mutated in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
and Kallmann syndrome. Am. J. Hum.  Genet. 87: 465-479, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/29/2001

EDITED carol: 10/11/2012
mgross: 2/26/2010
alopez: 10/27/2009
mgross: 9/2/2005
alopez: 11/3/2003
carol: 10/31/2001
carol: 10/29/2001

600069	TITLE *600069 URIDINE DIPHOSPHATE GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B15; UGT2B15
;;UDP GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B15;;
UDP GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B15;;
URIDINE DIPHOSPHATE GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B8;;
UDP GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B8; UGT2B8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The UGTs are of major importance in the conjugation and subsequent
elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds.
UGT2B8 demonstrates reactivity with estriol. See UGT2B4 (600067).

CLONING

Coffman et al. (1990) found that the cDNA corresponding to UGT2B8 is
2,094 bp and encodes a protein of 523 amino acids, including a 16-amino
acid leader sequence, and has an untranslated 3-prime region of 525 bp.

MAPPING

The steroid-metabolizing isoforms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase are
encoded by multiple genes. By fluorescence in situ hybridization with a
YAC containing all 3 genes, Monaghan et al. (1994) localized UGT2B4,
UGT2B9 (600068), and UGT2B15 to 4q13. They provisionally ordered the
genes as UGT2B9--UGT2B4--UGT2B15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Iida et al. (2002) provided a catalog of 86 SNPs in 3 uridine
diphosphate glycosyltransferase genes: UGT2A1 (604716), UGT2B15, and
UGT8 (601291).

POPULATION GENETICS

Using DNA from 100 healthy unrelated Caucasian volunteers, Menard et al.
(2009) characterized the common UGT2B17 (601903) and UGT2B28 (606497)
deletions and observed that their cooccurrence with a D85Y polymorphism
(dbSNP rs1902023) in the UGT2B15 gene generates 7 distinct haplotypes.
The authors concluded that analyzing copy number variation of UGT2B17
without evaluating UGT2B28 and the D85Y variant in UGT2B15 may over- or
underestimate the phenotypic impact of each gene.

REFERENCE 1. Coffman, B. L.; Tephly, T. R.; Irshaid, Y. M.; Green, M. D.; Smith,
C.; Jackson, M. R.; Wooster, R.; Burchell, B.: Characterization and
primary sequence of a human hepatic microsomal estriol UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 281: 170-175, 1990.

2. Iida, A.; Saito, S.; Sekine, A.; Mishima, C.; Kitamura, Y.; Kondo,
K.; Harigae, S.; Osawa, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Catalog of 86 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in three uridine diphosphate glycosyltransferase
genes: UGT2A1, UGTB15, and UGT8. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 505-510, 2002.

3. Menard, V.; Eap, O.; Harvey, M.; Guillemette, C.; Levesque, E.
: Copy-number variations (CNVs) of the human sex steroid metabolizing
genes UGT2B17 and UGT2B28 and their associations with a UGT2B15 functional
polymorphism. Hum. Mutat. 30: 1310-1319, 2009.

4. Monaghan, G.; Clarke, D. J.; Povey, S.; See, C. G.; Boxer, M.;
Burchell, B.: Isolation of a human YAC contig encompassing a cluster
of UGT2 genes and its regional localization to chromosome 4q13. Genomics 23:
496-499, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/17/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/22/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/3/1994

EDITED wwang: 11/23/2009
terry: 11/17/2009
cwells: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 1/7/2003
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
alopez: 7/7/1998
alopez: 6/22/1998
alopez: 5/20/1998
carol: 12/2/1994
terry: 8/4/1994
terry: 8/3/1994

179710	TITLE *179710 REGULATOR OF CHROMOSOME CONDENSATION 1; RCC1
;;CHROMOSOME CONDENSATION 1; CHC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mitotic cells possess chromosome-condensing factor(s), the presence of
which is shown by fusing mitotic and interphase cells. Upon fusion, the
chromatin is condensed and exhibits various forms of prematurely
condensed chromosomes (PCCs), depending on the phase of the cell. The
condensation process is essential for the even distribution of genetic
material into daughter cells. On the other hand, transcription cannot
occur from the mitotically condensed chromosomes. Cells obviously must
have regulatory mechanisms that allow condensation of the chromatin to
occur at a precisely correct time in the cell cycle. In the normal cell
cycle, the chromosome-condensing factor(s) appears in the early G2 phase
and accumulates toward the mitotic phase. Mutations associated with this
step in the cell cycle have to be isolated as temperature-sensitive
mutants (Kai et al., 1986). Ohtsubo et al. (1987) cloned the human RCC1
gene after DNA-mediated gene transfer into a temperature-sensitive
mutant which shows premature chromosome condensation at nonpermissive
temperatures (39.5-40 degrees C). This gene codes for a 2.5-kb
polyadenylated RNA that is well conserved in hamsters and humans.
Ohtsubo et al. (1987) found 2 cDNA clones in a human library that
complemented the temperature-sensitive mutation with an efficiency
comparable to that of the genomic DNA clone. The clones appeared to
encode a protein of 421 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight
of 44,847.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furuno et al. (1991) isolated total genomic DNA for the human RCC1 gene
from HeLa cells and determined its complete nucleotide sequence (34,641
bp) by the shotgun sequencing method. The gene was found to have 14
exons, 8 of which (starting from the seventh one) coded the 7 repeated
sequences of RCC1 protein. A single exon corresponded roughly to each
repeat of the RCC1 protein except for the middle one, indicating that
the RCC1 gene was generated through amplification of a primordial exon.
Primer extension analysis demonstrated the presence of an internal
promoter.

MAPPING

By hybridization to DNA from sorted chromosomes, Ohtsubo et al. (1987)
concluded that the gene, which they symbolized RCC1, is located on
chromosome 1. By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a
suppression FISH method for elimination of repetitive sequences in the
genomic clone, Nishimoto et al. (1994) mapped the CHC1 gene to 1p36.1.
They reported work of others indicating that the mouse counterpart maps
to the distal region of chromosome 4.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Makde et al. (2010) determined the crystal structure of a complex of
Drosophila RCC1 and the nucleosome core particle at 2.9-angstrom
resolution, providing an atomic view of how a chromatin protein
interacts with the histone and DNA components of the nucleosome. Their
structure also suggested that the Widom 601 DNA positioning sequence
present in the nucleosomes forms a 145-bp nucleosome core particle, not
the expected canonical 147-bp particle.

GENE FUNCTION

Bischoff et al. (1990) demonstrated that RCC1 protein is homologous to a
47-kD nuclear protein recognized by antikinetochore autoimmune sera from
patients with CREST syndrome (181750).

Hayashi et al. (1995) showed that, both in mammalian cells and in yeast,
RANBP1 (601180) acts as a negative regulator of RCC1 by inhibiting
RCC1-stimulated guanine nucleotide release from RAN (601179). See also
601181.

Ohba et al. (1999) demonstrated that the nucleotide exchange activity of
RCC1, the only known nucleotide exchange factor for RAN, was required
for microtubule aster formation with or without demembranated sperm in
Xenopus egg extracts arrested in meiosis II. In the RCC1-depleted egg
extracts, RanGTP (see 602362), but not RanGDP, induced self-organization
of microtubule asters, and the process required the activity of dynein
(see 603297). Thus, RAN was shown to regulate formation of the
microtubule network.

Adding chromatin beads to Xenopus egg extracts causes nucleation of
microtubules, which eventually reorganize into a bipolar spindle. Using
this assay, Carazo-Salas et al. (1999) demonstrated that the activity of
chromosome-associated RCC1 protein is required for spindle formation.
When in the GTP-bound state (RanGTP), RAN itself induces microtubule
nucleation and spindle-like structures in M-phase extract. Carazo-Salas
et al. (1999) proposed that RCC1 generates a high local concentration of
RanGTP around chromatin which, in turn, induces the local nucleation of
microtubules.

The Ran GTPase (601179) controls nucleocytoplasmic transport, mitotic
spindle formation, and nuclear envelope assembly. These functions rely
on the association of the Ran-specific exchange factor, RCC1, with
chromatin. Nemergut et al. (2001) found that RCC1 binds directly to
mononucleosomes and to histones H2A and H2B (142711). RCC1 utilizes
these histones to bind Xenopus sperm chromatin, and the binding of RCC1
to nucleosomes or histones stimulates the catalytic activity of RCC1.
Nemergut et al. (2001) proposed that the docking of RCC1 to H2A/H2B
establishes the polarity of the Ran-GTP gradient that drives nuclear
envelope assembly, nuclear transport, and other nuclear events.

Li and Zheng (2004) provided evidence that CDC2 (116940) coordinates
spindle assembly with the cell cycle during mitosis through
phosphorylation of RCC1. CDC2 phosphorylates RCC1 on serines located in
or near its nuclear localization signal. This phosphorylation activates
RCC1 to generate RanGTP on mitotic chromosomes, which is required for
spindle assembly and chromosome segregation.

At the time of the report of Schaner Tooley et al. (2010), the RAN
guanine nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 was the only protein for which
any biologic function of alpha-N-methylation had been identified.
Methylation-defective mutants of RCC1 have reduced affinity for DNA (Hao
and Macara, 2008) and cause mitotic defects (Chen et al., 2007), but
further characterization of this modification had been hindered by
ignorance of the responsible methyltransferase. Schaner Tooley et al.
(2010) reported the discovery of the first alpha-N-methyltransferase,
which they named N-terminal RCC1 methyltransferase (NRMT; 613560).
Substrate docking and mutational analysis of RCC1 defined the NRMT
recognition sequence and enabled the identification of numerous
methylation targets, including SET (600960) and RB1 (614041). Knockdown
of NRMT recapitulated the multispindle phenotype seen with
methylation-defective RCC1 mutants, demonstrating the importance of
alpha-N-methylation for normal bipolar spindle formation and chromosome
segregation.

NOMENCLATURE

RCC1 was used by HGM workshops for the primary renal cell carcinoma
locus on 3p (144700). CHC1 is another symbol for this locus (McAlpine,
1988).

REFERENCE 1. Bischoff, F. R.; Maier, G.; Tilz, G.; Ponstingl, H.: A 47-kDa
human nuclear protein recognized by antikinetochore autoimmune sera
is homologous with the protein encoded by RCC1, a gene implicated
in onset of chromosome condensation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 8617-8621,
1990.

2. Carazo-Salas, R. E.; Guarguaglini, G.; Gruss, O. J.; Segref, A.;
Karsenti, E.; Mattaj, I. W.: Generation of GTP-bound Ran by RCC1
is required for chromatin-induced mitotic spindle formation. Nature 400:
178-181, 1999.

3. Chen, T.; Muratore, T. L.; Schaner-Tooley, C. E.; Shabanowitz,
J.; Hunt, D. F.; Macara, I. G.: N-terminal alpha-methylation of RCC1
is necessary for stable chromatin association and normal mitosis. Nature
Cell Biol. 9: 596-603, 2007.

4. Furuno, N.; Nakagawa, K.; Eguchi, U.; Ohtsubo, M.; Nishimoto, T.;
Soeda, E.: Complete nucleotide sequence of the human RCC1 gene involved
in coupling between DNA replication and mitosis. Genomics 11: 459-461,
1991. Note: Erratum: Genomics 12: 181 only, 1992.

5. Hao, Y.; Macara, I. G.: Regulation of chromatin binding by a conformational
switch in the tail of the Ran exchange factor RCC1. J. Cell. Biol. 182:
827-836, 2008.

6. Hayashi, N.; Yokoyama, N.; Seki, T.; Azuma, Y.; Ohba, T.; Nishimoto,
T.: RanBP1, a Ras-like nuclear G protein binding to Ran/TC4, inhibits
RCC1 via Ran/TC4. Molec. Gen. Genet. 247: 661-669, 1995.

7. Kai, R.; Ohtsubo, M.; Sekiguchi, M.; Nishimoto, T.: Molecular
cloning of a human gene that regulates chromosome condensation and
is essential for cell proliferation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 2027-2032,
1986.

8. Li, H.-Y.; Zheng, Y.: Phosphorylation of RCC1 in mitosis is essential
for producing a high RanGTP concentration on chromosomes and for spindle
assembly in mammalian cells. Genes Dev. 18: 512-527, 2004.

9. Makde, R. D.; England, J. R.; Yennawar, H. P.; Tan, S.: Structure
of RCC1 chromatin factor bound to the nucleosome core particle. Nature 467:
562-566, 2010.

10. McAlpine, P. J.: Personal Communication. Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada  6/22/1988.

11. Nemergut, M. E.; Mizzen, C. A.; Stukenberg, T.; Allis, C. D.;
Macara, I. G.: Chromatin docking and exchange activity enhancement
of RCC1 by histones H2A and H2B. Science 292: 1540-1543, 2001.

12. Nishimoto, T.; Seino, H.; Seki, N.; Hori, T.-A.: The human CHC1
gene encoding RCC1 (regulator of chromosome condensation) (CHC1) is
localized to human chromosome 1p36.1. Genomics 23: 719-721, 1994.

13. Ohba, T.; Nakamura, M.; Nishitani, H.; Nishimoto, T.: Self-organization
of microtubule asters induced in Xenopus egg extracts by GTP-bound
Ran. Science 284: 1356-1358, 1999.

14. Ohtsubo, M.; Kai, R.; Furuno, N.; Sekiguchi, T.; Sekiguchi, M.;
Hayashida, H.; Kuma, K.; Miyata, T.; Fukushige, S.; Murotsu, T.; Matsubara,
K.; Nishimoto, T.: Isolation and characterization of the active cDNA
of the human cell cycle gene (RCC1) involved in the regulation of
onset of chromosome condensation. Genes Dev. 1: 585-593, 1987.

15. Schaner Tooley, C. E.; Petkowski, J. J.; Muratore-Schroeder, T.
L.; Balsbaugh, J. L.; Shabanowitz, J.; Sabat, M.; Minor, W.; Hunt,
D. F.; Macara, I. G.: NRMT is an alpha-N-methyltransferase that methylates
RCC1 and retinoblastoma protein. Nature 466: 1125-1128, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/17/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/11/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/20/1999
Alan F. Scott - edited: 4/5/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/3/1987

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
alopez: 3/8/2013
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 10/12/2010
terry: 10/12/2010
alopez: 9/17/2010
mgross: 9/16/2005
mgross: 5/11/2004
alopez: 4/15/2002
terry: 4/12/2002
cwells: 6/12/2001
cwells: 6/11/2001
terry: 6/7/2001
alopez: 8/25/1999
alopez: 5/20/1999
terry: 5/20/1999
dkim: 7/24/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 2/3/1998
carol: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 4/5/1996
mark: 4/4/1996
carol: 12/13/1994
mimadm: 4/29/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/1/1991

606534	TITLE *606534 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIIA, POLYPEPTIDE 43; CYP3A43
DESCRIPTION Subfamily IIIA of the cytochrome P450 family is considered to be the
major drug metabolizing subfamily. Its members are localized in the
organs most associated with drug disposition, including the liver,
gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. The major isoform in liver is CYP3A4
(124010), whereas CYP3A5 (605325) is present at only 10 to 30% of CYP3A4
levels, and CYP3A7 (605340) is not clearly present in adult liver at
all.

CLONING

By use of PCR on liver cDNA and 3-prime RACE, Domanski et al. (2001)
isolated a cDNA encoding CYP3A43, a novel cytochrome P450 IIIA isoform.
Sequence analysis predicted that the 503-amino acid protein differs from
the other forms at the N terminus as well as at 2 C-terminal conserved
sites and 4 sites that are important for the regioselectivity of steroid
hydroxylation. RNA dot-blot analysis detected only weak expression in
liver, whereas PCR of cDNA panels found expression in liver, kidney,
pancreas, and prostate as well as fetal liver and fetal skeletal muscle.
SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis showed expression of an approximately
55-kD protein. Functional analysis indicated that, under appropriate
conditions, CYP3A43 exhibits low but reproducible testosterone
6-beta-hydroxylase activity. Gellner et al. (2001) found the highest
expression level of CYP3A43 mRNA in prostate, an organ with extensive
steroid metabolism. It was also expressed in several other tissues
including liver, where it could be induced by rifampicin.

By EST database searching and 5-prime RACE, Westlind et al. (2001) also
obtained a cDNA encoding CYP3A43. The deduced protein is 76%, 76%, and
72% identical to CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7, respectively. Real-time PCR
in 10 different livers revealed that CYP3A43 is expressed at 0.1% and 2%
of the levels of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5.

GENE STRUCTURE

By RT-PCR analysis, Domanski et al. (2001) and Westlind et al. (2001)
determined that the CYP3A43 gene contains 13 exons and may have splice
variants.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Gellner et al. (2001) mapped the CYP3A43 gene
within a 231-kb region on chromosome 7q21.1, along with the CYP3A4,
CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 genes and 3 pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Domanski, T. L.; Finta, C.; Halpert, J. R.; Zaphiropoulos, P. G.
: cDNA cloning and initial characterization of CYP3A43, a novel human
cytochrome P450. Molec. Pharm. 59: 386-392, 2001.

2. Gellner, K.; Eiselt, R.; Hustert, E.; Arnold, H.; Koch, I.; Haberl,
M.; Deglmann, C. J.; Burk, O.; Buntefuss, D.; Escher, S.; Bishop,
C.; Koebe, H.-G.; Brinkmann, U.; Klenk, H.-P.; Kleine, K.; Meyer,
U. A.; Wojnowski, L.: Genomic organization of the human CYP3A locus:
identification of a new, inducible CYP3A gene. Pharmacogenetics 11:
111-121, 2001.

3. Westlind, A.; Malmebo, S.; Johansson, I.; Otter, C.; Andersson,
T. B.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.; Oscarson, M.: Cloning and tissue distribution
of a novel human cytochrome P450 of the CYP3A subfamily, CYP3A43. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 281: 1349-1355, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/6/2001

EDITED mgross: 07/11/2002
carol: 12/7/2001

