300654	TITLE *300654 FATTY ACID AMIDE HYDROLASE 2; FAAH2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Fatty acid amide hydrolases, such as FAAH1 (FAAH; 602935) and FAAH2,
hydrolyze primary fatty acid amide substrates (e.g., oleamide) and may
play a role in fatty acid catabolism (summary by Wei et al., 2006).

CLONING

By activity-based protein profiling in breast cancer and ovarian cancer
cell lines, Wei et al. (2006) cloned FAAH2. The deduced 532-amino acid
FAAH2 protein contains a predicted N-terminal transmembrane domain, an
amidase signature sequence containing the ser-ser-lys catalytic triad,
and shares approximately 20% amino acid identity with FAAH1. FAAH2 was
detected in the membrane fraction of transfected cancer cells, and
protein protection assays showed that FAAH2 is luminally oriented in the
membrane, unlike the cytoplasmic orientation of FAAH1. RT-PCR analysis
detected FAAH2 expression in human heart, kidney, liver, lung, and
prostate. Homologs of FAAH2 were identified in primates, marsupial, and
frog, but not in mouse or rat.

GENE FUNCTION

Wei et al. (2006) showed that mammalian cells expressing FAAH2 displayed
high oleamide hydrolase activity. FAAH2 displayed activity over a wide
range of endogenous fatty acid amide substrates and highest activity
with N-oleoyl ethanolamine (C18:1 N-acylethanolamine). Known inhibitors
of FAAH1 also inhibited FAAH2 activity.

MAPPING

Wei et al., 2006 noted that the FAAH2 gene maps to chromosome Xp11.

REFERENCE 1. Wei, B. Q.; Mikkelsen, T. S.; McKinney, M. K.; Lander, E. S.; Cravatt,
B. F.: A second fatty acid amide hydrolase with variable distribution
among placental mammals. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 36569-36578, 2006.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/11/2007

EDITED alopez: 01/13/2011
terry: 1/4/2011
wwang: 7/11/2007

610123	TITLE *610123 5-@HYDROXYTRYPTAMINE RECEPTOR 3, SUBUNIT E; HTR3E
;;SEROTONIN 5-HT-3E RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION For background information on the serotonin (5-HT) receptor gene family,
see 182131.

CLONING

The serotonin receptor 5-HT3 is an oligomeric complex composed of 5
subunits. Using BLAST analysis with a consensus sequence derived from
HTR3A (182139) and HTR3B (604654), Niesler et al. (2003) identified and
subsequently cloned 2 novel homologous genes, HTR3D and HTR3E. The HTR3E
gene encodes a predicted protein of 471 amino acids including a 16-amino
acid signal sequence, 4 transmembrane domains, and several potential
glycosylation and phosphorylation sites. Sequence comparisons showed
that HTR3C, HTR3D, and HTR3E share amino acid sequence identities of
64.8 to 74.3%; multiple sequence alignments suggested that HTR3C
(610121), HTR3D (610122), and HTR3E share a common evolutionary history,
whereas HTR3A and HTR3B are evolutionarily more distant. RT-PCR analysis
showed HTR3E expression only in adult colon and intestine.

Karnovsky et al. (2003) identified HTR3E and showed using RT-PCR that 2
alternative first exons are used, encoding predicted proteins of either
456 or 471 amino acids. HTR3E contains 6 proline residues necessary for
normal 5-HT3 receptor function. RT-PCR showed very strong expression in
small intestine and weak expression in spinal cord and retina. HTR3E is
also expressed in the human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines SW480
and differentiated Caco-2. Southern blot analyses of zooblots showed
HTR3E hybridization to human, dog, cow, pig, rabbit, and chicken genomic
DNA, but not to mouse or rat genomic DNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in situ hybridization, Kapeller et al. (2008) observed
colocalization of HTR3E with microRNA-510 (MIR510; 610123) in
enterocytes of colonic mucosa and in myenteric plexus. They identified
an MIR510-binding site in the 3-prime UTR of the HTR3E gene. Following
transfection of Colo320 cells, MIR510 downregulated expression of a
reporter gene that included the HTR3E 3-prime UTR in a dose-dependent
manner. Quantitative real-time PCR showed that MIR510 binding did not
affect the stability of HTR3E mRNA, suggesting that MIR510 repressed
HTR3E expression at the translational level.

GENE STRUCTURE

Karnovsky et al. (2003) reported that the HTR3E gene contains 9 exons
spanning at least 7.7 kb. They also found an additional alternative
first exon that includes exon 2 and 112 nucleotides between exons 1 and
2.

MAPPING

Niesler et al. (2003) mapped the HTR3E gene to chromosome 3q27 by FISH.
PCR and hybridization analysis showed that HTR3E, HTR3C, and HTR3D form
a cluster and map within a 100-kb region.

REFERENCE 1. Kapeller, J.; Houghton, L. A.; Monnikes, H.; Walstab, J.; Moller,
D.; Bonisch, H.; Burwinkel, B.; Autschbach, F.; Funke, B.; Lasitschka,
F.; Gassler, N.; Fischer, C.; and 10 others: First evidence for
an association of a functional variant in the microRNA-510 target
site of the serotonin receptor-type 3E gene with diarrhea predominant
irritable bowel syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 2967-2977, 2008.

2. Karnovsky, A. M.; Gotow, L. F.; McKinley, D. D.; Piechan, J. L.;
Ruble, C. L.; Mills, C. J.; Schellin, K. A. B.; Slightom, J. L.; Fitzgerald,
L. R.; Benjamin, C. W.; Roberds, S. L.: A cluster of novel serotonin
receptor 3-like genes on human chromosome 3. Gene 319: 137-148,
2003.

3. Niesler, B.; Frank, B.; Kapeller, J.; Rappold, G. A.: Cloning,
physical mapping and expression analysis of the human 5-HT(3) serotonin
receptor-like genes HTR3C, HTR3D and HTR3E. Gene 310: 101-111, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/23/2011

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/16/2006

EDITED mgross: 12/09/2011
terry: 11/23/2011
alopez: 5/16/2006

602516	TITLE *602516 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 4; RGS4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins have been shown to
accelerate the GTPase activities of G protein alpha-subunits, thus
driving G proteins into their inactive GDP-bound forms. See 602189 for
further background information.

CLONING

By searching for homologs of the yeast SST2 gene product, which
regulates G protein signaling, Druey et al. (1996) cloned RGS4 cDNAs
from rat and human brain cDNA libraries. The human RGS4 cDNA encodes a
predicted 205-amino acid protein that is 97% identical to rat Rgs4.
Northern blot analysis detected a single human RGS4 transcript that was
expressed exclusively in brain. RGS4 partially complemented a yeast SST2
mutation, but it required the G protein alpha-subunit to function. Druey
et al. (1996) suggested that RGS4, and presumably other RGSs, negatively
regulate signaling upstream or at the level of the heterotrimeric G
protein.

Koelle and Horvitz (1996) cloned a human RGS4 cDNA by searching for
homologs of the C. elegans egl-10 gene (see 602517).

Using RT-PCR, Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) found that Rgs4 was highly
expressed in the MIN6 murine insulinoma cell line and in mouse
pancreatic islets.

GENE FUNCTION

Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) showed that knockdown of Rgs4 in MIN6 cells
caused a concentration-dependent increase in intracellular calcium,
increased basal insulin release, and enhanced glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion. Rgs4 coimmunoprecipitated with M3 muscarinic receptor (M3R,
or CHRM3; 118494) from transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that RGS4 contains 5 exons and spans 5.5
kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sierra et al. (2002) mapped the RGS4 gene
to chromosome 1q23.3. They mapped the mouse Rgs4 gene to chromosome 1 by
interspecific backcross mapping.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the RGS4
gene and schizophrenia, see 181500.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) found that Rgs4 deficiency in mice enhanced
M3r-mediated insulin secretion. Pancreatic beta cell-specific Rgs4
knockout did not alter basal glucose levels, but it increased plasma
insulin levels and increased insulin release after administration of a
muscarinic agonist. Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) concluded that RGS4 acts
as a negative regulator of M3R signaling in pancreatic beta cells.

REFERENCE 1. Druey, K. M.; Blumer, K. J.; Kang, V. H.; Kehrl, J. H.: Inhibition
of G-protein-mediated MAP kinase activation by a new mammalian gene
family. Nature 379: 742-746, 1996.

2. Koelle, M. R.; Horvitz, H. R.: EGL-10 regulates G protein signaling
in the C. elegans nervous system and shares a conserved domain with
many mammalian proteins. Cell 84: 115-125, 1996.

3. Ruiz de Azua, I.; Scarselli, M.; Rosemond, E.; Gautam, D.; Jou,
W.; Gavrilova, O.; Ebert, P. J.; Levitt, P.; Wess, J.: RGS4 is a
negative regulator of insulin release from pancreatic beta-cells in
vitro and in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 7999-8004, 2010.

4. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2011
John Logan Black, III - updated: 5/15/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/6/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/9/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/4/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/14/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/17/2011
mgross: 5/17/2011
terry: 5/12/2011
carol: 2/1/2010
carol: 5/15/2006
carol: 5/12/2006
terry: 4/6/2006
carol: 8/16/2005
terry: 8/9/2005
terry: 7/11/2005
mgross: 4/4/2005
mgross: 9/12/2002
psherman: 4/15/1998
psherman: 4/14/1998

182269	TITLE 182269 SMALL PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN 2C; SPRR2C
DESCRIPTION See 182267. SPRR2C appears to be a pseudogene due to a C-to-T transition
in the sixth codon resulting in a TAG stop codon (Gibbs et al., 1993).

REFERENCE 1. Gibbs, S.; Fijneman, R.; Wiegant, J.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; van
de Putte, P.; Backendorf, C.: Molecular characterization and evolution
of the SPRR family of keratinocyte differentiation markers encoding
small proline-rich proteins. Genomics 16: 630-637, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/18/1993

EDITED terry: 7/11/1994
carol: 6/18/1993

608524	TITLE *608524 INHIBITOR OF GROWTH 4; ING4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to ING1 (601566) and ING2 (604215),
followed by PCR and RACE of a placenta cDNA library, Shiseki et al.
(2003) cloned ING4, which they called p29ING4. The deduced 249-amino
acid protein contains a C-terminal plant homeodomain finger motif and 2
nuclear localization signals.

GENE FUNCTION

Shiseki et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of ING4 or ING5
(608525) in cancer cell lines diminished colony-forming efficiency,
decreased cell population in S phase, and induced p53 (191170)-dependent
apoptosis. Both ING4 and ING5 activated the WAF1 (116899) promoter and
induced WAF1 expression. ING4 and ING5 physically interacted with p300
(602700), a member of histone acetyltransferase complexes, and with p53
in vivo, and they enhanced acetylation of p53 at lys382.

Garkavtsev et al. (2004) reported that ING4 is involved in regulating
brain tumor growth and angiogenesis. Expression of ING4 was
significantly reduced in gliomas as compared with normal human brain
tissue, and the extent of reduction correlated with the progression from
lower to higher grades of tumors. In mice, xenografts of human
glioblastoma U87MG, which has decreased expression of ING4, grew
significantly faster and had higher vascular volume fractions than
control tumors. Garkavtsev et al. (2004) showed that ING4 physically
interacts with the p65 (RelA; 164014) subunit of NFKB (see 164011), and
that ING4 regulates brain tumor angiogenesis through transcriptional
repression of NFKB-responsive genes, including IL8 (146930), IL6
(147620), COX2 (600262), and colony-stimulating factor 3 (138970). The
authors concluded that ING4 has an important role in brain tumor
pathogenesis.

A key component of the hypoxic response pathway is hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF; see 603348). Ozer et al. (2005) found that ING4 suppressed
expression of HIF target genes under hypoxic conditions. ING4 directly
interacted with HPH2 (EGLN1; 606425), a mediator of HIF stability,
providing a mechanism for ING4 recruitment to HIF. ING4 association with
HPH2 did not affect hydroxylase activity or HIF stability , but it
suppressed HIF activity in a chromatin-dependent manner. Ozer et al.
(2005) hypothesized that ING4, recruited to HIF by HPH2 under hypoxic
conditions, acts as an adaptor protein to recruit transcriptional
repressors to mediate HIF activity.

By immunopurifying HeLa cell proteins that associated with ING4, Doyon
et al. (2006) found that ING4 was a component of a histone
acetyltransferase complex containing HBO1 (MYST2; 609880). Using an in
vitro acetyltransferase assay, they showed that the complex could
acetylate lysines of the histone H4 (see 602822) N-terminal domain.

Zhang et al. (2010) presented evidence that microRNA-650 (MIR650;
615379) plays a role in human gastric cancer tumorigenicity. Using
bioinformatic analysis, they identified a potential binding site for
MIR650 in the 3-prime UTR of ING4. Transfection of MIR650 precursor into
HEK293 cells reduced protein content of ING4, whereas inhibition of
MIR650 increased expression of a reporter gene containing the ING4
3-prime UTR.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ING4
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP WI-19753).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kim et al. (2004) devised a screen for genes that suppress the loss of
contact inhibition elicited by overexpression of the protooncogene MYCN
(164840). The initial application of this screen detected 9 distinctive
suppressors within a representative human cDNA library. One of these
genes was ING4, a potential tumor suppressor gene. Ectopic expression of
ING4 suppressed the loss of contact inhibition elicited by either MYCN
or MYC (190080) but had no direct effect on cellular proliferation.
Pursuing the possibility that ING4 might be a tumor suppressor gene, Kim
et al. (2004) found inactivating mutations in ING4 transcripts from
various human cancer cell lines. In addition, they used comparative
genomic hybridization to detect deletion of the ING4 locus in 10 to 20%
of human breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors. Ectopic
expression of ING4 attenuated the growth of the human breast tumor cell
line T47D in soft agar. Kim et al. (2004) concluded that ING4 is a
strong candidate as a tumor suppressor gene.

REFERENCE 1. Doyon, Y.; Cayrou, C.; Ullah, M.; Landry, A.-J.; Cote, V.; Selleck,
W.; Lane, W. S.; Tan, S.; Yang, X.-J.; Cote, J.: ING tumor suppressor
proteins are critical regulators of chromatin acetylation required
for genome expression and perpetuation. Molec. Cell 21: 51-64, 2006.

2. Garkavtsev, I.; Kozin, S. V.; Chernova, O.; Xu, L.; Winker, F.;
Brown, E.; Barnett, G. H.; Jain, R. K.: The candidate tumour suppressor
protein ING4 regulates brain tumour growth and angiogenesis. Nature 428:
328-332, 2004.

3. Kim, S.; Chin, K.; Gray, J. W.; Bishop, J. M.: A screen for genes
that suppress loss of contact inhibition: identification of ING4 as
a candidate tumor suppressor gene in human cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 16251-16256, 2004.

4. Ozer, A.; Wu, L. C.; Bruick, R. K.: The candidate tumor suppressor
ING4 represses activation of the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF). Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7481-7486, 2005.

5. Shiseki, M.; Nagashima, M.; Pedeux, R. M.; Kitahama-Shiseki, M.;
Miura, K.; Okamura, S.; Onogi, H.; Higashimoto, Y.; Appella, E.; Yokota,
J.; Harris, C. C.: p29ING4 and p28ING5 bind to p53 and p300, and
enhance p53 activity. Cancer Res. 62: 2373-2378, 2003.

6. Zhang, X.; Zhu, W.; Zhang, J.; Huo, S.; Zhou, L.; Gu, Z.; Zhang,
M.: MicroRNA-650 targets ING4 to promote gastric cancer tumorigenicity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 395: 275-280, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/23/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/12/2004

EDITED mgross: 08/27/2013
mgross: 8/26/2013
mgross: 2/8/2013
mgross: 2/28/2006
mgross: 2/27/2006
terry: 2/9/2006
mgross: 7/13/2005
terry: 6/23/2005
tkritzer: 1/26/2005
terry: 12/30/2004
alopez: 4/8/2004
terry: 4/7/2004
mgross: 3/15/2004
joanna: 3/12/2004

126452	TITLE *126452 DOPAMINE RECEPTOR D4; DRD4
;;D4DR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DRD4 is a G protein-coupled receptor that belongs to the dopamine
D2-like receptor family. Functionally, the D2-like receptors are
characterized by their ability to inhibit adenylyl cyclase (Oldenhof et
al., 1998).

CLONING

Van Tol et al. (1991) cloned the gene for the human dopamine D4
receptor. DRD4 encodes a putative 387-amino acid protein with 7
transmembrane domains, a potential N-linked glycosylation site, and
several putative phosphorylation sites. It shares 28%, 41%, and 39%
sequence homology with DRD1 (126449), DRD2 (126450) and DRD3 (126451),
respectively. Northern blot analysis revealed a 5.3-kb DRD4 mRNA in a
human neuroblastoma cell line and in several regions of the brain in rat
and monkey. Relatively high levels of DRD4 were observed in the monkey
frontal cortex, midbrain area, amygdala, and medulla, with lower levels
in the basal ganglia.

Van Tol et al. (1992) identified 3 cDNA clones of DRD4 that differed
from each other in a 48-bp sequence in the putative third cytoplasmic
loop. The sequence occurred as a direct repeat sequence (D4.2), as a
4-fold repeat (D4.4), or as a 7-fold repeat (D4.7). The deduced amino
acid sequences of the clones implied the existence of 3 different forms
of the receptor with a variably sized putative third cytoplasmic loop.
In a note added in proof, Van Tol et al. (1992) stated that they had
identified 2 additional allelic forms of the DRD4 gene corresponding in
size with a 3- and 5-fold repeat sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van Tol et al. (1991) determined that the DRD4 gene contains 4 exons.
Van Tol et al. (1992) identified a 48-bp sequence in exon 3 of the DRD4
gene that contained a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR).

MAPPING

Using a probe for DRD4 that recognizes an informative HincII
polymorphism, Gelernter et al. (1991, 1992) studied linkage to DNA
markers in non-CEPH families. Linkage was found to tyrosine hydroxylase
(191290; lod = 7.4 with male and female recombination = 0.10 and 0.17,
respectively) and with the Harvey RAS oncogene (190020; lod = 11.1 with
male and female recombination = 0.02 and 0.0, respectively). Their
observations suggested that DRD4 is close to and probably distal to
HRAS, placing DRD4 in 11p15.5. By further linkage studies, Petronis et
al. (1993) determined that the DRD4 gene lies proximal to HRAS.

GENE FUNCTION

Van Tol et al. (1991) found that the affinity of DRD4 for the
antipsychotic clozapine was much higher than that of DRD2 and DRD3.

Van Tol et al. (1992) showed that expression of 3 variant forms of DRD4
showed different properties for the long form (D4.7) as contrasted with
the shorter forms with respect to clozapine and spiperone binding. They
suggested that variations in the 48-bp sequence in the third cytoplasmic
loop of DRD4 among humans may underlie individual differences in
susceptibility to neuropsychiatric disease and in responsiveness to
antipsychotic medication.

In vitro studies suggested that the receptor encoded by the DRD4 7R
allele may be subsensitive to endogenous dopamine compared with the
receptor encoded by the 2R allele (Asghari et al., 1995), although this
was apparently not due merely to the length of the third intracellular
loop (Jovanovic et al., 1999).

Seeman et al. (1993) found a selective 6-fold increase in the density of
dopamine D4 receptors in the brains of patients with schizophrenia (see
181500).

Oldenhof et al. (1998) showed that a proline-rich region within the
putative third cytoplasmic loop interacts in vitro with a variety of SH3
domain-containing proteins, including GRB2 (108355) and NCK (see
600508). Deletion of all putative SH3-binding domains in this region
resulted in constitutive internalization of the receptor.

Gong et al. (2003) described a large-scale screen to create an atlas of
CNS gene expression at the cellular level and to provide a library of
verified bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) vectors and transgenic
mouse lines that offer experimental access to CNS regions, cell classes,
and pathways. They observed that Drd4 BAC transgenic lines expressed at
high levels in the prefronal cortex. At high magnification, these cells
were identified as layer 5 pyramidal cells.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Rondou et al. (2008) showed that KLHL12
(614522) interacted with D4.2, D4.4, and D4.7, but not with other
dopamine receptors tested and not with mouse D4, which lacks the
polymorphic repeat in IC3. Domain mapping showed that the IC3 domain of
D4 and the kelch repeat domain of KLHL12 were required for the
interaction. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that KLHL12
interacted with the CUL3 (603136) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex via direct
interaction with CUL3 and, possibly, ROC1 (RBX1; 603814). Binding of
KLHL12 to both D4 and CUL3 resulted in recruitment of D4 to the
ubiquitin ligase complex, leading to D4 ubiquitination. Knockdown of
KLHL12 in KLHL12-overexpressing HEK293 cells abolished association of D4
with CUL3, and knockdown of CUL3 decreased ubiquitination of D4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Most of the diversity in the DRD4 gene is the result of length and
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation in the 48-bp VNTR in exon
3, which encodes the third intracellular loop of the receptor. Variant
alleles containing 2 (2R) to 11 (11R) repeats are found, with the
resulting proteins having 32 to 176 amino acids at this position. The
frequency of these alleles varies widely. The 7R allele, for example,
has an exceedingly low incidence in Asian populations yet a high
frequency in the Americas (Chang et al., 1996).

Chang et al. (1996) presented data that urged caution in the
interpretation of DRD4 association studies in mixed populations. They
focused particularly on the expressed polymorphism in exon 3, which may
have functional relevance. The polymorphism (an imperfect 48-bp tandem
repeat coding for 16 amino acids; alleles had been reported with 2 to 10
repeats) was found to be universal, suggesting that it is ancient and
arose before the global dispersion of modern humans. They described
diversity of allele frequencies for this expressed polymorphism among
different populations and emphasized the importance of population
considerations in the design and interpretation of association studies
using the polymorphism.

- Association with Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder

Attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; 143465) is a
developmental syndrome expressed along 3 domains: inattention,
hyperactive-impulsive, and combined type. Several investigations
examined the role of the DRD4 exon 3 repeat polymorphism in ADHD. The
long 7R allele of this receptor was shown in population-based and
family-based studies (LaHoste et al., 1996; Rowe et al., 1998; Smalley
et al., 1998; Swanson et al., 1998), but not in 1 case-control design
(Castellanos et al., 1998), to be a risk factor for this disorder. In a
family-based study of the DRD4 exon 3 repeat region and ADHD, Eisenberg
et al. (2000) failed to observe preferential transmission of the DRD4 7R
allele, and there was no preferential transmission observed when
genotypes were compared. The reasons for the conflict with earlier
findings were discussed.

Swanson et al. (2000) evaluated ADHD subgroups defined by the presence
or absence of the 7R allele of the DRD4 gene, using neuropsychologic
tests with reaction time measures designed to probe attention networks
with neuroanatomic foci in D4-rich brain regions. Despite the same
severity of symptoms on parent and teacher ratings for the ADHD
subgroups, the average reaction times of the 7R-present subgroup showed
normal speed and variability of response, whereas the average reaction
times of the 7R-absent subgroup showed the expected abnormalities (slow
and variable responses). This was opposite the primary prediction of the
study. The 7R-present subgroup seemed to be free of some of the
neuropsychologic abnormalities thought to characterize ADHD. These
findings led Swanson et al. (2000) to reconceptualize the possible
association of the DRD4 gene with ADHD.

Ding et al. (2002) stated that 8 separate replications of the initial
observation of an increased frequency of the DRD4 7R alleles in ADHD
probands had been reported.

Langley et al. (2004) found that in children with ADHD, possession of
the DRD4 7R allele appeared to be associated with an inaccurate,
impulsive response style on neuropsychologic tasks that was not
explained by ADHD symptom severity. Children with the 7R allele had
significantly more incorrect responses and shorter mean reaction times
for incorrect responses, and displayed higher activity levels as
measured by actigraphy compared to children without the allele.

Lynn et al. (2005) investigated the link between ADHD in adults,
novelty-seeking temperament, and the DRD4 7R allele in 171 parents from
96 families with ADHD-affected sib pairs. Of the parents, 56 (33%) had a
lifetime history of ADHD with 28 (50%) continuing to meet DSM-IV
criteria. Novelty seeking and the 7R variant were associated with a
lifetime history of ADHD; however, novelty seeking and ADHD did not
appear to be due to the DRD4 7R variant.

Leung et al. (2005) noted that the DRD4 7R allele associated with ADHD
varies in prevalence across ethnic groups and is very low in Asian
populations. Leung et al. (2005) studied 32 Han Chinese children with a
confirmed ADHD diagnosis and normal IQ who were methylphenidate
responders and observed no evidence of 7R alleles. Instead, they found a
2-repeat (2R) allele in this clinical sample (33%) compared to
ethnically matched controls (20%) (p = 0.015). This 1.65-fold increase
in the 2R allele was close to the increase of the 7R allele observed in
ADHD children of European ancestry. Leung et al. (2005) postulated that
an increased frequency of any non-4R allele may define the association
of the DRD4 gene with ADHD.

Manor et al. (2002) noted that polymorphisms (specifically the short
exon 3 allele) of the DRD4 gene have been associated with ADHD in some
studies, but that 2 Israeli studies (Eisenberg et al., 2000; Kotler et
al., 2000) failed to observe this association. Manor et al. (2002)
studied 178 Israeli triads using the transmission disequilibrium test
(TDT). Preferential transmission of the short allele was associated with
ADHD. Study of the same triad using the Test of Variables of Attention
(TOVA) revealed that individuals with the short allele of the exon 3
repeat performed significantly worse on the TOVA measured both by errors
of commission and response time variable. A dosage effect was observed
in that increasing repeat size was accompanied by a reduced number of
errors of commission and a significant difference was observed between
the 2 versus 7 repeats.

McCracken et al. (2000) found significant preferential transmission of a
240-bp (long) allele of the DRD4 120-bp repeat promoter polymorphism
(126452.0003) in 371 children with ADHD, and further analyses
strengthened the evidence for linkage.

D'Souza et al. (2004) studied the function of the 120-bp tandem
duplication sequence of the DRD4 gene by using transient transfection in
4 human cell lines and luciferase reporter gene assays. The longer
allele had lower transcriptional activity than the shorter allele. Lower
levels of transcriptional activity observed with the long form of the
polymorphism could result in lower levels of expression of the DRD4 gene
which may affect levels of dopamine in the synaptic cleft. The authors
noted that their findings supported the hypothesis of McCracken et al.
(2000) that the 240-bp allele was a risk factor for ADHD.

The Attention Network Test (ANT) uses the flanker task to measure
conflict and shows strong activation in the dorsal anterior cingulate on
neuroimaging studies. Because the cingulate is modulated by the ventral
tegmental dopamine system, Fossella et al. (2002) tested 200 normal
individuals with the ANT and genotyped them for 4 genes related to the
dopamine system. Polymorphisms in the DRD4 and MAOA (309850) genes were
significantly related to the efficiency of conflict. To examine whether
this genetic variation contributed to differences in brain activation
within the anterior cingulate cortex, Fan et al. (2003) genotyped 16
subjects for the DRD4 and MAOA genes who had been scanned during the
ANT. In each of the 2 genes they identified a polymorphism in which
persons with the allele associated with better behavioral performance
showed significantly more activation in the anterior cingulate while
performing the ANT than those with the allele associated with worse
performance. The 2 polymorphisms were the -1217G insertion/deletion in
the upstream region of DRD4 and a 3-repeat allele of the 30-bp repeat in
the MAOA promoter (309850.0002). The results demonstrated how genetic
differences among individuals can be linked to individual differences in
neuromodulators and in the efficiency of the operation of an appropriate
attentional network.

- Association with Novelty-Seeking Personality Trait and Risk-Taking
Behavior

Human personality traits that can be reliably measured by rating scales
show a considerable heritable component. One such instrument is the
tridimensional personality questionnaire (TPQ), which was designed by
Cloninger et al. (1993) to measure 4 distinct domains of
temperament--novelty seeking (601696), harm avoidance, reward
dependence, and persistence--that are hypothesized to be based on
distinct neurochemical and genetic substrates. Cloninger et al. (1993)
proposed that individual variations in the novelty seeking trait are
mediated by genetic variability in dopamine transmission. Individuals
who score higher than average on the TPQ novelty seeking scale are
characterized as impulsive, exploratory, fickle, excitable,
quick-tempered, and extravagant, whereas those who score lower than
average tend to be reflective, rigid, loyal, stoic, slow-tempered, and
frugal.

In a study of 20 abstinent alcohol-dependent men, a significant
correlation was found between apomorphine-induced growth hormone release
and the 'novelty seeking' score of the individual (Wiesbeck et al.,
1995). This supported Cloninger's hypothesis by giving neuroendocrine
evidence that this personality dimension is related to dopaminergic
activity, albeit in the tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic system which is
not directly associated with human personality traits.

Benjamin et al. (1996) pointed out that the possibility of a causal
relationship between DRD4 and novelty seeking is supported by studies
showing that the number of exon 3 repeats can affect the binding of
ligands to the receptor; that DRD4 is expressed in limbic areas involved
in cognition and emotion; that dopamine mediates exploratory behavior in
experimental animals; that the rewarding effects of amphetamines and
cocaine are related to dopamine release; and that novelty seeking is low
in dopamine-deficient patients with Parkinson disease (168600).

In a group of 124 unrelated Israeli subjects, Ebstein et al. (1996)
showed that higher than average novelty seeking test scores were
significantly associated with a particular exonic polymorphism, the
7-repeat (7R) allele, in exon 3 of the DRD4 gene. The association of
high novelty seeking and the 7R allele was independent of ethnicity,
sex, or age of the subjects. These results were corroborated by Benjamin
et al. (1996) who investigated the relationship between DRD4 exon 3
sequence variants and personality test scores in a population of 315
mostly male sibs, other family members and individuals in the United
States. The association between long alleles of exon 3 and personality
traits related to novelty seeking was confirmed. Moreover, family
studies showed that this association is the result of genetic
transmission rather than a population stratification.

In 2 groups of Finnish subjects (193 psychiatrically screened normal
controls and 138 alcoholic offenders), Malhotra et al. (1996) determined
DRD4 genotypes and assessed novelty seeking with the TPQ. In the control
individuals, they found no significant association between novelty
seeking and the 7R allele despite similar allele frequencies and the use
of the same personality measure as employed by Ebstein et al. (1996).
The group of alcoholic offenders had significantly higher novelty
seeking than control individuals; however, Malhotra et al. (1996) could
not replicate the previous association in this group. They suggested
that DRD4 may require reevaluation as a candidate gene for personality
variation.

Gelernter et al. (1997) also could not replicate an association between
the 7-repeat allele (called DRD4*7R by them) and higher novelty seeking.
They raised the possibility that this might represent a false negative.
They concluded that if genetic variation at the DRD4 locus exerts an
effect on human novelty seeking, it is likely to be through a mutation
in linkage disequilibrium with the exon 3 VNTR rather than as a direct
consequence of that variation.

Using the Japanese version of the Temperament and Character Inventory
questionnaire, Tomitaka et al. (1999) studied the association between
novelty seeking and the long alleles of the polymorphic exon 3 repeat
sequence of DRD4 in 69 medical students and residents (average age of
25) of the Tokyo Women's Medical College Hospital. Although the long
alleles of DRD4 were low in the Japanese population, the authors found
an association between the long alleles and novelty seeking when
compared to short alleles (p less than 0.014). The scores for
exploratory excitability and extravagance were significantly higher in
subjects with the long allele.

Kluger et al. (2002) conducted a metaanalysis of 20 studies, with a
total of 3,907 individuals, involving the association between DRD4
polymorphisms and novelty seeking. Thirteen reports suggested that the
presence of longer alleles is associated with higher novelty seeking
scores and 7 reports suggested the opposite. Kluger et al. (2002)
concluded that, on average, there was no association between DRD4
polymorphism and novelty seeking (average d = 0.06, 95% CI +/- 0.09).
They found that there was true heterogeneity among the studies (i.e.,
unknown moderators exist), but that the strength of the association
between DRD4 polymorphisms and novelty seeking in the presence of any
moderator was likely to be weak. Kluger et al. (2002) also reported that
a search for moderators had not yielded any reliable explanation for the
variability among studies.

De Luca et al. (2001) presented evidence indicating that there is a
genetic influence of the DRD4 gene on human temperament at birth and at
1 month of age. On assessment at 5 months of age, differences were not
detected, denoting a strong environmental effect. De Luca et al. (2003)
presented a follow-up, assessing the previously genotyped children at 3
years of age. By this age, both positive and negative emotions were more
clearly differentiated than at 1 and 5 months of age. Moreover,
exploratory behavior was more explicit at 3 years, given the increased
competence of 3-year-old infants to explore the environment actively and
intentionally. The study corroborated only in part previous results of a
link between the DRD4 gene and human temperament. None of the
extraversion and/or exploratory behavior measures was related to the
long form of the DRD4 exon 3 repeat polymorphism, an unusually variable
repeat region in the third cytoplasmic loop of the receptor that varies
between 2 and 10 repeats in most populations and changes the length of
the receptor protein (Asghari et al., 1995).

Savitz and Ramesar (2004) reviewed the evidence that alleles of the SERT
(182138) and DRD4 genes impact variations in personality. They argued
for the existence of a genuine effect: a gene-personality relationship
rendered periodically latent through genetic epistasis, gene-environment
interactions, variation in genetic background, and the presence of other
variables.

In a study of financial risk taking of 94 young men assessed through a
game with real monetary payoffs, Dreber et al. (2009) found an
association between the 7R allele polymorphism in the DRD4 gene and
increased financial risk-taking (see 601696). The DRD4 polymorphism was
estimated to account for about 20% of the heritable variation in
financial risk-taking. The findings were consistent with evolutionary
selection for this allele for behaviors associated with migration and
male competition, which entail an element of risk.

Among 65 individuals, Kuhnen and Chiao (2009) found that carriers of the
DRD4 7R allele took 25% more risk in a financial investment risk game
compared to individuals lacking the 7R allele. The authors speculated
that financial risk-taking may result from evolutionarily adaptive
mechanisms that encourage novelty-seeking behavior.

- Association with Alcoholism

The ALDH2*2 allele of the aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 gene (100650.0001) is
considered to be a genetic deterrent for alcoholism; however, Muramatsu
et al. (1996) found that 80 of 655 Japanese alcoholics had the mutant
allele. They postulated that these alcoholics had some other factor
which overcame the adverse effects of acetaldehydemia and that this
factor might reside in the 'reward system' of the brain in which
dopamine plays a crucial role. Therefore, Muramatsu et al. (1996)
studied variation at the DRD4 locus and found in the alcoholics a higher
frequency of a 5-repeat (5R) allele of the DRD4 receptor 48-bp repeat
polymorphism in alcoholics with ALDH2*2 than in 100 other alcoholics and
144 controls. They found that alcoholics with the 5R allele also abused
other drugs more often.

- Association with Mood Disorders

Using the Cockrane Review Manager, Lopez Leon et al. (2005) conducted a
metaanalysis to reevaluate the role of DRD4 polymorphisms in mood
disorders. In 917 patients with unipolar or bipolar affective disorder
(see 125480) and 1,164 control individuals from 12 samples, an
association was found between the DRD4 2R allele and unipolar depression
(p less than 0.001) and unipolar and bipolar depression combined (p less
than 0.001).

EVOLUTION

The 48-bp tandem repeat polymorphism in the coding region of DRD4 shows
4 repeats (4R) as the most common allele, with rarer variants containing
2 to 11 repeats (Chang et al., 1996). Ding et al. (2002) showed by DNA
resequencing and haplotyping of 600 DRD4 alleles, representing a
worldwide population sample, that the origin of the 2R to 6R alleles can
be explained by simple 1-step recombination/mutation events. In
contrast, the 7R allele is not simply related to the other common
alleles, differing by greater than 6 recombinations/mutations. Strong
linkage disequilibrium was found between the 7R allele and surrounding
DRD4 polymorphisms, suggesting that this allele is at least 5- to
10-fold 'younger' than the common 4R allele. Based on an observed bias
toward nonsynonymous amino acid changes, the unusual DNA sequence
organization, and the strong linkage disequilibrium surrounding the DRD4
7R allele, Ding et al. (2002) proposed that this allele originated as a
rare mutational event that nevertheless increased to high frequency in
human populations by positive selection. Ding et al. (2002) estimated
that the 7R allele may have originated approximately 40,000 years ago
and that the appearance of radical new technology and/or the development
of agriculture could be related to the increase in DRD4 7R allele
frequency. They suggested that individuals with personality traits such
as novelty seeking may have driven the expansion. In discussing why the
7R allele is associated with ADHD, Ding et al. (2002) speculated that
the very traits that may be selected for in individuals possessing this
allele may predispose to behaviors that are deemed inappropriate in the
typical classroom setting.

To estimate directly haplotype diversity, Wang et al. (2004) resequenced
the entire DRD4 locus from 103 individuals homozygous for 2R, 4R, or 7R
variants of the 48-bp tandem repeat DNA from individuals of African,
European, Asian, North and South American, and Pacific Island ancestry
were used. 4R/4R homozygotes exhibited little linkage disequilibrium
(LD) over the region examined, with more polymorphisms observed in DNA
samples from African individuals. In contrast, the evidence for strong
LD surrounding the 7R allele is dramatic, with all 7R/7R individuals
(including those from Africa) exhibiting the same alleles at most
polymorphic sites. By intraallelic comparison at 18 high heterozygosity
sites spanning the locus, they estimated that the 7R allele arose before
the upper Paleolithic era (approximately 40,000-50,000 years ago).
Further, the pattern of recombination at these polymorphic sites is the
pattern expected for selection acting at the 7R VNTR itself, rather than
at an adjacent site. Wang et al. (2004) proposed a model for selection
at the DRD4 locus consistent with these observed LD patterns and with
the known biochemical and physiologic differences between receptor
variants.

Harpending and Cochran (2002) commented extensively on the mechanisms by
which the increased frequency of the 7R allele might have occurred.

ANIMAL MODEL

By homologous recombination, Rubinstein et al. (1997) created mice
lacking the dopamine D4 receptor. Mutant mice were less active than
wildtype controls in open field tests in both novel and familiar
environments. However, mutant mice outperformed wildtype mice on the
rotarod and displayed locomotor supersensitivity to ethanol, cocaine,
and methamphetamine. Biochemical analyses indicated that dopamine
synthesis and its conversion to DOPAC were elevated in the dorsal
striatum of mutant mice. Rubinstein et al. (1997) proposed that DRD4
modulates normal, coordinated, and drug-stimulated motor behaviors as
well as the activity of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons.

Using an in silico search, followed by PCR, Hejjas et al. (2007)
identified VNTR polymorphisms in genes of the dopaminergic system in 4
dog breeds and European gray wolves. Polymorphisms of the DRD4, DBH
(609312), and DAT (SLC6A3; 126455) genes were associated with attention
deficit, but not activity-impulsivity, in Belgian Tervuerens, a breed
that had almost all genetic variants identified.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM DYSFUNCTION
DRD4, 13-BP DEL, NT235

Nothen et al. (1994) identified a null mutation in the first exon of the
DRD4 gene, predicted to result in a truncated nonfunctional protein. The
mutation consisted of a 13-bp deletion of bases 235 to 247. The deletion
was situated in the second transmembrane domain and included asp80,
which is highly conserved within the family of catecholaminergic
receptors and is postulated to act as counterion in catecholamine
binding. The deletion altered the reading frame from amino acid 79 and
generated a new stop codon 20 amino acids downstream. The mRNA was
predicted to code for an aberrant protein of 98 amino acids with a
calculated molecular mass of 11 kD. The frequency of the deletion was
found to be about 2% in the general population. The distribution of the
mutation was found to be similar in healthy controls and patients
suffering from psychiatric illnesses which included schizophrenia,
bipolar affective disorder, and Tourette syndrome, indicating that
heterozygosity for this mutation is not causally related to major
psychiatric diseases. However, Nothen et al. (1994) identified an adult
male who was homozygous for the mutation. He showed no symptoms of major
psychiatric illness but displayed somatic ailments including acoustic
neurinoma, obesity, and some disturbances of the autonomic nervous
system. Some of these symptoms might be related to the absence of
functional DRD4 protein. The homozygous male was 50 years old at the
time of study, had 4 children, and worked successfully as an engineer.
Autonomic hyperactivity included severe dermatographism and excessive
sweating, which occurred mainly during moderately warm temperatures and
in social gatherings. The proband denied feelings of anxiety in these
situations. Frequent fluctuations of pulse rate leading to intermittent
sinus tachycardia and necessitating medication with a beta blocker had
been recognized over the previous 10 years. A left-sided acoustic
neurinoma (family history negative) had been operated on when he was 38;
a second operation for recurrence was required 6 years later. He had
been obese since adolescence. A reduced body temperature had repeatedly
been measured (35.4 degrees C rectally).

.0002
DOPAMINE RECEPTOR D4 POLYMORPHISM
DRD4, VAL194GLY

Seeman et al. (1994) found a val194-to-gly variant of the dopamine D4
receptor in 12.5% of 186 Afro-Caribbeans but in none of 147 Caucasians
tested. This variant, present in heterozygotes, was not associated with
schizophrenia or any obvious dopamine-based disease. The amino acid
substitution resulted from a T-to-G transversion. The amino acid
replacement is 1 amino acid away from a serine that is critical for
dopamine binding in the dopamine D2 receptor (126450). Liu et al. (1996)
reported that the val194-to-gly DRD4 variant is 2 orders of magnitude
less sensitive to dopamine, clozapine, and olanzapine than the normal
receptor. The variant receptor was insensitive to guanine nucleotide,
indicating the absence of a high-affinity state or functional state.
They described a 15-year-old individual homozygous for this variant, who
also had sickle cell disease. The patient had low weight and no axillary
or pubic hair.

.0003
ATTENTION DEFICIT-HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DRD4, 120-BP INS

Seaman et al. (1999) identified a polymorphic tandem duplication of 120
bp located 1.2 kb upstream of the initiation codon of the DRD4 gene.
McCracken et al. (2000) analyzed the DRD4 120-bp repeat promoter
polymorphism in 371 children with attention deficit-hyperactivity
disorder (143465) using the transmission disequilibrium test. The
results showed a significant preferential transmission of the 240-bp
(long) allele with ADHD, and further analyses strengthened the evidence
for linkage.

Kustanovich et al. (2004) genotyped a large multiplex sample of
ADHD-affected children and their parents for polymorphisms in genes
reported to be associated with ADHD, including DRD4, and analyzed the
results using the transmission disequilibrium test. The DRD4 120-bp
insertion/deletion promoter polymorphism displayed a significant bias
for transmission of the insertion. The DRD4 240-bp allele showed a
significant association with ADHD in this sample, with an estimated
genotype relative risk of 1.37.

In 2 independent population samples from North and South India, Juyal et
al. (2006) found a significant association between Parkinson disease
(PD; 168600) and the 120-bp duplication polymorphism (dup). Allelic
analysis of 147 PD patients and 130 controls in the South Indian group
yielded an odds ratio for disease development of 0.67 for the dup allele
and 1.48 for the wildtype allele.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cloninger et al. (1996); Cook et al. (1995); Swanson et al. (2000)
REFERENCE 1. Asghari, V.; Sanyal, S.; Buchwaldt, S.; Paterson, A.; Jovanovic,
V.; Van Tol, H. H.: Modulation of intracellular cyclic AMP levels
by different human dopamine D4 receptor variants. J. Neurochem. 65:
1157-1165, 1995.

2. Benjamin, J.; Li, L.; Patterson, C.; Greenberg, B. D.; Murphy,
D. L.; Hamer, D. H.: Population and familial association between
the D4 dopamine receptor gene and measures of novelty seeking. Nature
Genet. 12: 81-84, 1996.

3. Castellanos, F. X.; Lau, E.; Tayebi, N.; Lee, P.; Long, R. E.;
Giedd, J. N.; Sharp, W.; Marsh, W. L.; Walter, J. M.; Hamburger, S.
D.; Ginns, E. I.; Rapoport, J. L.; Sidransky, E.: Lack of an association
between a dopamine-4 receptor polymorphism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: genetic and brain morphometric analyses. Molec. Psychiat. 3:
431-434, 1998.

4. Chang, F.-M.; Kidd, J. R.; Livak, K. J.; Pakstis, A. J.; Kidd,
K. K.: The world-wide distribution of allele frequencies at the human
dopamine D4 receptor locus. Hum. Genet. 98: 91-101, 1996.

5. Cloninger, C. R.; Adolfsson, R.; Svrakic, N. M.: Mapping genes
for human personality. Nature Genet. 12: 3-4, 1996.

6. Cloninger, C. R.; Svrakic, D. M.; Przybeck, T. R.: A psychobiological
model of temperament and character. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 50: 975-990,
1993.

7. Cook, E. H.; Stein, M. A.; Krasowski, M. D.; Cox, N. J.; Olkon,
D. M.; Kieffer, J. E.; Leventhal, B. L.: Association of attention-deficit
disorder and the dopamine transporter gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
993-998, 1995.

8. D'Souza, U. M.; Russ, C.; Tahir, E.; Mill, J.; McGuffin, P.; Asherson,
P. J.; Craig, I. W.: Functional effects of a tandem duplication polymorphism
in the 5-prime flanking region of the DRD4 gene. Biol. Psychiat. 56:
691-697, 2004.

9. De Luca, A.; Rizzardi, M.; Buccino, A.; Alessandroni, R.; Salvioli,
G. P.; Filograsso, N.; Novelli, G.; Dallapiccola, B.: Association
of dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) exon III repeat polymorphism with temperament
in 3-year-old infants. Neurogenetics 4: 207-212, 2003.

10. De Luca, A.; Rizzardi, M.; Torrente, I.; Alessandroni, R.; Salvioli,
G. P.; Filograsso, N.; Dallapiccola, B.; Novelli, G.: Dopamine D4
receptor (DRD4) polymorphism and adaptability trait during infancy:
a longitudinal study in 1- to 5-month-old neonates. Neurogenetics 3:
79-82, 2001.

11. Ding, Y.-C.; Chi, H.-C.; Grady, D. L.; Morishima, A.; Kidd, J.
R.; Kidd, K. K.; Flodman, P.; Spence, M. A.; Schuck, S.; Swanson,
J. M.; Zhang, Y.-P.; Moyzis, R. K.: Evidence of positive selection
acting at the human dopamine receptor D4 gene locus. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 309-314, 2002.

12. Dreber, A.; Apicella, C. L.; Eisenberg, D. T. A.; Garcia, J. R.;
Zamore, R. S.; Lum, J. K.; Campbell, B.: The 7R polymorphism in the
dopamine receptor D4 gene (DRD4) is associated with financial risk
taking in men. Evol. Hum. Behav. 30: 85-92, 2009.

13. Ebstein, R. P.; Novick, O.; Umansky, R.; Pirelli, B.; Osher, Y.;
Blaine, D.; Bennett, E. R.; Nemanov, L.; Katz, M.; Belmaker, R. H.
: Dopamine D4 receptor exon III polymorphism associated with the human
personality trait of novelty seeking. Nature Genet. 12: 78-80, 1996.

14. Eisenberg, J.; Zohar, A.; Mei-Tal, G.; Steinberg, A.; Tartakovsky,
E.; Gritsenko, I.; Nemanov, L.; Ebstein, R. P.: A haplotype relative
risk study of the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) exon III repeat polymorphism
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Am. J. Med.
Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 96B: 258-261, 2000.

15. Fan, J.; Fossella, J.; Sommer, T.; Wu, Y.; Posner, M. I.: Mapping
the genetic variation of executive attention onto brain activity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 7406-7411, 2003.

16. Fossella, J.; Sommer, T.; Fan, J.; Wu, Y.; Swanson, J. M.; Pfaff,
D. W.; Posner, M. I.: Assessing the molecular genetics of attention
networks. BMC Neurosci. 3: 14, 2002. Note: Electronic Article.

17. Gelernter, J.; Kennedy, J. L.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Civelli, O.;
Kidd, K. K.: The D4 dopamine receptor (DRD4) maps to distal 11p close
to HRAS. Genomics 13: 208-210, 1992.

18. Gelernter, J.; Kennedy, J. L.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Niznik, H. B.;
Civelli, O.; Kidd, K. K.: The D4 dopamine receptor (DRD4) maps to
distal 11p close to HRAS. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1960, 1991.

19. Gelernter, J.; Kranzler, H.; Coccaro, E.; Siever, L.; New, A.;
Mulgrew, C. L.: D4 dopamine-receptor (DRD4) alleles and novelty seeking
in substance-dependent, personality-disorder, and control subjects. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 61: 1144-1152, 1997.

20. Gong, S.; Zheng, C.; Doughty, M. L.; Losos, K.; Didkovsky, N.;
Schambra, U. B.; Nowak, N. J.; Joyner, A.; Leblanc, G.; Hatten, M.
E.; Heintz, N.: A gene expression atlas of the central nervous system
based on bacterial artificial chromosomes. Nature 425: 917-925,
2003.

21. Harpending, H.; Cochran, G.: In our genes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 10-12, 2002.

22. Hejjas, K.; Vas, J.; Kubinyi, E.; Sasvari-Szekely, M.; Miklosi,
A.; Ronai, Z.: Novel repeat polymorphisms of the dopaminergic neurotransmitter
genes among dogs and wolves. Mammalian Genome 18: 871-879, 2007.

23. Jovanovic, V.; Guan, H.-C.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: Comparative pharmacological
and functional analysis of the human dopamine D4.2 and D4.10 receptor
variants. Pharmacogenetics 9: 561-568, 1999.

24. Juyal, R. C.; Das, M.; Punia, S.; Behari, M.; Nainwal, G.; Singh,
S.; Swaminath, P. V.; Govindappa, S. T.; Jayaram, S.; Muthane, U.
B.; Thelma, B. K.: Genetic susceptibility to Parkinson's disease
among South and North Indians: I. Role of polymorphisms in dopamine
receptor and transporter genes and association of DRD4 120-bp duplication
marker. Neurogenetics 7: 223-229, 2006. Note: Erratum: Neurogenetics
9: 73 only, 2008.

25. Kluger, A. N.; Siegfried, Z.; Ebstein, R. P.: A meta-analysis
of the association between DRD4 polymorphism and novelty seeking. Molec.
Psychiat. 7: 712-717, 2002.

26. Kotler, M.; Manor, I.; Sever, Y.; Eisenberg, J.; Cohen, H.; Ebstein,
R. P.; Tyano, S.: Failure to replicate an excess of the long dopamine
D4 exon III repeat polymorphism in ADHD in a family-based study. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 96: 278-281, 2000.

27. Kuhnen, C. M.; Chiao, J. Y.: Genetic determinants of financial
risk taking. PLoS One 4: e4362, 2009. Note: Electronic Article.

28. Kustanovich, V.; Ishii, J.; Crawford, L.; Yang, M.; McGough, J.
J.; McCracken, J. T.; Smalley, S. L.; Nelson, S. F.: Transmission
disequilibrium testing of dopamine-related candidate gene polymorphisms
in ADHD: confirmation of association of ADHD with DRD4 and DRD5. Molec.
Psychiat. 9: 711-717, 2004.

29. LaHoste, G. J.; Swanson, J. M.; Wigal, S. B.; Glabe, C.; Wigal,
T.; King, N.; Kennedy, J. L.: Dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism
is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molec.
Psychiat. 1: 121-124, 1996.

30. Langley, K.; Marshall, L.; van den Bree, M.; Thomas, H.; Owen,
M.; O'Donovan, M.; Thapar, A.: Association of the dopamine D4 receptor
gene 7-repeat allele with neuropsychological test performance of children
with ADHD. Am. J. Psychiat. 161: 133-138, 2004.

31. Leung, P. W. L.; Lee, C. C.; Hung, S. F.; Ho, T. P.; Tang, C.
P.; Kwong, S. L.; Leung, S. Y.; Yuen, S. T.; Lieh-Mak, F.; Oosterlaan,
J.; Grady, D.; Harxhi, A.; Ding, Y. C.; Chi, H. C.; Flodman, P.; Schuck,
S.; Spence, M. A.; Moyzis, R.; Swanson, J.: Dopamine receptor D4
(DRD4) gene in Han Chinese children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD): increased prevalence of the 2-repeat allele. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 133B: 54-56, 2005.

32. Liu, I. S. C.; Seeman, P.; Sanyal, S.; Ulpian, C.; Rodgers-Johnson,
P. E. B.; Serjeant, G. R.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: Dopamine D4 receptor
variant in Africans, D4(valine194glycine), is insensitive to dopamine
and clozapine: report of a homozygous individual. Am. J. Med. Genet. 61:
277-282, 1996.

33. Lopez Leon, S.; Croes, E. A.; Sayed-Tabatabaei, F. A.; Claes,
S.; Van Broeckhoven, C.; van Duijn, C. M.: The dopamine D4 receptor
gene 48-base-pair-repeat polymorphism and mood disorders: a meta-analysis. Biol.
Psychiat. 57: 999-1003, 2005.

34. Lynn, D. E.; Lubke, G.; Yang, M.; McCracken, J. T.; McGough, J.
J.; Ishii, J.; Loo, S. K.; Nelson, S. F.; Smalley, S. L.: Temperament
and character profiles and the dopamine D4 receptor gene in ADHD. Am.
J. Psychiat. 162: 906-914, 2005.

35. Malhotra, A. K.; Virkkunen, M.; Rooney, W.; Eggert, M.; Linnoila,
M.; Goldman, D.: The association between the dopamine D(4) receptor
(D4DR) 16 amino acid repeat polymorphism and novelty seeking. Molec.
Psychiat. 1: 388-391, 1996.

36. Manor, I.; Tyano, S.; Eisenberg, J.; Bachner-Melman, R.; Kotler,
M.; Ebstein, R. P.: The short DRD4 repeats confer risk to attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder in a family-based design and impair
performance on a continuous performance test (TOVA). Molec. Psychiat. 7:
790-794, 2002.

37. McCracken, J. T.; Smalley, S. L.; McGough, J. J.; Crawford, L.;
Del'Homme, M.; Cantor, R. M.; Liu, A.; Nelson, S. F.: Evidence for
linkage of a tandem duplication polymorphism upstream of the dopamine
D4 receptor gene (DRD4) with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Molec. Psychiat. 5: 531-536, 2000.

38. Muramatsu, T.; Higuchi, S.; Murayama, M.; Matsushita, S.; Hayashida,
M.: Association between alcoholism and the dopamine D4 receptor gene. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 113-115, 1996.

39. Nothen, M. M.; Cichon, S.; Hemmer, S.; Hebebrand, J.; Remschmidt,
H.; Lehmkuhl, G.; Poustka, F.; Schmidt, M.; Catalano, M.; Fimmers,
R.; Korner, J.; Rietschel, M.; Propping, P.: Human dopamine D4 receptor
gene: frequent occurrence of a null allele and observation of homozygosity. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 2207-2212, 1994.

40. Oldenhof, J.; Vickery, R.; Anafi, M.; Oak, J.; Ray, A.; Schoots,
O.; Pawson, T.; von Zastrow, M.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: SH3-binding domains
in the dopamine D4 receptor. Biochemistry 37: 15726-15636, 1998.

41. Petronis, A.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Lichter, J. B.; Livak, K. J.;
Kennedy, J. L.: The D4 dopamine receptor gene maps on 11p proximal
to HRAS. Genomics 18: 161-163, 1993.

42. Rondou, P.; Haegeman, G.; Vanhoenacker, P.; Van Craenenbroeck,
K.: BTB protein KLHL12 targets the dopamine D4 receptor for ubiquitination
by a Cul3-based E3 ligase. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 11083-11096, 2008.

43. Rowe, D. C.; Stever, C.; Giedinghagen, L. N.; Gard, J. M. C.;
Cleveland, H. H.; Terris, S. T.; Mohr, J. H.; Sherman, S.; Abramowitz,
A.; Waldman, I. D.: Dopamine DRD4 receptor polymorphism and attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molec. Psychiat. 3: 419-426, 1998.

44. Rubinstein, M.; Phillips, T. J.; Bunzow, J. R.; Falzone, T. L.;
Dziewczapolski, G.; Zhang, G.; Fang, Y.; Larson, J. L.; McDougall,
J. A.; Chester, J. A.; Saez, C.; Pugsley, T. A.; Gershanik, O.; Low,
M. J.; Grandy, D. K.: Mice lacking dopamine D4 receptors are supersensitive
to ethanol, cocaine, and methamphetamine. Cell 90: 991-1001, 1997.

45. Savitz, J. B.; Ramesar, R. S.: Genetic variants implicated in
personality: a review of the more promising candidates. Am. J. Med.
Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 131B: 20-32, 2004.

46. Seaman, M. I.; Fisher, J. B.; Chang, F.-M.; Kidd, K. K.: Tandem
duplication polymorphism upstream of the dopamine D4 receptor gene
(DRD4). Am. J. Med. Genet. 88: 705-709, 1999.

47. Seeman, P.; Guan, H.-C.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: Dopamine D4 receptors
elevated in schizophrenia. Nature 365: 441-445, 1993.

48. Seeman, P.; Ulpian, C.; Chouinard, G.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Dwosh,
H.; Lieberman, J. A.; Siminovitch, K.; Liu, I. S. C.; Waye, J.; Voruganti,
P.; Hudson, C.; Serjeant, G. R.; Masibay, A. S.; Seeman, M. V.: Dopamine
D4 receptor variant, D4GLYCINE194, in Africans, but not in Caucasians:
no association with schizophrenia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 54: 384-390,
1994.

49. Smalley, S. L.; Bailey, J. N.; Palmer, C. G.; Cantwell, D. P.;
McGough, J. J.; Del'Homme, M. A.; Asarnow, J. R.; Woodward, J. A.;
Ramsey, C.; Nelson, S. F.: Evidence that the dopamine D4 receptor
is a susceptibility gene in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molec.
Psychiat. 3: 427-430, 1998. Note: Erratum: Molec. Psychiat. 4: 100
only, 1999.

50. Swanson, J.; Oosterlaan, J.; Murias, M.; Schuck, S.; Flodman,
P.; Spence, M. A.; Wasdell, M.; Ding, Y.; Chi, H.-C.; Smith, M.; Mann,
M.; Carlson, C.; Kennedy, J. L.; Sergeant, J. A.; Leung, P.; Zhang,
Y.-P.; Sadeh, A.; Chen, C.; Whalen, C. K.; Babb, K. A.; Moyzis, R.;
Posner, M. I.: Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder children
with a 7-repeat allele of the dopamine receptor D4 gene have extreme
behavior but normal performance on critical neuropsychological tests
of attention. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4754-4759, 2000.

51. Swanson, J. M.; Flodman, P.; Kennedy, J.; Spence, M. A.; Moyzis,
R.; Schuck, S.; Murias, M.; Moriarity, J.; Barr, C.; Smith, M.; Posner,
M.: Dopamine genes and ADHD. Neurosci. Behav. Rev. 24: 21-25, 2000.

52. Swanson, J. M.; Sunohara, G. A.; Kennedy, J. L.; Regino, R.; Fineberg,
E.; Wigal, T.; Lerner, M.; Williams, L.; LaHoste, G. J.; Wigal, S.
: Association of the dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene with a refined
phenotype of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): a family-based
approach. Molec. Psychiat. 3: 38-41, 1998.

53. Tomitaka, M.; Tomitaka, S.; Otuka, Y.; Kim, K.; Matuki, H.; Sakamoto,
K.; Tanaka, A.: Association between novelty seeking and dopamine
receptor D4 (DRD4) exon III polymorphism in Japanese subjects. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 88B: 469-471, 1999.

54. Van Tol, H. H. M.; Bunzow, J. R.; Guan, H. C.; Sunahara, R. K.;
Seeman, P.; Niznik, H. B.; Civelli, O.: Cloning of the gene for a
human dopamine D4 receptor with high affinity for the antipsychotic
clozapine. Nature 350: 610-614, 1991.

55. Van Tol, H. H. M.; Wu, C. M.; Guan, H.-C.; Ohara, K.; Bunzow,
J. R.; Civelli, O.; Kennedy, J.; Seeman, P.; Niznik, H. B.; Jovanovic,
V.: Multiple dopamine D4 receptor variants in the human population. Nature 358:
149-152, 1992.

56. Wang, E.; Ding, Y.-C.; Flodman, P.; Kidd, J. R.; Kidd, K. K.;
Grady, D. L.; Ryder, O. A.; Spence, M. A.; Swanson, J. M.; Moyzis,
R. K.: The genetic architecture of selection at the human dopamine
receptor D4 (DRD4) gene locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 931-944, 2004.

57. Wiesbeck, G. A.; Mauerer, C.; Thome, J.; Jakob, F.; Boening, J.
: Neuroendocrine support for a relationship between 'novelty seeking'
and dopaminergic function in alcohol-dependent men. Psychoneuroendocrinology 20:
755-761, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/7/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/21/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/10/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/8/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 7/22/2005
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/5/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 3/2/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/10/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 7/8/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/2003
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/19/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/31/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 2/10/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/20/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/26/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/1997
Orest Hurko - updated: 3/7/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/30/1991

EDITED carol: 04/18/2013
carol: 4/2/2013
terry: 10/2/2012
mgross: 3/12/2012
mgross: 3/8/2012
terry: 3/8/2012
ckniffin: 11/16/2010
wwang: 5/7/2010
ckniffin: 5/4/2010
wwang: 12/11/2009
terry: 6/4/2009
wwang: 4/16/2009
mgross: 10/24/2008
terry: 8/15/2008
carol: 7/25/2008
carol: 7/24/2008
wwang: 12/7/2006
ckniffin: 12/7/2006
carol: 4/25/2006
terry: 4/21/2006
carol: 4/10/2006
carol: 4/4/2006
wwang: 11/7/2005
carol: 10/4/2005
wwang: 8/10/2005
terry: 8/8/2005
carol: 7/25/2005
terry: 7/22/2005
terry: 7/11/2005
mgross: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 3/2/2005
mgross: 1/10/2005
tkritzer: 7/8/2004
alopez: 4/28/2004
terry: 4/27/2004
alopez: 1/9/2004
tkritzer: 10/24/2003
tkritzer: 10/14/2003
tkritzer: 10/13/2003
ckniffin: 9/29/2003
carol: 8/20/2003
terry: 8/19/2003
tkritzer: 7/25/2003
tkritzer: 7/23/2003
terry: 7/14/2003
carol: 2/18/2002
mcapotos: 2/7/2002
terry: 1/31/2002
cwells: 5/30/2001
mcapotos: 5/23/2001
terry: 5/11/2001
mcapotos: 2/16/2001
carol: 8/4/2000
mcapotos: 7/26/2000
mcapotos: 7/25/2000
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
mcapotos: 7/11/2000
terry: 6/15/2000
carol: 2/14/2000
yemi: 2/11/2000
yemi: 2/10/2000
alopez: 1/21/1998
alopez: 1/20/1998
terry: 12/3/1997
terry: 11/26/1997
alopez: 8/6/1997
alopez: 7/29/1997
alopez: 7/7/1997
jenny: 4/4/1997
terry: 3/31/1997
mark: 3/5/1997
mark: 6/19/1996
mark: 6/12/1996
terry: 6/6/1996
terry: 4/15/1996
terry: 3/27/1996
mark: 3/7/1996
terry: 2/23/1996
mark: 2/15/1996
terry: 2/9/1996
terry: 2/6/1996
mark: 1/4/1996
terry: 1/3/1996
terry: 12/29/1995
carol: 1/9/1995
pfoster: 12/29/1994
carol: 10/15/1993
carol: 2/15/1993
carol: 8/17/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

602118	TITLE *602118 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 1; CHD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The murine gene 'chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein-1' (Chd1) was
isolated by Delmas et al. (1993) in a search for proteins that bind a
DNA promoter element. The presence of chromo (chromatin organization
modifier) domains and an SNF2-related helicase/ATPase domain led to
speculation that this gene regulates chromatin structure or gene
transcription. Woodage et al. (1997) cloned and characterized 3 novel
human genes related to the mouse Chd1 gene, referred to as CHD1, CHD2
(602119), and CHD3 (602120). Human CHD1 encodes a 1,709-amino acid
predicted protein that shares 95.5% identity with the 1,711-amino acid
mouse Chd1 polypeptide. Examination of sequence databases revealed
several more related genes, most of which were not known to be similar
to mouse Chd1, yielding a total of 12 highly conserved CHD genes from
organisms as diverse as yeast and mammals. The major region of sequence
variation is in the C-terminal part of the proteins, a region with
DNA-binding activity in mouse Chd1. Targeted deletion of the sole CHD
gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae demonstrated that deletion strains were
less sensitive than wildtype to the cytotoxic effect of 6-azauracil.
This finding suggested to Woodage et al. (1997) that enhanced
transcriptional arrest at RNA polymerase II pause sites due to
6-azauracil-induced nucleotide pool depletion was reduced in the
deletion strain and that yeast CHD1 inhibited transcription. This
observation, along with the known roles of other proteins with chromo or
SNF2-related helicase/ATPase domains, suggested that alteration of gene
expression by CHD genes might occur by modification of chromatin
structure, which could alter access of the transcriptional apparatus to
its chromosomal DNA template.

Yeast SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase) and SLIK (SAGA-like) are 2
highly homologous and conserved multisubunit HAT complexes, which
preferentially acetylate histones H3 (see 602810) and H2B (see 609904)
and deubiquitinate histone H2B. Pray-Grant et al. (2005) identified the
chromatin remodeling protein Chd1 as a component of SAGA and SLIK. Their
findings indicated that 1 of the 2 chromodomains of Chd1 specifically
interacts with the methylated lys4 mark on histone H3 that is associated
with transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the SLIK complex showed
enhanced acetylation of a methylated substrate, and this activity was
dependent upon a functional methyl-binding chromodomain, both in vitro
and in vivo.

GENE FUNCTION

Flanagan et al. (2005) described the structure of the tandem arrangement
of human CHD1 chromodomains and its interactions with histone tails.
Unlike HP1 (see 604478) and Polycomb (see 602770) proteins that use
single chromodomains to bind to their respective methylated histone H3
tails, the 2 chromodomains of CHD1 cooperate to interact with 1
methylated H3 tail. Flanagan et al. (2005) showed that the human CHD1
double chromodomains target the lysine-4-methylated histone H3 tail
(H3K4me), a hallmark of active chromatin. Methylammonium recognition
involves 2 aromatic residues, not the 3-residue aromatic cage used by
chromodomains of HP1 and Polycomb proteins. Furthermore, unique inserts
within chromodomain 1 of CHD1 block the expected site of H3 tail binding
seen in HP1 and Polycomb, instead directing H3 binding to a groove at
the interchromodomain junction.

Gaspar-Maia et al. (2009) demonstrated that the chromatin remodeling
factor Chd1 is required to maintain the open chromatin of pluripotent
mouse embryonic stem cells. Chd1 is a euchromatin protein that
associates with the promoters of active genes, and downregulation of
Chd1 leads to accumulation of heterochromatin. Chd1-deficient embryonic
stem cells are no longer pluripotent, because they are incapable of
giving rise to primitive endoderm and have a high propensity for neural
differentiation. Furthermore, Chd1 is required for efficient
reprogramming of fibroblasts to the pluripotent stem cell state.
Gaspar-Maia et al. (2009) concluded that Chd1 is essential for open
chromatin and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells, and for somatic cell
reprogramming to the pluripotent state.

MAPPING

Woodage et al. (1997) mapped the human CHD1 gene to 5q15-q21 by PCR
screening of the CEPH YAC library.

REFERENCE 1. Delmas, V.; Stokes, D. G.; Perry, R. P.: A mammalian DNA-binding
protein that contains a chromodomain and an SNF2/SWI2-like helicase
domain. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 2414-2418, 1993.

2. Flanagan, J. F.; Mi, L.-Z.; Chruszcz, M.; Cymborowski, M.; Clines,
K. L.; Kim, Y.; Minor, W.; Rastinejad, F.; Khorasanizadeh, S.: Double
chromodomains cooperate to recognize the methylated histone H3 tail. Nature 438:
1181-1185, 2005.

3. Gaspar-Maia, A.; Alajem, A.; Polesso, F.; Sridharan, R.; Mason,
M. J.; Heidersbach, A.; Ramalho-Santos, J.; McManus, M. T.; Plath,
K.; Meshorer, E.; Ramalho-Santos, M.: Chd1 regulates open chromatin
and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. Nature 460: 863-868, 2009.

4. Pray-Grant, M. G.; Daniel, J. A.; Schieltz, D.; Yates, J. R., III;
Grant, P. A.: Chd1 chromodomain links histone H3 methylation with
SAGA- and SLIK-dependent acetylation. Nature 433: 434-438, 2005.

5. Woodage, T.; Basrai, M. A.; Baxevanis, A. D.; Hieter, P.; Collins,
F. S.: Characterization of the CHD family of proteins. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 94: 11472-11477, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/23/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/13/1997

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 1/29/2013
alopez: 9/8/2009
terry: 9/4/2009
alopez: 1/18/2006
terry: 1/12/2006
alopez: 2/23/2005
terry: 2/23/2005
mcapotos: 5/8/2001
mcapotos: 5/4/2001
terry: 4/30/2001
psherman: 11/6/1998
dholmes: 11/18/1997
mark: 11/13/1997

604384	TITLE *604384 ATPase, Ca(2+)-TRANSPORTING, TYPE 2C, MEMBER 1; ATP2C1
;;ATPase, Ca(2+)-SEQUESTERING;;
SECRETORY PATHWAY Ca(2+) ATPase 1; SPCA1;;
PMR1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA1347
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATP2C1 is a Golgi-localized ATPase that mediates Golgi uptake of
cytosolic Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) and has a role in regulating Ca(2+) and
Mn(2+) cellular content (Ton et al., 2002).

CLONING

Hu et al. (2000) identified an EST corresponding to the ATP2C1 gene
within a 1.3-Mb YAC/BAC contig spanning the region of chromosome
3q21-q24 deleted in a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD; 169600).
This EST had been annotated as homologous to a yeast gene encoding a
calcium ATPase with a function predicted to be related to that of SERCA2
(ATP2A2; 108740). Hu et al. (2000) isolated the full-length cDNA
corresponding to the human EST. Similar to other Ca(2+) ATPase genes,
the ATP2C1 gene encodes 2 alternatively spliced transcripts, ATP2C1a and
ATP2C1b. These transcripts differed in their C termini (encoding amino
acids 877 to the end), but had the same expression patterns in all
tissues examined. ATP2C1a was predicted to encode 919 amino acids, and
ATP2C1b was predicted to encode 888 amino acids. The protein encoded by
ATP2C1 was highly homologous (97% identity) to rat Pmr1, which in turn
is homologous to the yeast calcium pump Pmr1, but less homologous to
other calcium pumps. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb ATP2C1
transcript in keratinocytes and in all 12 whole tissues examined.
Highest expression was in kidney and heart, and lowest expression was in
colon, thymus, and leukocytes. Patients with HHD are not known to have
extracutaneous manifestations of the disease. Hu et al. (2000) found no
differences in ATP2C1 mRNA levels between skin taken from the axilla and
skin from the buttock (sites particularly prone vs resistant to
blistering, respectively, in HHD patients) of one normal individual and
little change in ATP2C1 mRNA levels in normal human epidermal
keratinocytes cultured with glucocorticoid.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned ATP2C1 clone, which they designated
KIAA1347. The deduced 918-amino acid protein shares 97% identity with
its rat ortholog, a calcium-transporting ATPase. RT-PCR ELISA detected
variable ATP2C1 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with
highest expression in ovary, followed by lung, testis, brain, liver, and
kidney. Within specific adult brain regions, highest expression was
detected in thalamus, followed by amygdala and substantia nigra.

Ton et al. (2002) showed that epitope-tagged human SPCA1 localized to
the Golgi compartment following expression in yeast and Chinese hamster
ovary cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2000) detected 27 exons in the ATP2C1 gene. Dobson-Stone et
al. (2002) detected 28 translated exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the ATP2C1
gene to chromosome 3. Hu et al. (2000) mapped the ATP2C1 gene to
chromosome 3q21-q24.

GENE FUNCTION

Pmr1, the yeast ortholog of SPCA1, is expressed in the Golgi compartment
and functions as a high-affinity Ca(2+)/Mn(2+) pump involved in Ca(2+)
and Mn(2+) secretion. Deletion of Pmr1 in yeast causes hypersensitivity
to Ca(2+) chelators and Mn(2+) toxicity, with defects in protein
glycosylation, processing, sorting, and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-related glycosylation. Ton et al. (2002) found that heterologous
expression of human SPCA1, but not SERCA-type Ca(2+)-transporting
ATPases, reduced Mn(2+) toxicity and complemented Ca(2+)-related
phenotypes in Pmr1-null yeast. Yeast Golgi vesicles expressing human
SPCA1 showed high-affinity Ca(2+) transport activity that was
inhibitable by Mn(2+), but not by thapsigargin, an inhibitor of
SERCA-type ATPases. Ton et al. (2002) proposed that SPCA1 plays a role
in maintaining Ca(2+) and Mn(2+) concentrations in Golgi and the
secretory pathway.

Using RNA interference with HeLa cells, Van Baelen et al. (2003) showed
that SPCA1 was completely responsible for thapsigargin-insensitive
Ca(2+) uptake into Golgi vesicles. Knockdown of SPCA1 did not alter
Ca(2+) handling in the ER and had only a small effect on baseline
histamine-induced Ca(2+) oscillations in whole cells.

Mukhopadhyay and Linstedt (2011) found that exposure of HeLa cells to
increased extracellular Mn(2+), but not Ca(2+), induced trafficking of
the Golgi phosphoprotein GPP130 (GOLIM4; 606805) from the Golgi to
multivesicular bodies and then to lysosomes, followed by GPP130
degradation. They showed that a gln747-to-ala (Q747A) point mutation in
SPCA1 increased Golgi uptake of cellular Mn(2+), leading to increased
GPP130 degradation and reduced Mn(2+) toxicity via secretion. In
contrast, SPCA1 containing either an asp350-to-ala (D350A) mutation,
which blocks autophosphorylation and transport of Mn(2+) and Ca(2+), or
a gly309-to-cys (G309C) mutation, which blocks transport of Mn(2+), but
not Ca(2+), reduced Golgi uptake of Mn(2+), resulting in reduced GPP130
degradation and increased Mn(2+) toxicity.

Kourtis et al. (2012) demonstrated that heat stroke triggers pervasive
necrotic cell death and neurodegeneration in C. elegans. Preconditioning
of animals at a mildly elevated temperature strongly protected from
heat-induced necrosis. The heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 (140580)
and the small heat-shock protein HSP-16.1 mediate cytoprotection by
preconditioning. HSP-16.1 localizes to the Golgi, where it functions
with the calcium- and magnesium-transporting ATPase PMR1 to maintain
calcium homeostasis under heat stroke. Preconditioning also suppresses
cell death inflicted by diverse insults, and protects mammalian neurons
from heat cytotoxicity. Kourtis et al. (2012) concluded that their
findings revealed an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that defends
against diverse necrotic stimuli. In mouse cortical neurons and striatal
cells, Kourtis et al. (2012) found that overexpression of crystallin
alpha-A (123580), which colocalizes with the Golgi marker
alpha-mannosidase-II (154582) and the PMR1 ATPase, was sufficient to
protect mammalian neurons from heat stroke-induced death, even in the
absence of preconditioning. Heat stroke caused massive necrotic death
and axonal degeneration in neurons expressing short hairpin RNAs against
Pmr1, even after preconditioning.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD; 169600) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by persistent blisters and erosions of the skin. By family
linkage studies, the HHD region was localized to 3q21-q24. Study of a
family carrying a deletion helped narrow the location. To screen HHD
patients for ATP2C1 mutations, Hu et al. (2000) identified intron sites
by comparison of genomic and cDNA sequences, designed primers flanking
the 27 identified exons, and assessed PCR products from patients and
controls by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) or
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) analyses. Among 51
unrelated kindreds of European descent and 10 of Japanese descent, they
identified 21 abnormalities (16/51 and 5/10). Of the abnormal sequences,
6 predicted single amino acid substitutions, 2 predicted aberrant
splicing, and 13 predicted prematurely truncated products through
frameshifts or single-basepair substitution. A high frequency of the
last type of mutation supported a haploinsufficiency pathogenesis
consistent with the complete deletion of the gene in 1 kindred and
further suggested that calcium pumps of the PMR1 family function as
monomers. The mechanism by which mutant ATPC1 causes acantholysis is
unknown, but it may be through abnormally elevated cytoplasmic calcium
or abnormally low Golgi Ca(2+) levels. Elevated cytoplasmic calcium
might act by altering posttranslational modification of proteins or by
inducing changes in gene expression.

Sudbrak et al. (2000) identified 13 different mutations, including
nonsense, frameshift insertion and deletions, splice-site mutations, and
nonconservative missense mutations, in ATP2C1 in patients with
Hailey-Hailey disease. The identification of ATP2A2 as the gene
defective in Darier disease (124200) provided further evidence of the
critical role of Ca(2+) signaling in maintaining epidermal integrity.

Ikeda et al. (2001) reported ATP2C1 mutations in 11 Japanese patients
with Hailey-Hailey disease. Some affected individuals had unique
clinical features (generalization of Hailey-Hailey disease and
generalized skin eruption resembling keratotic papules in Darier
disease), but other affected individuals did not, suggesting the
presence of intrafamilial phenotypic variations. These findings
reinforced the conclusion that differences in clinical phenotypes in
Hailey-Hailey disease are probably related to factors other than the
type of causative mutation.

Chao et al. (2002) identified 7 different ATP2C1 mutations, 6 of them
novel, in 7 Taiwanese kindreds with Hailey-Hailey disease. They found 3
deletion mutations, 2 nonsense mutations, 1 missense mutation, and 1
splicing mutation.

Dobson-Stone et al. (2002) screened all 28 translated exons of ATP2C1 in
24 Hailey-Hailey disease families and 3 sporadic cases and identified 22
mutations (18 novel) in 25 probands. The novel mutations comprised 3
nonsense, 6 insertion/deletion, 3 splice site, and 6 missense mutations,
and were distributed throughout the ATP2C1 gene. They noted that 6 of
the mutations were found in multiple families in their study as well as
in the studies of Sudbrak et al. (2000) and Hu et al. (2000). Haplotype
analysis revealed that 2 of these were recurrent mutations. Comparison
between genotype and phenotype in 23 families failed to yield any clear
correlation between the nature of the mutation and clinical features of
Hailey-Hailey disease. The extensive inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic
variability suggested that modifying genes and/or environmental factors
may greatly influence the clinical features of this disease.

In a patient with unilateral segmental exacerbations of Hailey-Hailey
disease, Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a
splice site mutation in exon 22 of the ATP2C1 gene (604384.0009).
Haplotype analysis of the more severely affected segmental skin regions
revealed consistent loss of the paternal wildtype allele, confirming the
authors' hypothesis that such segmental exacerbations represent a form
of mosaicism with hemizygosity for the mutation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 4-BP INS, 767CCCT

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000) found
a 4-bp insertion after nucleotide 767 in exon 10 of the ATP2C1 gene. The
insertion resulted in a frameshift with a premature termination codon 42
amino acids downstream of the mutation.

.0002
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, ALA304THR

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000)
identified a G-to-T transversion of nucleotide 910 of the ATP2C1 gene,
resulting in an ala304-to-thr amino acid substitution.

.0003
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, ARG468TER

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000) found
a 1402C-T transition in the ATP2C1 gene that altered codon 468 from
arginine to stop.

.0004
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 4-BP DEL, 2374TTTG

In 2 unrelated families with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al.
(2000) found an identical 4-bp deletion of 2374delTTTG in the ATP2C1
gene. The 2 families had different alleles of the D3S1587 marker, a
locus less than 100 kb from the mutant gene, on the mutant chromosome.
This may indicate that these were independent mutations. The deletion
resulted in a premature termination codon 10 amino acids downstream of
the mutation.

.0005
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, IVS11, G-A, -1

Sudbrak et al. (2000) identified a G-to-A transition at the 3-prime end
of intron 11 (nucleotide position 852) of the ATP2C1 gene in a family
with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600). The effect on the cDNA was not
determined.

.0006
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, CYS490PHE

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a
cys490-to-phe (C490F) amino acid substitution that arose from a 1469G-T
transversion in exon 17 of the ATP2C1 gene.

.0007
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 1-BP DEL, 2460G

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a
frameshift mutation in the ATP2C1 gene, 2460delG, that resulted in a
premature termination codon at exon 25.

.0008
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, LEU584PRO

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 1751 in exon 19 of the ATP2C1 gene, resulting
in a leu584-to-pro (L584P) amino acid substitution.

.0009
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, IVS22, G-A, +1

In a patient with unilateral segmental exacerbations of Hailey-Hailey
disease (169600), originally reported by Vakilzadeh and Kolde (1985),
Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A
transition at the first base of the consensus splice donor site of exon
22 of the ATP2C1 gene. The mutation, which they designated 2146+1G-A,
resulted in the skipping of the 69-bp exon 22. Haplotype analysis of the
more severely affected segmental skin regions revealed consistent loss
of the paternal wildtype allele, confirming the authors' hypothesis that
such segmental exacerbations represent a form of mosaicism with
hemizygosity for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chao, S.-C.; Tsai, Y.-M.; Yang, M.-H.: Mutation analysis of ATP2C1
gene in Taiwanese patients with Hailey-Hailey disease. Brit. J. Derm. 146:
595-600, 2002.

2. Dobson-Stone, C.; Fairclough, R.; Dunne, E.; Brown, J.; Dissanayake,
M.; Munro, C. S.; Strachan, T.; Burge, S.; Sudbrak, R.; Monaco, A.
P.; Hovnanian, A.: Hailey-Hailey disease: molecular and clinical
characterization of novel mutations in the ATP2C1 gene. J. Invest.
Derm. 118: 338-343, 2002.

3. Hu, Z.; Bonifas, J. M.; Beech, J.; Bench, G.; Shigihara, T.; Ogawa,
H.; Ikeda, S.; Mauro, T.; Epstein, E. H., Jr.: Mutations in ATP2C1,
encoding a calcium pump, cause Hailey-Hailey disease. Nature Genet. 24:
61-65, 2000.

4. Ikeda, S.; Shigihara, T.; Mayuzumi, N.; Yu, X.; Ogawa, H.: Mutations
of ATP2C1 in Japanese patients with Hailey-Hailey disease: intrafamilial
and interfamilial phenotype variations and lack of correlation with
mutation patterns. J. Invest. Derm. 117: 1654-1656, 2001.

5. Kourtis, N.; Nikoletopoulou, V.; Tavernarakis, N.: Small heat-shock
proteins protect from heat-stroke-associated neurodegeneration. Nature 490:
213-218, 2012.

6. Mukhopadhyay, S.; Linstedt, A. D.: Identification of a gain-of-function
mutation in a Golgi P-type ATPase that enhances Mn(2+) efflux and
protects against toxicity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108: 858-863, 2011.

7. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

8. Poblete-Gutierrez, P.; Wiederholt, T.; Konig, A.; Jugert, F. K.;
Marquardt, Y.; Rubben, A.; Merk, H. F.; Happle, R.; Frank, J.: Allelic
loss underlies type 2 segmental Hailey-Hailey disease, providing molecular
confirmation of a novel genetic concept. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1467-1474,
2004.

9. Sudbrak, R.; Brown, J.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Carter, S.; Ramser, J.;
White, J.; Healy, E.; Dissanayake, M.; Larregue, M.; Perrussel, M.;
Lehrach, H.; Munro, C. S.; Strachan, T.; Burge, S.; Hovnanian, A.;
Monaco, A. P.: Hailey-Hailey disease is caused by mutations in ATP2C1
encoding a novel Ca2+ pump. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1131-1140, 2000.

10. Ton, V.-K.; Mandal, D.; Vahadji, C.; Rao, R.: Functional expression
in yeast of the human secretory pathway Ca(2+), Mn(2+)-ATPase defective
in Hailey-Hailey disease. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 6422-6427, 2002.

11. Vakilzadeh, F.; Kolde, G.: Relapsing linear acantholytic dermatosis. Brit.
J. Derm. 112: 349-355, 1985.

12. Van Baelen, K.; Vanoevelen, J.; Callewaert, G.; Parys, J. B.;
De Smedt, H.; Raeymaekers, L.; Rizzuto, R.; Missiaen, L.; Wuytack,
F.: The contribution of the SPCA1 Ca(2+) pump to the Ca(2+) accumulation
in the Golgi apparatus of HeLa cells assessed via RNA-mediated interference. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 306: 430-436, 2003.

13. Yokota, K.; Takizawa, Y.; Yasukawa, K.; Kimura, K.; Nishikawa,
T.; Shimizu, H.: Analysis of ATP2C1 gene mutation in 10 unrelated
Japanese families with Hailey-Hailey disease. J. Invest. Derm. 118:
550-551, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/19/2005
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 5/13/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/29/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2013
terry: 3/8/2013
carol: 11/27/2012
alopez: 11/1/2012
terry: 10/25/2012
mgross: 10/13/2009
carol: 1/20/2005
terry: 1/19/2005
alopez: 5/13/2003
alopez: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/14/2003
alopez: 8/7/2000
alopez: 5/12/2000
alopez: 12/29/1999

605677	TITLE *605677 ACYL-CoA SYNTHETASE LONG CHAIN FAMILY, MEMBER 5; ACSL5
;;FATTY ACID CoA LIGASE, LONG CHAIN 5; FACL5;;
ACYL-CoA SYNTHETASE 5; ACS5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acyl-CoA synthetases (ACSs; EC 6.2.1.3), such as ACSL5, catalyze the
formation of acyl-CoA from fatty acid, ATP, and CoA. This reaction is
essential in mammalian fatty acid metabolism. In addition, ACSs mediates
transportation of fatty acids into cells by cooperating with the fatty
acid transporter protein (FATP; 600691) (summary by Watkins et al.,
2007).

CLONING

Oikawa et al. (1998) cloned rat Acs5 and found that it is highly
expressed in proliferating 3T3-L1 cells. By screening a liver cDNA
library with rat ACS5 as the probe, Yamashita et al. (2000) isolated a
cDNA encoding human ACS5. The deduced 683-amino acid protein shares
approximately 80% amino acid identity with the rat sequence. Northern
blot analysis detected 2 major ACS5 transcripts of 2.5 and 3.7 kb in a
wide range of tissues, with highest expression in uterus and spleen.

By searching databases for sequences containing acyl-CoA synthetase
motifs 1 and 2, Watkins et al. (2007) identified 3 splice variants of
human ACSL5. The full-length protein contains 739 amino acids. The 2
other splice variants differ from each other only in their 5-prime UTRs
and encode an N-terminally truncated protein of 683 amino acids.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that ACSL5 belongs to a family of long
chain acyl-CoA synthetases.

GENE FUNCTION

Markedly increased levels of ACS5 transcripts were detected in a glioma
line and in primary gliomas of grade IV malignancy, while ACS5
expression was found to be low in normal brain. Yamashita et al. (2000)
found that cultured glioma cells infected with an adenovirus encoding
ACS5 displayed induced cell growth on exposure to palmitate. Consistent
with the induction of cell growth, the virus-infected cells displayed
induced uptake of palmitate. These results demonstrated a novel fatty
acid-induced glioma cell growth mediated by ACS5.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using BAC and YAC clones, Yamashita et al. (2000) determined that the
ACS5 gene spans approximately 46 kb and contains 21 exons.

MAPPING

Yamashita et al. (2000) determined that the 3-prime UTR of ACS5 contains
a specific STS marker that maps to 10q25.1-q25.2, a region frequently
deleted in malignant gliomas (see 601969).

Watkins et al. (2007) mapped the ACSL5 gene to the plus strand of
chromosome 10q25.1-q25.2 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Oikawa, E.; Iijima, H.; Suzuki, T.; Sasano, H.; Sato, H.; Kamataki,
A.; Nagura, H.; Kang, M. J.; Fujino, T.; Suzuki, H.; Yamamoto, T.
T.: A novel acyl-CoA synthetase, ACS5, expressed in intestinal epithelial
cells and proliferating preadipocytes. J. Biochem. 124: 679-685,
1998.

2. Watkins, P. A.; Maiguel, D.; Jia, Z.; Pevsner, J.: Evidence for
26 distinct acyl-coenzyme A synthetase genes in the human genome. J.
Lipid Res. 48: 2736-2750, 2007.

3. Yamashita, Y.; Kumabe, T.; Cho, Y.-Y.; Watanabe, M.; Kawagishi,
J.; Yoshimoto, T.; Fujino, T.; Kang, M.-J.; Yamamoto, T. T.: Fatty
acid induced glioma cell growth is mediated by the acyl-CoA synthetase
5 gene located on chromosome 10q25.1-q25.2, a region frequently deleted
in malignant gliomas. Oncogene 19: 5919-5925, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/22/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/02/2011
mgross: 11/30/2011
terry: 10/4/2011
terry: 1/20/2010
terry: 9/19/2008
mgross: 2/22/2001

609038	TITLE *609038 RHO FAMILY GTPase 1; RND1
;;RHO6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Rho GTPase family, such as RND1, regulate the
organization of the actin cytoskeleton in response to extracellular
growth factors (Nobes et al., 1998).

CLONING

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library using bovine Rnd1 as
probe, Nobes et al. (1998) cloned RND1. The deduced protein contains 232
amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 26 kD. It contains 3
guanine-binding motifs, 2 loops and a threonine involved in phosphate
binding, and 3 major residues that coordinate magnesium in the GTP-bound
state. However, RND1 lacks the residues important for the intrinsic
GTPase activity of RAS (see 190020). RND1 ends with a CAAX box motif and
a terminal methionine residue, suggesting that RND1 is farnesylated.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.9-kb RND1 transcript expressed at
highest levels in adult and fetal brain and liver, with little to no
expression in other tissues examined. Within specific brain regions,
RND1 expression was highest in cortex, occipital pole, and frontal and
temporal lobes. Immunohistochemical staining of rat brain found highest
Rnd1 protein in the pyramidal cells of the hippocampus, granule neurons
of dentate gyrus, and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. Endogenous mouse
Rnd1 localized in adherens junctions of confluent fibroblast cultures.

GENE FUNCTION

Nobes et al. (1998) showed that RND1 exchanges GTP faster and has a much
lower affinity for GDP that most other small G proteins, but it has no
intrinsic GTPase activity. Expression of RND1 in fibroblasts inhibited
the formation of actin stress fibers, membrane ruffles, and
integrin-based focal adhesions, and it induced loss of cell-substrate
adhesion, leading to cell rounding.

Aoki et al. (2000) found that expression of human RND1 in rat
pheochromocytoma cells disrupted the cortical actin filaments and caused
the formation of many neuritic processes from the cell body. The
processes had microtubules but few filamentous actin and neurofilaments.
An inhibitor of actin polymerization mimicked the effects of RND1
overexpression. Process formation induced by RND1 was inhibited by
dominant-negative RAC1 (602048).

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, in vitro protein binding assays, and
pull-down experiments with a breast cancer cell line, Vayssiere et al.
(2000) showed that RND1 interacts with GRB7 (601522). They determined
that the interaction involves the switch II loop of RND1, a region
crucial for guanine nucleotide exchange in all GTPases, and an SH2
domain of GRB7, a region crucial for GRB7 interaction with several
activated receptors.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nobes et al. (1998) mapped the RND1 gene to chromosome
12q12-q13.

REFERENCE 1. Aoki, J.; Katoh, H.; Mori, K.; Negishi, M.: Rnd1, a novel Rho
family GTPase, induces the formation of neuritic processes in PC12
cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 604-608, 2000.

2. Nobes, C. D.; Lauritzen, I.; Mattei, M.-G.; Paris, S.; Hall, A.;
Chardin, P.: A new member of the Rho family, Rnd1, promotes disassembly
of actin filament structures and loss of cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 141:
187-197, 1998.

3. Vayssiere, B.; Zalcman, G.; Mahe, Y.; Mirey, G.; Ligensa, T.; Weidner,
K. M.; Chardin, P.; Camonis, J.: Interaction of the Grb7 adapter
protein with Rnd1, a new member of the Rho family. FEBS Lett. 467:
91-96, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/23/2004

EDITED mgross: 11/23/2004

614758	TITLE *614758 DYNACTIN 4; DCTN4
;;DYN4;;
DYNACTIN, 62-KD SUBUNIT;;
p62
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN4 is a subunit of the 20S dynactin complex. The dynactin complex is
involved in microtubule-dependent vesicular transport, spindle assembly,
and cell division (summary by Karki et al., 2000).

CLONING

By gene dosage analysis and sequencing candidate genes in a YAC contig
covering the critical region of the 5q deletion syndrome (153550),
followed by database analysis, Boultwood et al. (2000) identified a
DCTN4 clone designated 605d01. Northern blot analysis detected a 7.5-kb
DCTN4 transcript in all 15 human tissues examined.

By mass spectrometric analysis of the 62-kD protein that affinity
purified with human dynactin, followed by EST database analysis and PCR
of an NT2 human teratocarcinoma cDNA library, Karki et al. (2000) cloned
DCTN4, which they called p62. The deduced 460-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 52.3 kD. It has an N-terminal domain with
11 cysteines, the last 8 of which fit the consensus sequence for a RING
domain predicted to bind 2 Zn(2+) atoms. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of an approximately 4.2-kb transcript in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal muscle.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that p62 had a punctate cytoplasmic
distribution as well as a centrosomal distribution typical of dynactin.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Ayalon et al. (2008) showed that Dyn4
colocalized with other dynactin subunits in adult mouse muscle fibers.
Dyn4 localized in a punctate distribution along costamere lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Karki et al. (2000) stated that p62 is present in the dynactin complex
at a stoichiometry of 1 copy per complex and that it localizes at 1 end
of the central ARP1 (ACTR1A; 605143) polymeric filament. Using
biochemical and immunoprecipitation analyses, they showed that p62
associated with the rat 20S dynactin complex. Recombinant human p62
bound immobilized in vitro-translated human ARP1. Overexpression of p62
in PtK2 porcine kidney cells did not disrupt microtubule organization or
the integrity of the Golgi, but it resulted in some p62 nuclear
localization.

ATP7B (606882) localizes to the trans-Golgi network, where it transports
copper to apoceruloplasmin (CP; 117700). When copper levels are in
excess, ATP7B redistributes to a vesicular compartment near the biliary
canalicular membranes, where excess copper is eliminated into bile.
Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human liver cDNA library, Lim et al.
(2006) found that the N-terminal domain of ATP7B, which contains 6
N-terminal metal-binding sites, interacted with the C-terminal domain of
p62. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that ATP7B, but not ATP7A
(300011), interacted with endogenous p62 in a human fibroblast line.
Depletion of copper reduced interaction of ATP7B with p62. Mutation
analysis revealed that the metal-binding CxxC motifs of ATP7B were
required for its interaction with p62, predominantly CxxC motifs 4
through 6. Lim et al. (2006) concluded that ATP7B is transported along
liver cell microtubules in a copper-dependent manner via interaction
with p62.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse heart cDNA library, Ayalon et al.
(2008) found that Ankb (ANK2; 106410) interacted with Dyn4. Protein
pull-down assays confirmed the interaction. Depletion of Ankb in adult
mouse skeletal muscle fibers disrupted costamere-associated
microtubules, concomitant with loss of costamere-associated Dyn4
expression.

MAPPING

By database and YAC contig analyses, Boultwood et al. (2000) mapped the
DCTN4 gene to chromosome 5q31-q32.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Emond et al. (2012) used exome sequencing and an extreme phenotype study
design to discover genetic variants influencing Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection in cystic fibrosis. Forty-three individuals with early age of
onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (all below the tenth percentile
of age at onset), and the 48 oldest individuals who had not reached
chronic P. aeruginosa infection (all past the mean age of onset) were
sequenced. After Bonferroni adjustment, a single gene, DCTN4, was
significantly associated with time to chronic P. aeruginosa infection
(naive P = 2.2 x 10(-6); adjusted P = 0.025). Twelve of the 43
individuals in the early extreme sample carried a missense variant in
DCTN4, 9 a phe349-to-leu substitution (F349L; dbSNP rs11954652) and 3 a
tyr270-to-cys substitution (Y270C; dbSNP rs35772018). None of the 48
individuals in the late P. aeruginosa extreme sample had either missense
variant. Subsequently, 696 individuals with varied CFTR genotypes were
studied. Seventy-eight participants were heterozygous and 9 were
homozygous for the F349L (614758.0001) mutation; 15 were heterozygous
for the Y270C (614758.0002) mutation; 1 individual was heterozygous for
both mutations. The presence of at least 1 DCTN4 missense variant was
significantly associated with both early age of first P.
aeruginosa-positive culture (p = 0.01, hazard ratio = 1.4) and with
early age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (p = 0.004, hazard
ratio = 1.9). The risk was highest in individuals with less selective
bias toward a P. aeruginosa-negative history, i.e., children enrolled
before 1.5 years of age and 103 enrollees who participated in the study
despite a history of P. aeruginosa-positive cultures. No significant
interaction was found between CFTR genotypes and DCTN4 mutations,
although power to detect such an interaction was low.

REFERENCE 1. Ayalon, G.; Davis, J. Q.; Scotland, P. B.; Bennett, V.: An ankyrin-based
mechanism for functional organization of dystrophin and dystroglycan. Cell 135:
1189-1200, 2008.

2. Boultwood, J.; Fidler, C.; Strickson, A. J.; Watkins, F.; Kostrzewa,
M.; Jaju, R. J.; Muller, U.; Wainscoat, J. S.: Transcription mapping
of the 5q- syndrome critical region: cloning of two novel genes and
sequencing, expression, and mapping of a further six novel cDNAs. Genomics 66:
26-34, 2000.

3. Emond, M. J.; Louie, T.; Emerson, J.; Zhao, W.; Mathias, R. A.;
Knowles, M. R.; Wright, F. A.; Rieder, M. J.; Tabor, H. K.; Nickerson,
D. A.; Barnes, K. C.; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
GO Exome Sequencing Project; Lung GO; Gibson, R. L.; Bamshad, M.
J.: Exome sequencing of extreme phenotypes identifies DCTN4 as a
modifier of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fibrosis. Nature
Genet. 44: 886-889, 2012.

4. Karki, S.; Tokito, M. K.; Holzbaur, E. L. F.: A dynactin subunit
with a highly conserved cysteine-rich motif interacts directly with
Arp1. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 4834-4839, 2000.

5. Lim, C. M.; Cater, M. A.; Mercer, J. F. B.; La Fontaine, S.: Copper-dependent
interaction of dynactin subunit p62 with the N terminus of ATP7B but
not ATP7A. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 14006-14014, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/10/2012

EDITED alopez: 03/04/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
mgross: 8/10/2012

607274	TITLE *607274 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 14; USP14
;;tRNA-GUANINE TRANSGLYCOSYLASE, 60-KD SUBUNIT;;
TGT, 60-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Eukaryotes synthesize queuosine by the irreversible exchange of queuine
for guanine at tRNA position 34, a reaction catalyzed by tRNA-guanine
transglycosylase (TGT). Mammalian TGT appears to be a dimer of 60- and
43-kD subunits. Deshpande et al. (1996) determined that the purified
rabbit 60-kD Tgt subunit, or Usp14, shares significant sequence identity
with human TRE2 (USP6; 604334) and ORF8 (USP8; 603158), particularly in
the conserved cys and his domains. Using the rabbit sequence, they
identified an EST containing human USP14 and cloned the cDNA from a
placenta cDNA library. The deduced human protein contains 494 amino
acids and shares 98% sequence identity with the rabbit protein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the USP14
gene to chromosome 18 (TMAP SJGC-11272). Wilson et al. (2002) stated
that 2 human neurologic disorders possibly involving alterations of
synaptic function map to 18p near USP14: major affective disorder-1
(MAFD1; 125480) and schizophrenia disorder 8 (SCZD8; 603206).

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (2010) showed that USP14, a proteasome-associated
deubiquitinating enzyme, can inhibit the degradation of
ubiquitin-protein conjugates both in vitro and in vivo and in cells. A
catalytically inactive variant of USP14 has reduced inhibitory activity,
indicating that inhibition is mediated by trimming of the ubiquitin
chain on the substrate. A high-throughput screen identified a selective
small-molecule inhibitor of the deubiquitinating activity of human
USP14. Treatment of cultured cells with this compound enhanced
degradation of several proteasome substrates that have been implicated
in neurodegenerative disease. USP14 inhibition accelerated the
degradation of oxidized proteins and enhanced resistance to oxidative
stress.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice that are homozygous with respect to the spontaneous mutation ax(J)
in the ataxia (ax) gene develop severe tremors by 2 to 3 weeks of age
followed by hindlimb paralysis and death by 6 to 10 weeks of age. Wilson
et al. (2002) showed that ax encodes Usp14, one of the large family of
cysteine proteases that specifically feed ubiquitin conjugates. Although
Usp14 can cleave a ubiquitin-tagged protein in vitro, it is unable to
process polyubiquitin, which is believed to be associated with the
protein aggregates seen in Parkinson disease, spinocerebellar ataxia
type 1 (SCA1; 164400), and gracile axonal dystrophy (GAD) in mice. The
physiologic substrate of Usp14 may therefore contain a monoubiquitin
side chain, the removal of which would regulate processes such as
protein localization and protein activity. Expression of Usp14 is
altered in homozygous ax(J) mice as a result of the insertion of an
intracisternal A particle (IAP) into intron 5 of Usp14. In contrast to
other neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson disease and SCA1 in
humans and GAD in mice, neither ubiquitin-positive protein aggregates
nor neuronal cell loss was detectable in the CNS of ax(J) mice. Instead,
these mice had defects in synaptic transmission in both the central and
peripheral nervous systems. These results suggested that ubiquitin
proteases are important in regulating synaptic activity in mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Deshpande, K. L.; Seubert, P. H.; Tillman, D. M.; Farkas, W. R.;
Katze, J. R.: Cloning and characterization of cDNA encoding the rabbit
tRNA-guanine transglycosylase 60-kilodalton subunit. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 326: 1-7, 1996.

2. Lee, B.-H.; Lee, M. J.; Park, S.; Oh, D.-C.; Elsasser, S.; Chen,
P.-C.; Gartner, C.; Dimova, N.; Hanna, J.; Gygi, S. P.; Wilson, S.
M.; King, R. W.; Finley, D.: Enhancement of proteasome activity by
a small-molecule inhibitor of USP14. Nature 467: 179-184, 2010.

3. Wilson, S. M.; Bhattacharyya, B.; Rachel, R. A.; Coppola, V.; Tessarollo,
L.; Householder, D. B.; Fletcher, C. F.; Miller, R. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.: Synaptic defects in ataxia mice result from
a mutation in Usp14, encoding a ubiquitin-specific protease. Nature
Genet. 32: 420-425, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/6/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/3/2002

EDITED alopez: 10/06/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
mgross: 9/28/2005
alopez: 11/7/2002
cwells: 10/7/2002
terry: 10/4/2002
mgross: 10/3/2002

185640	TITLE *185640 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L7a; RPL7A
;;SURFEIT 3; SURF3
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins (see 180466).

CLONING

Giallongo et al. (1989) demonstrated that the SURF3 gene encodes the L7a
ribosomal protein. The first 2 exons of the human SURF3 gene have been
found to be capable of activating the TRK oncogene (see 191315). The
SURF3 gene appears to be the only intron-containing member of the
surfeit family cluster on chromosome 9q34 (see SURF1, 185620).

GENE STRUCTURE

Angiolillo et al. (2002) determined that transcription start sites of
the MED22 (185641) and RPL7A genes are separated by a 110-bp region that
shows bidirectional promoter activity. This promoter region lacks a TATA
box but is characterized by a CpG island that extends through the first
exon into the first intron of both genes.

MAPPING

Yon et al. (1993) mapped the RPLA7 gene to chromosome 9q34.1. Kenmochi
et al. (1998) confirmed the mapping assignment.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mor et al. (1996) described a common polymorphism in the surfeit gene
cluster that was of interest because it occurs in the TSC1 (191100)
region of chromosome 9q34. By database analysis, Smith (1997) found that
the polymorphism reported by Mor et al. (1996) is due to mutation in the
SURF3 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Angiolillo, A.; Russo, G.; Procellini, A.; Smaldone, S.; D'Alessandro,
F.; Pietropaolo, C.: The human homologue of the mouse Surf5 gene
encodes multiple alternatively spliced transcripts. Gene 284: 169-178,
2002.

2. Giallongo, A.; Yon, J.; Fried, M.: The ribosomal protein L7a is
encoded by a gene (Surf-3) within the tightly clustered mouse surfeit
locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 9: 224-231, 1989.

3. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

4. Mor, O.; Duhig, T.; Fried, M.: A high frequency polymorphism in
the candidate region for tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) at 9q34. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 60: 259-260, 1996.

5. Smith, M.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/2/1997.

6. Yon, J.; Jones, T.; Garson, K.; Sheer, D.; Fried, M.: The organization
and conservation of the human Surfeit gene cluster and its localization
telomeric to the c-abl and can proto-oncogenes at chromosome band
9q34.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 237-240, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/30/2008
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 9/21/2000
Moyra Smith - updated: 1/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/29/1989

EDITED wwang: 10/30/2008
terry: 10/30/2008
carol: 8/20/2008
carol: 2/24/2004
psherman: 9/21/2000
psherman: 9/10/1999
psherman: 2/2/1999
terry: 8/12/1998
mark: 1/2/1997
carol: 9/13/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/15/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 8/29/1989

615187	TITLE *615187 POST-GPI ATTACHMENT TO PROTEINS 2; PGAP2
;;FGF RECEPTOR-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 1; FRAG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) modification of plasma membrane
proteins occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and GPI-anchored
proteins are incorporated into rafts in the Golgi during their transport
to the cell surface. PGAP2 appears to be involved in maturation of the
GPI anchor on GPI-anchored proteins (Tashima et al., 2006).

CLONING

By screening an M426 human embryonic fibroblast cell line with rat
Frag1, Lorenzi et al. (1999) cloned PGAP2, which they called FRAG1. The
deduced 316-amino acid protein has 2 N-terminal FRAG1 homology (FH)
domains and 4 possible isoprenylation signals. Hydropathy analysis
suggested that FRAG1 has 7 transmembrane segments. Human and rat FRAG1
share 92% amino acid identity, but the rat protein has only 1 FH domain.
Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a 2.0-kb FRAG1
transcript in all 16 tissues examined, with highest expression in testis
and pancreas, and lowest expression in brain and thymus. A transcript of
about 3.2 kb was also detected in several tissues, predominantly
pancreas, spleen, and prostate. FRAG1 was also detected in a number of
tumor cell lines at a level comparable to that observed in normal
tissues.

By database analysis and cloning using rat and hamster cDNA libraries,
Tashima et al. (2006) identified human, rat, and hamster cDNAs encoding
a 254-amino acid PGAP2 protein. They also identified a splice variant in
human and hamster that encodes a 250-amino acid isoform lacking a VSQE
sequence. Rat Pgap2 localized to Golgi in transfected NRK cells.

Hansen et al. (2013) stated that the PGAP2 gene encodes 16 different RNA
transcripts, 8 of which encode different isoforms and 8 that are
noncoding RNA. Isoform 8, which is 254 amino acids long and contains 5
alpha-helix domains embedded in the Golgi membrane, is believed to be
the biologically active isoform. The N terminus is in the cytoplasm and
the C terminus is in the Golgi lumen.

GENE FUNCTION

Tashima et al. (2006) found that transfected CHO cells lacking Pgap2
were deficient in cell surface expression of the human GPI-anchored
proteins CD59 (107271) and CD55 (125240). Cotransfection of rat Pgap2 or
the human or hamster variant encoding the short PGAP2 isoform restored
CD59 surface expression. GPI-anchored proteins appeared to traffic
normally through the ER and Golgi, but they were secreted upon arrival
at the plasma membrane via phospholipid D (see 602382)-like activity.
The secreted proteins showed an altered GPI anchor. Tashima et al.
(2006) proposed that remodeling of the GPI anchor occurs in GPI-anchored
proteins, and that in Pgap2-deficient cells, this remodeling is
defective, resulting in GPI-anchored proteins that are sensitive to
cleavage then secretion from the plasma membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lorenzi et al. (1999) determined that the PGAP2 gene contains 6 exons
and spans over 7 kb. The tandem FH domains in the FRAG1 protein are
encoded by exons 1 and 2.

MAPPING

Using FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Lorenzi et al. (1999) mapped
the PGAP2 gene to chromosome 11p15.5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous families with
hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome-3 (HPMRS3; 614207),
Hansen et al. (2013) identified 2 different homozygous missense
mutations in the PGAP2 gene (615187.0001 and 615187.0002, respectively).
In vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant alleles
were hypomorphic and caused decreased enzyme activity. Hansen et al.
(2013) commented that the disorder due to PGAP2 mutations can be viewed
as part of a disease family representing a spectrum of disorders due to
mutations in genes involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor
biosynthesis. Mutations in genes earlier in the pathway appear to cause
a more severe phenotype, including dysmorphic features (e.g., MCAHS1,
614080), than mutations in genes that act later in the pathway.

Among 13 individuals with intellectual disability and increased serum
alkaline phosphatase who were screened for mutations in genes encoding
proteins in the GPI-anchor biosynthesis pathway, Krawitz et al. (2013)
found that 2 unrelated patients carried biallelic missense mutations in
the PGAP2 gene (615187.0003-615187.0005). In vitro studies showed that
the mutations caused decreased enzyme activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, TYR99CYS

In 3 affected members of a consanguineous Syrian family (MR043) with
autosomal recessive hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation-3 (HPMRS3;
614207) originally reported by Abou Jamra et al. (2011), Hansen et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.296A-G transition in the PGAP2 gene,
resulting in a tyr99-to-cys (Y99C) substitution between transmembrane
segments 1 and 2 in the Golgi lumen. The mutation, which was found by
exome sequencing of the linked region on chromosome 11p15, was confirmed
by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in the family. In
vitro functional expression studies in CHO cells showed that the mutant
protein was expressed but had significantly decreased activity compared
to wildtype. Patient lymphoblastoid cells showed essentially normal
expression of the GPI-anchored proteins DAF (125240) and CD59 (107271),
supporting a hypomorphic effect of the Y99C mutation.

.0002
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, ARG177PRO

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family (MR5) with
HPMRS3 (614207) originally reported by Rehman et al. (2011), Hansen et
al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.530G-C transversion in the PGAP2
gene, resulting in an arg177-to-pro (R177P) substitution between
transmembrane segments 3 and 4 in the Golgi lumen. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing of the linked region on chromosome 11p15,
was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in
the family. In vitro functional expression studies in CHO cells showed
that the mutant protein was expressed but had significantly decreased
activity compared to wildtype. Patient lymphoblastoid cells showed
essentially normal expression of the GPI-anchored proteins DAF (125240)
and CD59 (107271), supporting a hypomorphic effect of the R177P
mutation.

.0003
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, LEU127SER

In a Turkish boy, born of consanguineous parents, with HPMRS3 (614207),
Krawitz et al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.380T-C transition in the
PGAP2 gene, resulting in a leu127-to-ser (L127S) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation segregated with the disorder in
the family. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein had decreased activity compared to wildtype.

.0004
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, ARG16TRP

In a 28-year-old Finnish woman with mild HPMRS3 (614207), Krawitz et al.
(2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PGAP2
gene: a c.46C-T transition resulting in an arg16-to-trp (R16W)
substitution, and a c.479C-T transition resulting in a thr160-to-ile
(T160I; 615187.0005) substitution. Both mutations occurred at highly
conserved residues. In vitro functional expression studies showed that
the mutant proteins had decreased activity compared to wildtype. Higher
residual activity of R16W may explain the milder phenotype in this
patient.

.0005
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, THR160ILE

See 615187.0004 and Krawitz et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hansen, L.; Tawamie, H.; Murakami, Y.; Mang, Y.; Rehman, S.; Buchert,
R.; Schaffer, S.; Muhammad, S.; Bak, M.; Nothen, M. M.; Bennett, E.
P.; Maeda, Y.; Aigner, M.; Reis, A.; Kinoshita, T.; Tommerup, N.;
Baig, S. M.; Abou Jamra, R.: Hypomorphic mutations in PGAP2, encoding
a GPI-anchor-remodeling protein, cause autosomal-recessive intellectual
disability. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 575-583, 2013.

3. Krawitz, P. M.; Murakami, Y.; Riess, A.; Hietala, M.; Kruger, U.;
Zhu, N.; Kinoshita, T.; Mundlos, S.; Hecht, J.; Robinson, P. N.; Horn,
D.: PGAP2 mutations, affecting the GPI-anchor-synthesis pathway,
cause hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 92: 584-589, 2013.

4. Lorenzi, M. V.; Castagnino, P.; Aaronson, D. C.; Lieb, D. C.; Lee,
C. C.; Keck, C. L.; Popescu, N. C.; Miki, T.: Human FRAG1 encodes
a novel membrane-spanning protein that localizes to chromosome 11p15.5,
a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in cancer. Genomics 62:
59-66, 1999.

5. Rehman, S.; Baig, S. M.; Eiberg, H.; Rehman, S.; Ahmad, I.; Malik,
N. A.; Tommerup, N.; Hansen, L.: Autozygosity mapping of a large
consanguineous Pakistani family reveals a novel non-syndromic autosomal
recessive mental retardation locus on 11p15-tel. Neurogenetics 12:
247-251, 2011.

6. Tashima, Y.; Taguchi, R.; Murata, C.; Ashida, H.; Kinoshita, T.;
Maeda, Y.: PGAP2 is essential for correct processing and stable expression
of GPI-anchored proteins. Molec. Biol. Cell 17: 1410-1420, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/9/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/18/2013

EDITED alopez: 05/23/2013
ckniffin: 5/9/2013
mgross: 4/18/2013

610781	TITLE *610781 GUANOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE REDUCTASE 2; GMPR2
;;GMP REDUCTASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of GMPR1 (GMPR; 139265) as
query, Deng et al. (2002) identified and subsequently cloned GMPR2 from
a human fetal brain cDNA library. The deduced 348-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 37.9 kD and shares 90% sequence identity
with GMPR1 and 69% identity with E. coli GMPR. Northern blot analysis
detected relatively high levels of both GMPR1 and GMPR2 in heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney, and relatively low levels of both in colon,
thymus, and peripheral blood leukocyte. Strong signals of GMPR2 were
detected in brain, liver, and placenta, whereas weak signals of GMPR1
were observed in these tissues. The apparent Km of GMPR2 for NADPH and
GMP are 26.6 and 17.4 microM, respectively.

Zhang et al. (2003) cloned GMPR2 from a human dendritic cell cDNA
library. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of an
approximately 2.2-kb transcript, with high expression in testis, ovary,
prostate, heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, and kidney. An
additional transcript of about 1.3 kb was detected in placenta.
Expression was also detected in most cancer cell lines studied.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) showed that recombinant GMPR2 protein was able to
reduce GMP. Transfection experiments demonstrated that overexpression of
GMPR2 promoted the monocytic differentiation of HL-60 leukemia cells.

EVOLUTION

Deng et al. (2002) presented evidence that the 2 types of GMP reductase
are derived from duplication of an ancient gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng et al. (2002) determined that the GMPR2 gene contains 10 exons and
spans more than 6.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deng et al. (2002) mapped the GMPR2 gene
to chromosome 14p11.2-p11.1. By the same method, Zhang et al. (2003)
mapped the gene to chromosome 14q11-q21.

REFERENCE 1. Deng, Y.; Wang, Z.; Ying, K.; Gu, S.; Ji, C.; Huang, Y.; Gu, X.;
Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: NADPH-dependent GMP reductase
isoenzyme of human (GMPR2): expression, purification, and kinetic
properties. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 1035-1050, 2002.

2. Zhang, J.; Zhang, W.; Zou, D.; Chen, G.; Wan, T.; Zhang, M.; Cao,
X.: Cloning and functional characterization of GMPR2, a novel human
guanosine monophosphate reductase, which promotes the monocytic differentiation
of HL-60 leukemia cells. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 76-83,
2003.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/21/2007

EDITED carol: 02/21/2007
carol: 2/21/2007

614003	TITLE *614003 NEUROBLASTOMA BREAKPOINT FAMILY, MEMBER 14; NBPF14
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NBPF14 is a member of the NBPF gene family, which consists of 22 genes
and pseudogenes that arose by gene duplication. NBPF genes contain
numerous low-copy repetitive elements and show high intergenic and
intragenic sequence identity in coding and noncoding regions (Vandepoele
et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NBPF1 (610501),
Vandepoele et al. (2005) identified NBPF14. EST database analysis
revealed NBPF14 expression in fetal liver/spleen, prostate, uterus, and
leiomyosarcoma.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vandepoele et al. (2005) determined that the NBPF14 gene contains at
least 22 coding exons, several of which result from internal
duplication.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and FISH, Vandepoele et al. (2005) mapped
the NBPF14 gene to an NBPF gene cluster on chromosome 1q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Vandepoele, K.; Van Roy, N.; Staes, K.; Speleman, F.; van Roy,
F.: A novel gene family NBPF: intricate structure generated by gene
duplications during primate evolution. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 2265-2274,
2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/24/2011

EDITED carol: 07/05/2011
mgross: 5/25/2011

160760	TITLE *160760 MYOSIN, HEAVY CHAIN 7, CARDIAC MUSCLE, BETA; MYH7
;;MYOSIN, CARDIAC, HEAVY CHAIN, BETA; MYHCB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The structural gene for the beta heavy chain of myosin is expressed
predominantly in fetal life and is switched on in older animals under
conditions of thyroid hormone depletion/replacement and in response to
some physical stresses. Jandreski et al. (1987) presented evidence
indicating that the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain mRNA is expressed in
skeletal muscle tissue. The expression of cardiac beta-myosin heavy
chain mRNA was particularly prominent in the soleus muscle, which is
rich in slow-twitch type I muscle fibers. There were only trace amounts
in the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis, which consist predominantly
of fast-twitch type II fibers.

Diederich et al. (1989) cloned the entire gene.

By scanning mouse myosin genes for intronic microRNAs (miRNAs), van
Rooij et al. (2009) identified Mir208b (613613) within intron 31 of the
Myh7 gene. Northern blot analysis showed that Myh7 and Mir208b were
highly expressed in mouse slow-twitch soleus muscle. Little to no
expression was detected in heart and in the fast-twitch
gastrocnemius/plantaris, tibialis anterior, and extensor digitorum
longus muscles. However, van Rooij et al. (2009) noted that Myh7 is the
predominant myosin in adult heart in large animals, whereas Myh6
(160710) predominates in adult mouse heart.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jaenicke et al. (1990) demonstrated that the MYH7 gene is 22,883 bp
long. The 1,935 amino acids of this protein are encoded by 38 exons. The
5-prime untranslated region (86 bp) is split by 2 introns. The 3-prime
untranslated region is 114 bp long. Three Alu repeats were identified
within the gene and a fourth one in the 3-prime flanking intergenic
region.

Liew et al. (1990) found that like the rat skeletal myosin heavy chain
gene, the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene is divided into 41 exons,
the first 2 of which are noncoding. However, exons 37 and 38 are fused;
they do not have an intervening intron. The gene extends for 21,828
nucleotides and encodes a deduced 1,1939-amino acid protein with a
molecular mass of 222,937 Da.

Van Rooij et al. (2009) identified a microRNA (miRNA), Mir208b (613613),
within intron 31 of the mouse Myh7 gene.

MAPPING

Matsuoka et al. (1989) found that both the alpha and the beta human
cardiac myosin heavy chain genes are located in the 14cen-q13 region;
the assignment was by somatic cell hybridization and in situ
hybridization. Qin et al. (1990) localized the MYH7 gene to 14q12 by in
situ hybridization.

The beta cardiac myosin heavy chain is located on chromosome 14, 3.6 kb
upstream from the alpha cardiac myosin gene. The 2 genes are oriented in
a head-to-tail tandem fashion (Yamauchi-Takihara et al., 1989;
Geisterfer-Lowrance et al., 1990).

GENE FUNCTION

Van Rooij et al. (2007) found that miRNA208A (MIR208A; 611116), a
cardiac-specific miRNA encoded by intron 27 of the mouse and human MYH6
gene, was required for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, fibrosis, and
expression of Myh7 in response to stress and hypothyroidism in mice.

Van Rooij et al. (2009) found that expression of Myh7 and its
intronically encoded miRNA, Mir208b, was upregulated in mouse heart by
hypothyroidism caused by inhibition of triiodothyronine (T3; see 188450)
synthesis. This upregulation was reversed by T3 administration. Gain-
and loss-of-function experiments in mice showed that expression of Myh7
and Mir208b was controlled by the dominant miRNA in mouse heart,
Mir208a. However, van Rooij et al. (2009) noted that, in large animals,
Myh7 is the predominant myosin in adult heart. In contrast, the
predominant myosin in adult mouse heart is Myh6, the host gene of
Mir208a. Thus, van Rooij et al. (2009) suggested that Mir208b, which
shares the same seed sequence as Mir208a, may fulfill the function of
Mir208a in large animals.

In mice, adult cardiomyocytes primarily express alpha-myosin heavy chain
(alpha-MHC, also known as Myh6; 160710), whereas embryonic
cardiomyocytes express beta-MHC (Myh7). Cardiac stress triggers adult
hearts to undergo hypertrophy and a shift from alpha-MHC to fetal
beta-MHC expression. Hang et al. (2010) showed that BRG1 (603254), a
chromatin-remodeling protein, has a critical role in regulating cardiac
growth, differentiation, and gene expression. In embryos, Brg1 promotes
myocyte proliferation by maintaining Bmp10 (608748) and suppressing
p57(kip2) (600856) expression. It preserves fetal cardiac
differentiation by interacting with histone deacetylases (HDACs; see
601241) and poly(ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP; 173870) to repress
alpha-MHC and activate beta-MHC. In adults, Brg1 (also known as Smarca4)
is turned off in cardiomyocytes. It is reactivated by cardiac stresses
and forms a complex with its embryonic partners, HDAC and PARP, to
induce a pathologic alpha-MHC-to-beta-MHC shift. Preventing Brg1
reexpression decreases hypertrophy and reverses this MHC switch. BRG1 is
activated in certain patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, its
level correlating with disease severity and MHC changes. Hang et al.
(2010) concluded that their studies showed that BRG1 maintains
cardiomyocytes in an embryonic state, and demonstrated an epigenetic
mechanism by which 3 classes of chromatin-modifying factors, BRG1, HDAC,
and PARP, cooperate to control developmental and pathologic gene
expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy 1

McKenna (1993) estimated that 40 to 50% of cases of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH; 192600) are due to mutations in the MYH7 gene. He
stated that Kaplan-Meier survival curves for these mutations showed that
the val606-to-met mutation (160760.0005) was associated with normal
survivorship, whereas the arg453-to-cys mutation (160760.0003) was
associated with death in about half the affected individuals by age 40
years.

Anan et al. (1994) presented a schematic of 15 mutations within the MYH7
gene that cause CMH. They described a phe513-to-cys mutation
(160760.0016) in which affected family members had near-normal life
expectancy, and an arg719-to-trp mutation (160760.0017) in 4 unrelated
CMH families with a high incidence of premature death and an average
life expectancy in affected individuals of 38 years. They suggested that
these findings supported the hypothesis that mutations that alter the
charge of the encoded amino acid affects survival more significantly
than those that produce a conservative amino acid change. Kelly and
Strauss (1994) pointed out that all but one of the known mutations of
the MYH7 gene that produce hypertrophic cardiomyopathy result in amino
acid substitutions in the protein head or the region in which the head
and rod of the molecule intersect. In their Figure 2, they diagrammed
the cardiac myosin heavy-chain dimer and the site of the mutations. They
suggested that these mutations represent dominant negatives by
disturbing contractile function despite the production of a normal
protein by the remaining normal allele. Consistent with this conclusion
is the finding of Cuda et al. (1993) that mutant beta-myosin separated
from the heart muscle in cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of the
chromosome 14 type translocate actin filaments with an abnormally low
sliding velocity in motility assays in vitro.

Lankford et al. (1995) compared the contractile properties of single
slow-twitch muscle fibers from patients with 3 distinct CMH-causing MYH7
mutations with those from normal controls. Fibers from the gly741-to-arg
mutation (160760.0011), located near the binding site of essential light
chain, demonstrated decreased maximum velocity of shortening (39% of
normal) and decreased isometric force generation (42% of normal). Fibers
with the arg403-to-gln mutation (160760.0001) (at the actin interface of
myosin) showed lower force/stiffness ratio (56% of normal) and depressed
velocity of shortening (50% of normal). Both of these
mutation-containing fibers displayed abnormal force-velocity
relationships and reduced power output. Fibers from the gly256-to-glu
mutation (160760.0012), located at the end of the ATP-binding pocket,
had contractile properties that were indistinguishable from normal.
Thus, variability was found in the nature and extent of functional
impairments in skeletal fibers containing different MYH7 gene mutations,
and this variability may correlate with the severity and penetrance of
the disease resulting from each mutation.

Rayment et al. (1995) examined 29 missense mutations in the MYH7 gene
that are responsible for 10 to 30% of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy cases and analyzed their effects on the 3-dimensional
structure of skeletal muscle myosin. Arai et al. (1995) reported a
thirtieth missense mutation and stated that these had been found in 49
families worldwide at that time. Almost all were located in the region
of the gene coding for the globular head of the molecule and only 1
mutation was found in both Caucasian and Japanese families.

Seidman (2000) pointed out that correlations between genotype and
prognosis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is possible. Life expectancy is
markedly diminished in individuals with the R719W (160760.0017) and
R403Q (160760.0001) mutations in the MYH7 gene but near normal in
individuals with the E542Q (600958.0006) and 791insG (600958.0011)
mutations in the MYBPC3 gene.

Woo et al. (2003) screened 70 probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
for mutations in the beta-MHC gene. Mutations in this gene were detected
in 15 of 70 probands (21%). Eleven mutations were detected, including 4
novel mutations. Median survival was 66 years (95% CI 64 to 77 years) in
all affected subjects. There was a significant difference in survival
between subjects according to the affected functional domain.
Significant independent predictors of decreased survival were the
nonconservative missense mutations that affected the actin binding site
and those that affected the rod portion of beta-MHC.

Hougs et al. (2005) screened for mutations in the rod region (exons 24
to 40) of MYH7 in 92 Danish patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Using capillary electrophoresis single-strand conformation polymorphism,
3 disease-causing mutations of the rod region were identified in 4
patients, including the R1712W (160760.0032) mutation in 2 patients. Two
of the patients had already been shown to carry other FHC-associated
mutations.

Arad et al. (2005) identified 2 different MYH7 missense mutations in 2
probands with apical hypertrophy from families in which the mutations
also caused other CMH morphologies (see 160760.0038 and 160760.0039,
respectively), and 1 in a sporadic patient with apical hypertrophy
(R243H; 160760.0040).

In a consanguineous British family in which 3 sibs developed
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, respiratory failure, and myosin storage
myopathy (608358), Tajsharghi et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for
a missense mutation in the MYH7 gene (160760.0035).

In a Japanese proband with CMH (CMH17; 613873), Matsushita et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the JPH2 gene
(605267.0004); subsequent analysis of 15 known CMH-associated genes
revealed that the proband also carried 2 mutations in MYH7, F513C
(160760.0016) and A26V. The authors suggested that mutations in both
JPH2 and MYH7 could be associated with the pathogenesis of CMH in this
proband.

In a 32-year-old African American woman with severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and a family history of CMH and sudden cardiac death,
Frazier et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous mutation in the TNNI3
gene (P82S; 191044.0003) and a heterozygous mutation in the MYH7 gene
(R453S; 160760.0043).

- Dilated Cardiomyopathy 1S

Kamisago et al. (2000) performed clinical evaluations in 21 kindreds
with familial dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1S; 613426). In a genomewide
linkage study, a genetic locus for mutations associated with dilated
cardiomyopathy was identified at chromosome 14q11.2-q13 (maximum lod
score = 5.11 at theta = 0.0). Analysis of MYH7 and other genes for
sarcomere proteins revealed heterozygous missense mutations in MYH7 in 2
kindreds (S532P, 160760.0022 and P764L, 160760.0023, respectively).
Affected individuals had neither antecedent cardiac hypertrophy nor
histopathologic findings characteristic of hypertrophy.

- Myosin Storage Myopathy, Laing Distal Myopathy, and Scapuloperoneal
Myopathy

In affected members of a family and in an unrelated patient with myosin
storage myopathy (608358), Tajsharghi et al. (2003) identified a
heterozygous mutation in the MYH7 gene (160760.0028).

Laing et al. (1995) mapped Laing distal myopathy (160500) to chromosome
14. In affected members of 7 separate families with Laing distal
myopathy, Meredith et al. (2004) sequenced the MYH7 gene, a positional
candidate for the site of the causative mutation. They identified 5
heterozygous mutations in 6 families (see 160760.0029-160760.0030) and
no mutations in the seventh family. All 5 mutations were predicted, by
in silico analysis, to disrupt locally the ability of the myosin tail to
form a coiled coil, which is its normal structure. The findings
demonstrated that heterozygous mutations toward the 3-prime end of MYH7
can cause Laing distal myopathy.

Pegoraro et al. (2007) conducted MYH7 gene analysis by
RT-PCR/SSCP/sequencing in 2 patients diagnosed with myosin storage
myopathy and 17 patients diagnosed with scapuloperoneal myopathy of
unknown etiology. They found the R1845W mutation of the MYH7 gene in
both cases of myosin storage myopathy and in 2 of the 17 scapuloperoneal
patients (181430) studied. 5533C-T segregation analysis in the mutation
carrier families identified 11 additional patients. The clinical
spectrum in this cohort of patients included asymptomatic hyperCKemia
(elevated serum creatine kinase), scapuloperoneal myopathy, and proximal
and distal myopathy with muscle hypertrophy. Muscle MRI identified a
unique pattern in the posterior compartment of the thigh, characterized
by early involvement of the biceps femoris and semimembranosus, with
relative sparing of the semitendinosus. Muscle biopsy revealed hyaline
bodies characteristic of myosin storage myopathy in only half of
biopsied patients (2 of 4). These patients without hyaline bodies had
been diagnosed with scapuloperoneal myopathy prior to the identification
of hyaline bodies in other family members, prompting MYH7 gene analysis.
The authors pointed out that patients without hyaline bodies presented
later onset and milder severity.

Armel and Leinwand (2009) analyzed the functional effects of 4 different
MYH7 mutations in the rod or tail domain that were found to be
responsible for myosin storage myopathy: R1845W (160760.0028), H1901L
(160760.0031), E1886K (160760.0035), and L1793P (160760.0037). None of
the mutations altered the secondary structure of the protein, but L1793P
and H1901L showed decreased thermodynamic stability. All mutations
decreased the extent of self-assembly of the light meromyosin rod (less
than 50 to 60%) compared to the wildtype protein. R1845W and H1901L
showed formation of more stable and larger filaments, whereas L1793P and
E1886K showed more rapid filament degradation. Armel and Leinwand (2009)
noted that the assembly of muscle filaments is a multistep process that
involves both the proper folding of alpha-helices into coiled-coils, and
the assembly of these coiled-coils, in proper register, into filaments,
and concluded that defects in any one of these steps can result in
improper filament formation leading to muscle disease.

- Left Ventricular Noncompaction 5

Klaassen et al. (2008) analyzed 6 genes encoding sarcomere proteins in
63 unrelated adult probands with left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC)
but no other congenital heart anomalies (see LVNC5; 613426), and
identified 7 different heterozygous mutations in the MYH7 gene in the
probands from 4 families and in 4 sporadic patients (see, e.g.,
160760.0040-160760.0042). Klaassen et al. (2008) noted that 5 of the 7
mutations were located within the genomic sequence of exon 8 to exon 9
of MYH7, which appeared to be a cluster for LVNC mutations.

In a mother with myosin storage myopathy, who later developed CMH, and
in her daughter, who had early-symptomatic LVNC, Uro-Coste et al. (2009)
identified heterozygosity for the L1793P mutation in MYH7 (160760.0037).

In an analysis of the MYH7 gene in 141 white probands of western
European descent diagnosed with Ebstein anomaly (see 224700), Postma et
al. (2011) identified heterozygous mutations in 8 (see, e.g.,
160760.0045 and 160760.0046). Of these 8 probands, LVNC was present in 7
and uncertain in 1, whereas none of the 133 mutation-negative probands
had LVNC. Evaluation of all available family members of
mutation-positive probands revealed 3 families in which additional
mutation-positive individuals had cardiomyopathy or congenital heart
malformations, including type II atrial septal defect, ventricular
septal defect, bicuspid aortic valve, aortic coarctation, and pulmonary
artery stenosis/hypoplasia.

ANIMAL MODEL

Geisterfer-Lowrance et al. (1996) engineered the human CMH cardiac
myosin heavy chain gene mutation arg403-to-gln (R403Q) into the mouse
genome to create a murine model of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Homozygous mice died within a week after birth, while heterozygous mice
displayed both histologic and hemodynamic abnormalities characteristic
of CMH. In addition, the CMH mice demonstrated gender and developmental
differences. Male CMH mice demonstrated more severe myocyte hypertrophy,
disarray, and interstitial fibrosis than their female littermates, and
both sexes showed increased cardiac dysfunction and histopathology as
they aged. Heterozygous CMH mice also had sudden death of uncertain
etiology, especially during periods of exercise. Berul et al. (1997)
found that in contrast to wildtype mice which had completely normal
cardiac electrophysiology, CMH mice demonstrated (a)
electrocardiographic abnormalities including prolonged repolarization
intervals and rightward axis; (b) electrophysiologic abnormalities
including heterogeneous ventricular conduction properties and prolonged
sinus node recovery time; and (c) inducible ventricular ectopy.

Fatkin et al. (1999) reported further studies of the CMH mouse in which
the arg403-to-gln mutation had been introduced by homologous
recombination. Heterozygous mice developed myocardial histologic
abnormalities similar to those in human CMH by 15 weeks of age.
Sedentary heterozygous mice had a normal life span. Homozygous mutant
mice were liveborn, but, unlike their heterozygous littermates, all died
within 1 week. Fatkin et al. (1999) found that neonatal lethality was
caused by a fulminant dilated cardiomyopathy characterized by myocyte
dysfunction and loss. They studied cardiac dimensions and functions for
the first time in neonatal mice by high frequency (45 MHz)
echocardiography and found that both were normal at birth. Between days
4 and 6, homozygous deficient mice developed a rapidly progressive
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular dilation, wall thinning, and
reduced systolic contraction. Histopathology revealed myocardial
necrosis with dystrophic calcification. Electron microscopy showed
normal architecture intermixed with focal myofibrillar disarray. Fatkin
et al. (1999) speculated that variable incorporation of mutant and
normal MYHC into sarcomeres of heterozygotes may account for focal
myocyte death in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

In R403Q-knockin mice, Gao et al. (1999) observed that during twitch
contractions, peak intracellular Ca(2+) was higher in mutant muscles
than in wildtype muscles, but force development was equivalent in both.
Developed force fell at higher stimulation rates in the mutants but not
in controls. Gao et al. (1999) concluded that calcium cycling and
myofilament properties are both altered in CMH mutant mice.

Marian et al. (1999) created a transgenic rabbit model of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy by injecting a transgene carrying the R403Q mutation into
fertilized zygotes. Expression of transgene mRNA and protein were
confirmed by Northern blotting and 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis
followed by immunoblotting, respectively. Animals carrying the mutant
transgene showed substantial myocyte disarray and a 3-fold increase in
interstitial collagen expression in the myocardium. Mean septal
thickness was comparable between rabbits carrying the wildtype transgene
and nontransgenic littermates, but was significantly increased in the
mutant transgenic animals. Posterior wall thickness and left ventricular
mass were also increased, but dimensions and systolic function were
normal. Premature death was more common in mutant than in wildtype
transgenic rabbits or in nontransgenic littermates. Thus, the phenotype
of patients with the R403Q mutation of the MYH7 was reproduced.

To minimize confounding variables while assessing relationships between
CMH histopathology and arrhythmia vulnerability, Wolf et al. (2005)
generated inbred CMH mice carrying the R403Q mutation and observed
variable susceptibility to arrhythmias, differences in ventricular
hypertrophy, and variable amounts and distribution of fibrosis and
myocyte disarray. There was no correlation between the amount and/or
pattern of fibrosis or the quantity of myocyte disarray and the
propensity for arrhythmia as assessed by ex vivo high-resolution mapping
and in vivo electrophysiologic study; however, the amount of ventricular
hypertrophy was significantly associated with increased arrhythmia
susceptibility. Wolf et al. (2005) concluded that the 3 cardinal
manifestations of CMH (cardiac hypertrophy, myocyte fibrosis, and
disarray) reflect independent pathologic processes within myocytes
carrying a sarcomere gene mutation and that the severity of fibrosis and
disarray is substantially influenced by unknown somatic factors, and
they suggested that a shared pathway triggered by sarcomere gene
mutations links cardiac hypertrophy and arrhythmias in CMH.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG403GLN

In the large French-Canadian kindred originally reported by Pare et al.
(1961) and shown to have linkage of the cardiac disorder (192600) to
markers on the proximal portion of 14q, Geisterfer-Lowrance et al.
(1990) found a missense mutation in the beta cardiac myosin heavy chain
that converted arginine-403 to glutamine (R403Q). A guanine residue at
position 10,162 (enumerated as in Jaenicke et al., 1990) was mutated to
an adenine residue. The mutation generated a new DdeI site and changed
the CGG(arg) codon to CAG(gln). Perryman et al. (1992) found that the
R403Q mutation was identifiable in myocardial mRNA. Ross and Knowlton
(1992) reviewed this discovery beginning with the patients first seen by
Pare in the 1950s.

Using an isolated, isovolumic heart preparation where cardiac
performance was measured simultaneously with cardiac energetics using
(31)P nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Spindler et al. (1998)
studied the effects of the codon 403 missense mutation. They observed 3
major alterations in the physiology and bioenergetics of the mutant
mouse hearts. First, while there was no evidence for systolic
dysfunction, diastolic function was impaired during inotropic
stimulation. Diastolic dysfunction was manifest as both a decreased rate
of left ventricular relaxation and an increase in end-diastolic
pressure. Second, under baseline conditions the mutant R403Q mouse
hearts had lower phosphocreatine and increased inorganic phosphate
contents resulting in a decrease in the calculated value for the free
energy released from ATP hydrolysis. Third, mutant hearts that were
studied unpaced responded to increased perfusate calcium by decreasing
heart rate approximately twice as much as wildtypes. The authors
concluded that the hearts from mice carrying the R403Q mutation have
workload-dependent diastolic dysfunction resembling the human form of
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Changes in high-energy phosphate
content suggested that an energy-requiring process may contribute to the
observed diastolic dysfunction.

Bashyam et al. (2003) pointed out that polymorphism in the ACE1 gene
(106180) had been shown to affect the prognosis in familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. The DD allele of the ACE1 gene (106180.0001) was
associated with a severe form of hypertrophy and sudden death in
patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Iwai et al., 1994).
Tesson et al. (1997) established an association of the D allele at the
ACE1 locus with the R403Q mutation in MYH7, but not with MYBPC3 (600958)
mutations.

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG249GLN

Using a ribonuclease protection assay, Watkins et al. (1992) screened
the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain genes of probands from 25 unrelated
families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600). Seven
different mutations were identified in 12 of the 25 families; see
160760.0003-160760.0007. All were missense mutations; 5 were clustered
in the head of the beta-chain, which comprises the 5-prime 866 amino
acids, and 2 were located in the 5-prime or hinge portion of the rod
part. Six of the mutations resulted in a change in the charge of the
amino acid. These patients had a shorter life expectancy (mean age at
death, 33 years) than did patients with the one mutation that did not
produce a change in charge, val606-to-met. One of the mutations they
found was a substitution of glutamine for arginine-249.

.0003
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG453CYS

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found substitution of cysteine
for arginine-453 in 2 unrelated families with familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600). One of the families also had an alpha/beta
cardiac myosin heavy chain hybrid gene which was presumably of no
functional significance, inasmuch as the 5-prime promoter region was
derived from the alpha subunit.

In a 3-generation Chinese family, Ko et al. (1996) observed the
coexistence of sudden death and end-stage heart failure due to the
arg453-to-cys mutation. The average age of death in affected members of
the family was 34 years.

.0004
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY584ARG

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found the gly584-to-arg mutation
in 2 unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(192600).

.0005
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, VAL606MET

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found this mutation in 3
unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600).
Of the 7 mutations they found, this was the only one that produced no
change in the charge of the amino acid. Although the affected patients
did not differ in other clinical manifestations of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, patients in this family had nearly normal survival; mean
age at death was 33 years in the 11 families with one or another
mutation that substituted an amino acid with a different charge.

Blair et al. (2001) identified the val606-to-met mutation in a family in
which 2 individuals had suffered sudden death at an early age. The
mutation was found to be in cis with an ala728-to-val (A728V) mutation
(160760.0025).

.0006
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU924LYS

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found this mutation in 1 family
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600). The mutation was
found in exon 23 by RNase protection assay. It occurred as a new
mutation in a 44-year-old female; the parents lacked the mutation which,
however, was transmitted to her 24-year-old daughter.

.0007
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU949LYS

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found this mutation in 1 family
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600).

.0008
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG723CYS

Among 7 individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600),
Watkins et al. (1992) identified mutations in the beta cardiac MHC genes
in 2. Since the parents were neither clinically nor genetically
affected, the authors concluded that the mutations in each proband arose
de novo. Transmission of the mutation and disease to an offspring
occurred in 1 pedigree (160760.0006), predicting that these were
germline mutations. One proband, a 40-year-old female, was shown by
RNase protection assay to have a C-to-T transition in exon 20 at
nucleotide 2253, leading to a change from arginine to cysteine at codon
723. Arginine residue 723 is conserved among all known cardiac MHCs and
all vertebrate striated muscle MHCs except the human perinatal and
rabbit skeletal isoforms; mutation of a cysteine residue constitutes a
nonconservative substitution with a change in net charge.

.0009
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, 2.4-KB DEL

In a family with several members affected with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600), Marian et al. (1992) identified a novel 9.5-kb
BamHI RFLP detected by an MYH7 probe on Southern blots of DNA from the
proband. PCR was used to amplify the segment of the gene; sequence
analysis showed a 2.4-kb deletion involving 1 allele. The deletion
included part of intron 39, exon 40 including the 3-prime untranslated
region and the polyadenylation signal, and part of the region between
the beta and alpha myosin heavy chain genes. The deletion was inherited
by 2 daughters of the proband and a grandson, aged 33, 32, and 10 years,
respectively, who were, however, free of signs of the disorder. The
67-year-old proband had late onset of the disorder which was first
diagnosed in him at the age of 59 when he presented with atypical chest
pain, lightheadedness, and decreased exercise tolerance. On cardiac
examination, he showed an S4 heart sound and a systolic ejection murmur.
EKG showed left ventricular hypertrophy with repolarization
abnormalities. Ventricular hypertrophy was demonstrated by
echocardiogram which also showed systolic anterior motion of the
anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. There was a 25-mm Hg left
ventricular outflow tract gradient. From observations in C. elegans, it
was predicted that an unstable mRNA might result from this mutation.

.0010
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, LEU908VAL

Fananapazir et al. (1993) found evidence, on soleus muscle biopsy, of
central core disease (117000) in 10 of 13 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
patients with the leu908-to-val mutation. Although the mutations in the
MYH7 gene were associated with skeletal muscle changes characteristic of
central core disease, such was not found in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy unlinked to MYH7. Notably, in 1 branch of a family with
the L908V mutation, 2 adults and 3 children had histologic changes of
central core disease without evidence of cardiac hypertrophy by
echocardiogram. One of the adults had skeletal myopathic changes.
McKenna (1993), who stated that he had never seen clinical evidence of
skeletal myopathy in patients with CMH1 (192600), doubted the
significance of the findings.

.0011
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY741ARG

In 1 of 3 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) and the
G741R mutation, Fananapazir et al. (1993) found microscopic changes of
central core disease on soleus muscle biopsy.

.0012
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY256GLU

In 1 patient with the G256E mutation and familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600), Fananapazir et al. (1993) found histologic
changes on soleus muscle biopsy consistent with central core disease.

.0013
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ASP778GLY

Using PCR-DNA conformation polymorphism analysis, Harada et al. (1993)
found an A-to-G transition at codon 778 leading to replacement of the
asp residue by gly. The mutation was found in 5 unrelated Japanese
patients and their affected family members with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600).

.0014
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG403LEU

In 2 French pedigrees with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(192600), Dausse et al. (1993) performed linkage analysis using 2
microsatellite markers located in the MYH7 gene, as well as 4 highly
informative markers that mapped to the 14q11-q12 region. Linkage to the
markers was found in pedigree 720, but results were not conclusive for
pedigree 730. Haplotype of 6 markers allowed identification of affected
individuals and of some unaffected subjects who were carrying the
disease gene. Two novel missense mutations were identified in exon 13 by
direct sequencing: arg403-to-leu and arg403-to-trp in families 720 and
730, respectively. The arg403-to-leu mutation was associated with
incomplete penetrance, a high incidence of sudden deaths and severe
cardiac events, whereas the consequences of the arg403-to-trp mutation
appeared to be less severe. Codon 403 of the MYH7 gene appears,
therefore, to be a hotspot for mutations causing CMH. The first mutation
identified in this disorder involved codon 403 (160760.0001).

.0015
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG403TRP

See 160760.0014.

.0016
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, PHE513CYS

In a family of Japanese ancestry in which a mild form of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) occurred, Anan et al. (1994) found
a 1624T-G transversion in exon 15, resulting in a phe513-to-cys (F513C)
substitution. The F513C mutation did not alter the charge of the encoded
amino acid, which may be related to the finding of near-normal life
expectancy in this family.

In a Japanese proband with CMH (CMH17; 613873), Matsushita et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the JPH2 gene
(605267.0004); subsequent analysis of 15 known CMH-associated genes
revealed that the proband also carried 2 heterozygous mutations in MYH7,
F513C and A26V. Her newborn son, who had no signs of CMH on
echocardiography at 1 day of age, carried both the JPH2 G505S mutation
and the MYH7 A26V mutation. The authors suggested that mutations in both
JPH2 and MYH7 could be associated with the pathogenesis of CMH in this
proband.

.0017
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG719TRP

In 4 unrelated families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) with a
high incidence of premature death and an average life expectancy in
affected individuals of 38 years, Anan et al. (1994) found an R719W
mutation in exon 19 changing the charge of the amino acid by -1. The
difference in survival of individuals bearing the R719W mutation as
compared with those with the F513C mutation (160760.0016) was
demonstrated by Kaplan-Meier product-limit curves (their Figure 4).

In a 6.5-year-old boy with a severe form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
Jeschke et al. (1998) identified 2 missense mutations: one was the R719W
mutation and the other was an M349T mutation (160760.0020), which was
inherited through the maternal grandmother. Six family members who were
carriers of the M349T mutation were clinically unaffected. The authors
hypothesized that compound heterozygosity for the R719W and M349T
mutations resulted in the particularly severe phenotype of early onset.

.0018
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY716ARG

In a small family from the U.K. in which 2 individuals affected by
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) were alive, including one who had
been resuscitated after sudden death at age 19, Anan et al. (1994) found
a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2232 resulting in a gly716-to-arg
(G716R) substitution (charge change = +1) of the encoded amino acid.

.0019
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU935LYS

In 2 brothers with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) who died in
their thirties, Nishi et al. (1994) found a G-to-A transition in codon
935 of the MYH7 gene, leading to a replacement of glutamic acid with
lysine. The brothers were homozygous, whereas the parents, who were
first cousins, were heterozygous for the mutation and had cardiac
hypertrophy without clinical symptoms. An elder sister was also
heterozygous for the mutation but did not manifest cardiac hypertrophy.
Nishi et al. (1994) suggested that there was a gene dosage effect on
clinical manifestations in this family.

.0020
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, MET349THR

See 160760.0017 and Jeschke et al. (1998).

.0021
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG719GLN

In a study of mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) in
2 South African subpopulations, Moolman-Smook et al. (1999) identified
an arg719-to-gln (R719Q) mutation in the MYH7 gene. The mutation
occurred in a family of white ancestry and had previously been described
by Watkins et al. (1992) in a Canadian family. The codon is the same as
that involved in the arg719-to-trp mutation (160760.0017).

.0022
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, SER532PRO

In a family with familial dilated cardiomyopathy-1S (613426), Kamisago
et al. (2000) demonstrated a T-to-C change at nucleotide 1680 in exon 16
of the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene, causing a ser532-to-pro
missense mutation. An affected member of this family had received a
cardiac transplant cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene. An affected
member of this family had received a cardiac transplant at 23 years of
age. A 20-year-old female suffered postpartum congestive heart failure
and sudden death. A female child developed congestive heart failure at 2
years of age.

.0023
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, PHE764LEU

In a family with familial dilated cardiomyopathy-1S (613426), Kamisago
et al. (2000) found a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 2378 in exon 21
of the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene, causing a phe764-to-leu
missense mutation. The 33-year-old father was given a diagnosis of
dilated cardiomyopathy at age 11 years. A daughter died suddenly at the
age of 2 months. A 4-year-old daughter, diagnosed with dilated
cardiomyopathy at the time of birth, was found to have fetal left
ventricular dilatation.

.0024
CARDIOMYOPATHY, HYPERTROPHIC, MIDVENTRICULAR, DIGENIC
MYH7, GLU743ASP

Davis et al. (2001) identified a double point mutation in the MYLK2 gene
(606566) on the maternal haplotype in a 13-year-old white male proband
with early midventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see 192600). The
MYLK2 mutations were ala87 to val (A87V; 606566.0001) and ala95 to glu
(A95E; 606566.0002). The proband also inherited a glu743-to-asp mutation
(E743D) in the beta-myosin gene (MYH7) from his father. Although the son
had significant disease at an early age, the father and mother came to
medical attention only after the diagnosis of the son. Echocardiographic
evaluation showed that both parents had similarly abnormal
asymmetrically thickened hearts. The kindred was too small for linkage
analysis, and the authors proposed that the mutant MYLK2 may be
functionally abnormal and may consequently stimulate cardiac
hypertrophy. Davis et al. (2001) concluded that the increased severity
of the disease at such a young age in the proband suggests a compound
effect.

.0025
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ALA728VAL

Blair et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 20 resulting
in an ala728-to-val (A728V) mutation in cis with a val606-to-met (V606M;
160760.0005) mutation in a family in which 3 individuals had suffered
sudden death. Blair et al. (2001) suggested that this second mutation in
cis with the V606M mutation was responsible for the more severe
phenotype in this family.

.0026
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, ALA223THR

In a series of 46 young patients with dilated cardiomyopathy-1S
(613426), Daehmlow et al. (2002) identified 2 mutations in the MYH7
gene, one of which was a G-to-A transition in exon 8 at nucleotide 7799,
resulting in an ala223-to-thr (A223T) substitution. The mutation
affected a buried residue near the ATP-binding site. The patient with
this mutation was 35 years old when diagnosed with dilated
cardiomyopathy.

.0027
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, SER642LEU

In a series of 46 young patients with dilated cardiomyopathy-1S
(613426), Daehmlow et al. (2002) found 2 mutations in the MYH7 gene, one
of which was a C-to-T transition in exon 17 at nucleotide 12164,
resulting in a ser642-to-leu (S642L) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The mutation occurred at the actin-myosin interface. The
patient with this mutation was 18 years old when diagnosed with dilated
cardiomyopathy.

.0028
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE
SCAPULOPERONEAL MYOPATHY, MYH7-RELATED, INCLUDED
MYH7, ARG1845TRP

In affected members of a family and in an unrelated patient with myosin
storage myopathy (608358) without cardiomyopathy, Tajsharghi et al.
(2003) identified a heterozygous 23014C-T transition in the MYH7 gene,
resulting in an arg1845-to-trp (R1845W) substitution. The mutation is
located in the distal end of the filament-forming rod region of the
protein. Tajsharghi et al. (2003) suggested that the mutation may
interfere with the interaction of MYH7 with myosin-binding proteins and
inhibit myosin assembly into thick filaments.

Laing et al. (2005) identified the R1845W mutation in 2 unrelated
Belgian patients with myosin storage myopathy. Neither patient had a
family history of the disease. The mutation was predicted to impair the
coiled-coil structure of the protein.

Pegoraro et al. (2007) conducted MYH7 gene analysis by
RT-PCR/SSCP/sequencing in 2 patients diagnosed with myosin storage
myopathy and 17 patients diagnosed with scapuloperoneal myopathy of
unknown etiology. They found the arg1845-to-trp mutation of the MYH7
gene in both cases of myosin storage myopathy and in 2 of the 17
scapuloperoneal patients (181430) studied. 5533C-T segregation analysis
in the mutation carrier families identified 11 additional patients. The
clinical spectrum in this cohort of patients included asymptomatic
hyperCKemia (elevated serum creatine kinase), scapuloperoneal myopathy,
and proximal and distal myopathy with muscle hypertrophy. Muscle MRI
identified a unique pattern in the posterior compartment of the thigh,
characterized by early involvement of the biceps femoris and
semimembranosus, with relative sparing of the semitendinosus. Pegoraro
et al. (2007) concluded that phenotypic and histopathologic variability
may underlie MYH7 gene mutation and that the absence of hyaline bodies
in muscle biopsies does not rule out MYH7 gene mutations.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009) showed that the R1845W
mutant protein was nearly indistinguishable from wildtype in both
secondary structural characteristics and biophysical parameters.
However, compared to the wildtype protein, the mutant protein was unable
to assemble to the same extent, formed larger structures, and formed
more stable paracrystals. The results suggested that the R1845W mutation
alters the interactions between filaments such that their assembly is
less constrained, causing the formation of abnormally large,
degradation-resistant structures. Similar results were found for H1901L
(160760.0031).

.0029
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, ARG1500PRO

In an Australian patient with sporadic Laing distal myopathy (160500),
Meredith et al. (2004) identified an arg1500-to-pro (R1500P) mutation in
exon 32 of the MYH7 gene. Mild talipes equinovarus had been noted at
birth but corrected itself. By the time the patient was 4 years old, she
was noted to have weakness of ankle dorsiflexion. Progressive weakness
of legs and hands followed, with involvement of the arms at 11 years of
age.

.0030
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, LYS1617DEL

In affected members of previously reported families with Laing distal
myopathy (160500) from Germany (Voit et al., 2001) and Austria (Zimprich
et al., 2000), Meredith et al. (2004) identified deletion of a lysine at
position 1617 in exon 34 of the MYH7 gene.

.0031
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE
MYH7, HIS1904LEU

In affected members of a Saudi Arabian family with autosomal dominant
hyaline body myopathy, or myosin storage myopathy (608358), reported by
Bohlega et al. (2003), Bohlega et al. (2004) identified a 25596A-T
transversion in the MYH7 gene, resulting in a his1904-to-leu (H1904L)
substitution in a highly conserved residue in the coiled-coil tail
region of the protein. The mutation was not identified in 130 control
chromosomes. None of the patients had cardiac abnormalities. The authors
noted that the H1904L mutation is adjacent to a critical assembly
competent domain and suggested that the mutation may cause improper
assembly of the thick filament or interfere with stability of the
protein.

Oldfors et al. (2005) used a different numbering system and stated that
the mutation described by Bohlega et al. (2004) should be HIS1901LEU.
They asserted that the histidine at residue 1901 occupies the 'f'
position of the heptad repeat of the coiled-coil domain, whereas residue
1904 is not at an 'f' position in the heptad repeat sequence. In
response, Meyer (2005) stated that the mutation occupies an 'f' position
regardless of the numbering system used.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009), who also referred to
this mutation as H1901L, indicated that the mutant protein had decreased
thermodynamic stability. In addition, the extent of assembly of the tail
region was decreased compared to wildtype, and the paracrystals were
much larger and more stable than wildtype. The findings suggested that
the E1901L mutation alters the interactions between filaments such that
larger, more stable structures are formed. Similar results were observed
for R1845W (160760.0028).

.0032
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG1712TRP

In 2 Danish patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600),
Hougs et al. (2005) identified a 21815C-T transition in exon 35 of the
MYH7 gene, resulting in an arg1712-to-trp substitution (R1712W) in the
myosin rod region.

.0033
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU483LYS

In a family with CMH (192600) previously reported by Hengstenberg et al.
(1993, 1994), Richard et al. (1999) found that of 8 affected members, 4
had a G-to-A transition in exon 15 of the MYH7 gene, leading to a
glu483-to-lys (E483K) substitution; 2 had a G-to-T mutation at codon
1096 of the MYBPC3 gene (600958.0014) and 2 were doubly heterozygous for
the 2 mutations. The E483K mutation was thought to affect a protein
domain involved in actin fixation.

.0034
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG870HIS

In 3 affected members of a large consanguineous Indian kindred with
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600), Tanjore et al. (2006)
identified a G-to-A transition in exon 22 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in
an arg870-to-his (R870H) substitution in the rod region. The 2 affected
homozygotes had asymmetric septal hypertrophy without obstructive
outflow, and one of them died of heart failure at age 37 years. The
third patient was heterozygous for the R870H mutation and had
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with obstructive outflow. Analysis of family
members identified the heterozygous R870H mutation in 18 individuals, of
whom 10 were symptomatic. Tanjore et al. (2006) estimated the penetrance
of the R870H mutation to be 59% in general, whereas 75% of males and 44%
of females were clinically symptomatic, suggesting that female mutation
carriers have a better prognosis.

.0035
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE, INCLUDED
MYH7, GLU1883LYS

In a 44-year-old male with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and respiratory
failure (192600), born of second-cousin British parents, Tajsharghi et
al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a 24012G-A transition in exon 38
of the MYH7 gene, resulting in a glu1883-to-lys (E1883K) substitution at
a highly conserved residue in the distal end of the filament-forming rod
region. The proband had 2 similarly affected sibs who had died at ages
32 years and 57 years of cardiorespiratory failure; muscle biopsies from
all 3 sibs showed findings typical for myosin storage myopathy (608358).
The unaffected parents were presumed heterozygous carriers of the
mutation, and another sib was unaffected. There was no family history of
muscle weakness.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009), who referred to this
mutation as E1886K, showed that the mutant protein showed no major
differences in secondary structure or biophysical parameters from
wildtype. However, that mutant protein had a decreased ability to
assemble to the same extent as wildtype, and the paracrystals formed
were more readily degraded by proteolysis. The authors concluded that
altered packing of the filaments may destabilize them.

.0036
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, THR441MET

In a Tanzanian boy with Laing distal myopathy (160500), Darin et al.
(2007) identified a heterozygous 1408C-T transition in the MYH7 gene,
resulting in a thr441-to-met (T441M) substitution in the globular head
of the myosin heavy chain. The patient had distal muscle weakness in the
lower limbs and mild atrial enlargement. Darin et al. (2007) noted that
most patients with Laing myopathy have mutations in the rod region of
the protein and suggested that the cardiac involvement in this child may
be due to the mutation affecting the globular region.

.0037
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1, INCLUDED;;
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5, INCLUDED
MYH7, LEU1793PRO

In 1 of 2 sibs with myosin storage myopathy (608358) originally reported
by Cancilla et al. (1971), Dye et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous
5378T-C transition in exon 37 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in a
leu1793-to-pro (L1793P) substitution in the light meromyosin (LMM)
region of the myosin heavy chain tail. The sibs presumably had the
disease because of gonadal mosaicism in 1 of the unaffected parents,
although this could not be confirmed.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009) showed that the L1793P
mutation did not differ in protein secondary structure or in the
alpha-helical content compared to wildtype, but decreased thermodynamic
stability compared to wildtype. The L1793P mutation altered the ability
of LMM to assemble, presumably because of the increased instability of
the molecule. Although the paracrystals formed were similar to wildtype,
they were more susceptible to proteolytic cleavage. The authors
suggested that the L1793P mutation destabilized the dimer interface
under conditions similar to those found in vivo, which affects the
ability of LMM to assemble properly.

In a mother with myosin storage myopathy who later developed
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH1; 192600) and in her daughter who had
early symptomatic left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC5; see 613426),
Uro-Coste et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for the L1793P
mutation in MYH7. The daughter did not complain of muscle weakness, but
clinical examination revealed bilateral wasting of the distal leg
anterior compartment, and she had some difficulty with heel-walking.

.0038
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU497ASP

In affected members of a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-1
(192600), Arad et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a
glu497-to-asp (E497D) substitution in the MYH7 gene. The proband had
apical hypertrophy with associated electrocardiographic changes of left
ventricular hypertrophy and deeply inverted precordial T waves, whereas
a family member with concurrent coronary artery disease who carried the
mutation had massive concentric hypertrophy with an interventricular
septal thickness of 29 mm.

.0039
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ASP906GLY

In 2 sibs with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-1 (192600), Arad et al.
(2005) identified heterozygosity for an asp906-to-gly (D906G)
substitution in the MYH7 gene. The proband had apical hypertrophy,
whereas the sib, who had sudden death at 45 years of age, was found on
necropsy to have massive asymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy with
an interventricular septal thickness greater than 30 mm and a posterior
left ventricular wall that was 18 mm thick. Arad et al. (2005) noted
that the D906G mutation had previously been identified by Ho et al.
(2002) in 22 affected members of a CMH family with a range of maximum
left ventricular wall thickness of 13 to 29 mm; none had apical
hypertrophy.

.0040
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5, INCLUDED
MYH7, ARG243HIS

In a 40-year-old man with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-1 (192600) who
presented with presyncope and was found to have apical hypertrophy, Arad
et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for an arg243-to-his (R243H)
substitution in the MYH7 gene.

In affected members of a 3-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant left ventricular noncompaction but no other congenital heart
anomalies (LVNC5; see 613426), previously studied by Sasse-Klaassen et
al. (2003) as 'family INVM-107,' Klaassen et al. (2008) identified
heterozygosity for an 814G-A transition in the MYH7 gene, resulting in
the R243H substitution. Noncompaction in all 4 affected individuals
involved the apex and mid-left ventricular wall, and the right ventricle
was involved as well in 2 patients.

.0041
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, IVS8DS, G-A, +1

In affected members of 2 families segregating autosomal dominant left
ventricular noncompaction but no other congenital heart anomalies
(LVNC5; see 613426), 1 of which was previously studied by Sasse-Klaassen
et al. (2003) as 'family INVM-101,' Klaassen et al. (2008) identified
heterozygosity for an 818+1G-A transition at the splice donor site in
intron 8 of the MYH7 gene. The mutation segregated with disease in both
families; haplotype analysis ruled out a founding mutation. Clinical
evaluation in both families was remarkable for the very pronounced
morphology of LVNC. The proband of family INVM-101 was diagnosed because
of inverted T-waves and later had a stroke and systemic peripheral
emboli, whereas his brother initially presented with decompensated heart
failure and pulmonary emboli; both patients remained stable over a
period of 8 years. Other affected members of family INVM-101 fulfilled
morphologic LVNC criteria but were clinically asymptomatic. The proband
of the other family was diagnosed because of atypical chest pain; he and
his affected 8-year-old son had no signs of heart failure.

.0042
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, ALA1766THR

In a 20-year-old man with left ventricular noncompaction but no other
congenital heart anomalies (LVNC5; see 613426), Klaassen et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 5382G-A transition in exon 37 of
the MYH7 gene, resulting in an ala1766-to-thr (A1766T) substitution. The
proband was initially diagnosed due to arrhythmias on routine
electrocardiogram, but his left ventricular systolic function
subsequently deteriorated over a period of 6 years; sustained
ventricular tachycardia resulted in implantation of an intracardiac
defibrillator. The mutation was not present in his unaffected parents.

.0043
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG453SER

In a 32-year-old African American woman with severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and a family history of CMH and sudden cardiac death,
Frazier et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for a 1357C-A
transversion in exon 14 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in an arg453-to-ser
(R453S) substitution, as well as a heterozygous missense mutation in the
TNNI3 gene (191044.0003). Her affected 8-year-old daughter carried only
the heterozygous MYH7 mutation.

.0044
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, 3-BP DEL, AAG

In affected members of an Italian American family with Laing distal
myopathy (160500) reported by Hedera et al. (2003), Meredith et al.
(2004) identified a heterozygous 3-bp deletion of 1 of 3 consecutive AAG
triplets in exon 36 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in the deletion of
lys1729 (lys1729del).

Muelas et al. (2010) identified the lys1729del mutation in 29 clearly
affected individuals from 4 unrelated families in the Safor region of
Spain. There was great phenotypic variability. The age at onset ranged
from congenital to 50 years, with a mean of 14 years. All patients
presented with weakness of great toe/ankle dorsiflexors, and many had
associated neck flexor (78%), finger extensor (78%), mild facial (70%),
or proximal muscle (65%) weakness. Five patients had cardiac
abnormalities, including dilated cardiomyopathy, left ventricular
relaxation impairment, and conduction abnormalities. The spectrum of
disability ranged from asymptomatic to wheelchair-confined, but life
expectancy was not affected. EMG showed myopathic and neurogenic
features, and muscle biopsies showed fiber type disproportion,
core/minicore lesions, and mitochondrial abnormalities. These findings
expanded the phenotypic spectrum of Laing myopathy, but the wide
spectrum associated with a single mutation was noteworthy.

Muelas et al. (2012) identified a common 41.2-kb short haplotype
including the lys1729del mutation in both Spanish patients from the
Safor region and in the Italian American family reported by Hedera et
al. (2003), indicating a founder effect. However, microsatellite markers
both up- and downstream of the mutation did not match, indicating
multiple recombination events. The mutation was estimated to have been
introduced into the Safor population about 375 to 420 years ago (15
generations ago). The region is located in the southeast of Valencia on
the Mediterranean coast of Spain. Muelas et al. (2012) hypothesized that
the families from Safor were descendants of the Genoese who had
repopulated this Spanish region in the 17th century after the Muslims
were expelled; in fact, many of the surnames of the Safor families with
Laing myopathy had an Italian origin.

.0045
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, TYR283ASP

In affected individuals from 2 white families of western European
descent segregating autosomal dominant left ventricular noncompaction
(LVNC5; 613426), Postma et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a
mutation at nucleotide 933 in exon 10 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in a
tyr283-to-asp (Y283D) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation segregated with disease in both families and was not found in
more than 980 ethnically matched control chromosomes. The 2 probands had
other cardiac malformations in addition to LVNC, including Ebstein
anomaly in both as well as type II atrial septal defect in 1 and
pulmonary artery hypoplasia in the other. One family had 5 more affected
individuals over 3 generations, 2 of whom had other cardiac
malformations, including Ebstein anomaly in 1 and perimembranous
ventricular septal defect in 1; 2 of the patients had only mild left
ventricular apical hypertrabeculation. In the other family, the
proband's asymptomatic mutation-positive father was found to have LVNC
by screening echocardiography; in addition, a paternal aunt was reported
to have heart failure, and the paternal grandfather had received an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.

.0046
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, ASN1918LYS

In 4 affected individuals over 3 generations of a white family of
western European descent with left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC5;
613426), Postma et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a mutation
in exon 39 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in an asn1918-to-lys (N1918K)
substitution at a conserved residue. The mutation segregated with
disease in the family and was not found in more than 980 ethnically
matched control chromosomes. In addition to marked LVNC, the 39-year-old
proband exhibited Ebstein anomaly, which was discovered upon evaluation
of a cardiac murmur at 3 years of age. She remained asymptomatic despite
significant tricuspid regurgitation from age 30 years. She had a
mutation-positive son with bicuspid aortic valve and aortic coarctation
in whom echocardiography at age 5 years also showed LVNC. Her
asymptomatic mutation-positive mother and brother were both found to
have LVNC by echocardiography, and her brother also had LV dilation with
dysfunction. In an asymptomatic mutation-positive cousin, cardiomyopathy
could not be ruled out due to poor imaging quality.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Kurabayashi et al. (1988); Saez et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Anan, R.; Greve, G.; Thierfelder, L.; Watkins, H.; McKenna, W.
J.; Solomon, S.; Vecchio, C.; Shono, H.; Nakao, S.; Tanaka, H.; Mares,
A., Jr.; Towbin, J. A.; Spirito, P.; Roberts, R.; Seidman, J. G.;
Seidman, C. E.: Prognostic implications of novel beta-cardiac myosin
heavy chain gene mutations that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Clin. Invest. 93: 280-285, 1994.

2. Arad, M.; Penas-Lado, M.; Monserrat, L.; Maron, B. J.; Sherrid,
M.; Ho, C. Y.; Barr, S.; Karim, A.; Olson, T. M.; Kamisago, M.; Seidman,
J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Gene mutations in apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 112:
2805-2811, 2005.

3. Arai, S.; Matsuoka, R.; Hirayama, K.; Sakurai, H.; Tamura, M.;
Ozawa, T.; Kimura, M.; Imamura, S.; Furutani, Y.; Joh-o, K.; Kawana,
M.; Takao, A.; Hosoda, S.; Momma, K.: Missense mutation of the beta-cardiac
myosin heavy-chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 58: 267-276, 1995.

4. Armel, T. Z.; Leinwand, L. A.: Mutations in the alpha-myosin rod
cause myosin storage myopathy via multiple mechanisms. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 106: 6291-6296, 2009.

5. Bashyam, M. D.; Savithri, G. R.; Kumar, M. S.; Narasimhan, C.;
Nallari, P.: Molecular genetics of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(FHC). J. Hum. Genet. 48: 55-64, 2003.

6. Berul, C. I.; Christe, M. E.; Aronovitz, M. J.; Seidman, C. E.;
Seidman, J. G.; Mendelsohn, M. E.: Electrophysiological abnormalities
and arrhythmias in alpha-MHC mutant familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
mice. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 570-576, 1997.

7. Blair, E.; Price, S. J.; Baty, C. J.; Ostman-Smith, I.; Watkins,
H.: Mutations in cis can confound genotype-phenotype correlations
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 38: 385-387,
2001.

8. Bohlega, S.; Abu-Amero, S. N.; Wakil, S. M.; Carroll, P.; Al-Amr,
R.; Lach, B.; Al-Sayed, Y.; Cupler, E. J.; Meyer, B. F.: Mutation
of the slow myosin heavy chain rod domain underlies hyaline body myopathy. Neurology 62:
1518-1521, 2004.

9. Bohlega, S.; Lach, B.; Meyer, B. F.; Al Said, Y.; Kambouris, M.;
Al Homsi, M.; Cupler, E. J.: Autosomal dominant hyaline body myopathy:
clinical variability and pathologic findings. Neurology 61: 1519-1523,
2003.

10. Cancilla, P. A.; Kalyanaraman, K.; Verity, M. A.; Munsat, T.;
Pearson, C. M.: Familial myopathy with probable lysis of myofibrils
in type 1 fibers. Neurology 21: 579-585, 1971.

11. Cuda, G.; Fananapazir, L.; Zhu, W.-S.; Sellers, J. R.; Epstein,
N. D.: Skeletal muscle expression and abnormal function of beta-myosin
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 91: 2861-2865,
1993.

12. Daehmlow, S.; Erdmann, J.; Knueppel, T.; Gille, C.; Froemmel,
C.; Hummel, M.; Hetzer, R.; Regitz-Zagrosek, V.: Novel mutations
in sarcomeric protein genes in dilated cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 298: 116-120, 2002.

13. Darin, N.; Tajsharghi, H.; Ostman-Smith, I.; Gilljam, T.; Oldfors,
A.: New skeletal myopathy and cardiomyopathy associated with a missense
mutation in MYH7. Neurology 68: 2041-2042, 2007.

14. Dausse, E.; Komajda, M.; Fetler, L.; Dubourg, O.; Dufour, C.;
Carrier, L.; Wisnewsky, C.; Bercovici, J.; Hengstenberg, C.; Al-Mahdawi,
S.; Isnard, R.; Hagege, A.; Bouhour, J.-B.; Desnos, M.; Beckmann,
J.; Weissenbach, J.; Schwartz, K.; Guicheney, P.: Familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: microsatellite haplotyping and identification of a
hot spot for mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene. J. Clin.
Invest. 92: 2807-2813, 1993.

15. Davis, J. S.; Hassanzadeh, S.; Winitsky, S.; Lin, H.; Satorius,
C.; Vemuri, R.; Aletras, A. H.; Wen, H.; Epstein, N. D.: The overall
pattern of cardiac contraction depends on a spatial gradient of myosin
regulatory light chain phosphorylation. Cell 107: 631-641, 2001.

16. Diederich, K. W.; Eisele, I.; Ried, T.; Jaenicke, T.; Lichter,
P.; Vosberg, H.-P.: Isolation and characterization of the complete
human beta-myosin heavy chain gene. Hum. Genet. 81: 214-220, 1989.

17. Dye, D. E.; Azzarelli, B.; Goebel, H. H.; Laing, N. G.: Novel
slow-skeletal myosin (MYH7) mutation in the original myosin storage
myopathy kindred. Neuromusc. Disord. 16: 357-360, 2006.

18. Fananapazir, L.; Dalakas, M. C.; Cyran, F.; Cohn, G.; Epstein,
N. D.: Missense mutations in the beta-myosin heavy-chain gene cause
central core disease in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 90: 3993-3997, 1993.

19. Fatkin, D.; Christe, M. E.; Aristizabal, O.; McConnell, B. K.;
Srinivasan, S.; Schoen, F. J.; Seidman, C. E.; Turnbull, D. H.; Seidman,
J. G.: Neonatal cardiomyopathy in mice homozygous for the arg403-to-gln
mutation in the alpha cardiac myosin heavy chain gene. J. Clin. Invest. 103:
147-153, 1999.

20. Frazier, A.; Judge, D. P.; Schulman, S. P.; Johnson, N.; Holmes,
K. W.; Murphy, A. M.: Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated
with cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain and troponin I mutations. Pediat.
Cardiol. 29: 846-850, 2008.

21. Gao, W. D.; Perez, N. G.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.; Marban,
E.: Altered cardiac excitation-contraction coupling in mutant mice
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 103:
661-666, 1999.

22. Geisterfer-Lowrance, A. A.; Christe, M.; Conner, D. A.; Ingwall,
J. S.; Schoen, F.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: A mouse model
of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Science 272: 731-734, 1996.

23. Geisterfer-Lowrance, A. A. T.; Kass, S.; Tanigawa, G.; Vosberg,
H.-P.; McKenna, W.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: A molecular basis
for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a beta cardiac myosin heavy
chain gene missense mutation. Cell 62: 999-1006, 1990.

24. Hang, C. T.; Yang, J.; Han, P.; Cheng, H.-L.; Shang, C.; Ashley,
E.; Zhou, B.; Chang, C.-P.: Chromatin regulation by Brg1 underlies
heart muscle development and disease. Nature 466: 62-67, 2010. Note:
Erratum: Nature 475: 532 only, 2011.

25. Harada, H.; Kimura, A.; Nishi, H.; Sasazuki, T.; Toshima, H.:
A missense mutation of cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene linked
to familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in affected Japanese families. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 194: 791-798, 1993.

26. Hedera, P.; Petty, E. M.; Bui, M. R.; Blaivas, M.; Fink, J. K.
: The second kindred with autosomal dominant distal myopathy linked
to chromosome 14q: genetic and clinical analysis. Arch. Neurol. 60:
1321-1325, 2003.

27. Hengstenberg, C.; Charron, P.; Beckmann, J. S.; Weissenbach, J.;
Isnard, R.; Komajda, M.; Schwartz, K.: Evidence for the existence
of a fifth gene causing familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53 (suppl.): A1013 only, 1993.

28. Hengstenberg, C.; Charron, P.; Isnard, R.; Beckmann, J. S.; Fetler,
L.; Desnos, M.; Hagege, A.; Bouhour, J. B.; Souriant, G.; Dubourg,
O.; Schwartz, K.; Komajda, M.: Mise en evidence d'un cinquieme locus
implique dans les cardiomyopathies hypertrophiques familiales. Arch.
Mal. Coeur. 87: 1655-1662, 1994.

29. Ho, C. Y.; Sweitzer, N. K.; McDonough, B.; Maron, B. J.; Casey,
S. A.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.; Solomon, S. D.: Assessment
of diastolic function with Doppler tissue imaging to predict genotype
in preclinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 105: 2992-2997,
2002.

30. Hougs, L.; Havndrup, O.; Bundgaard, H.; Kober, L.; Vuust, J.;
Larsen, L. A.; Christiansen, M.; Andersen, P. S.: One-third of Danish
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with MYH7 mutations have mutations
in rod region. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13: 161-165, 2005. Note: Erratum:
Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13: 694 only, 2005.

31. Iwai, N.; Ohmichi, N.; Nakamura, Y.; Kinoshita, M.: DD genotype
of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene is a risk factor for left
ventricular hypertrophy. Circulation 90: 2622-2628, 1994.

32. Jaenicke, T.; Diederich, K. W.; Haas, W.; Schleich, J.; Lichter,
P.; Pfordt, M.; Bach, A.; Vosberg, H.-P.: The complete sequence of
the human beta-myosin heavy chain gene and a comparative analysis
of its product. Genomics 8: 194-206, 1990.

33. Jandreski, M. A.; Sole, M. J.; Liew, C.-C.: Two different forms
of beta myosin heavy chain are expressed in human striated muscle. Hum.
Genet. 77: 127-131, 1987.

34. Jeschke, B.; Uhl, K.; Weist, B.; Schroder, D.; Meitinger, T.;
Dohlemann, C.; Vosberg, H.-P.: A high risk phenotype of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy associated with a compound genotype of two mutated
beta-myosin heavy chain genes. Hum. Genet. 102: 299-304, 1998.

35. Kamisago, M.; Sharma, S. D.; DePalma, S. R.; Solomon, S.; Sharma,
P.; McDonough, B.; Smoot, L.; Mullen, M. P.; Woolf, P. K.; Wigle,
E. D.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Mutations in sarcomere protein
genes as a cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. New Eng. J. Med. 343:
1688-1696, 2000.

36. Kelly, D. P.; Strauss, A. W.: Mechanisms of disease. New Eng.
J. Med. 330: 913-919, 1994.

37. Klaassen, S.; Probst, S.; Oechslin, E.; Gerull, B.; Krings, G.;
Schuler, P.; Greutmann, M.; Hurlimann, D.; Yegibasi, M.; Pons, L.;
Gramlich, M.; Drenckhahn, J.-D.; Heuser, A.; Berger, F.; Jenni, R.;
Thierfelder, L.: Mutations in sarcomere protein genes in left ventricular
noncompaction. Circulation 117: 2893-2901, 2008.

38. Ko, Y.-L.; Chen, J.-J.; Tang, T.-K.; Cheng, J.-J.; Lin, S.-Y.;
Liou, Y.-C.; Kuan, P.; Wu, C.-W.; Lien, W.-P.; Liew, C.-C.: Malignant
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a family with a 453arg-to-cys
mutation in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene: coexistence of sudden
death and end-stage heart failure. Hum. Genet. 97: 585-590, 1996.

39. Kurabayashi, M.; Tsuchimochi, H.; Komuro, I.; Takaku, F.; Yazaki,
Y.: Molecular cloning and characterization of human cardiac alpha-
and beta-form myosin heavy chain complementary DNA clones: regulation
of expression during development and pressure overload in human atrium. J.
Clin. Invest. 82: 524-531, 1988.

40. Laing, N. G.; Ceuterick-de Groote, C.; Dye, D. E.; Liyanage, K.;
Duff, R. M.; Dubois, B.; Robberecht, W.; Sciot, R.; Martin, J.-J.;
Goebel, H. H.: Myosin storage myopathy: slow skeletal myosin (MYH7)
mutation in two isolated cases. Neurology 64: 527-529, 2005.

41. Laing, N. G.; Laing, B. A.; Meredith, C.; Wilton, S. D.; Robbins,
P.; Honeyman, K.; Dorosz, S.; Kozman, H.; Mastaglia, F. L.; Kakulas,
B. A.: Autosomal dominant distal myopathy: linkage to chromosome
14. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 422-427, 1995.

42. Lankford, E. B.; Epstein, N. D.; Fananapazir, L.; Sweeney, H.
L.: Abnormal contractile properties of muscle fibers expressing beta-myosin
heavy chain gene mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Clin. Invest. 95: 1409-1414, 1995.

43. Liew, C.-C.; Sole, M. J.; Yamauchi-Takihara, K.; Kellam, B.; Anderson,
D. H.; Lin, L.; Liew, J. C.: Complete sequence and organization of
the human cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 18:
3647-3651, 1990.

44. Marian, A. J.; Wu, Y.; Lim, D.-S.; McCluggage, M.; Youker, K.;
Yu, Q.; Brugada, R.; DeMayo, F.; Quinones, M.; Roberts, R.: A transgenic
rabbit model for human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 104:
1683-1692, 1999.

45. Marian, A. J.; Yu, Q.-T.; Mares, A., Jr.; Hill, R.; Roberts, R.;
Perryman, M. B.: Detection of a new mutation in the beta-myosin heavy
chain gene in an individual with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Clin. Invest. 90: 2156-2165, 1992.

46. Matsuoka, R.; Yoshida, M. C.; Kanda, N.; Kimura, M.; Ozasa, H.;
Takao, A.: Human cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene mapped within chromosomal
region 14q11.2-q13. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1040-1041,
1989.

47. Matsushita, Y.; Furukawa, T.; Kasanuki, H.; Nishibatake, M.; Kurihara,
Y.; Ikeda, A.; Kamatani, N.; Takeshima, H.; Matsuoka, R.: Mutation
of junctophilin type 2 associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Hum. Genet. 52: 543-548, 2007.

48. McKenna, W. J.: Personal Communication. London, England  5/30/1993.

49. Meredith, C.; Herrmann, R.; Parry, C.; Liyanage, K.; Dye, D. E.;
Durling, H. J.; Duff, R. M.; Beckman, K.; de Visser, M.; van der Graaff,
M. M.; Hedera, P.; Fink, J. K.; Petty, E. M.; Lamont, P.; Fabian,
V.; Bridges, L.; Voit, T.; Mastaglia, F. L.; Laing, N. G.: Mutations
in the slow skeletal muscle fiber myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7) cause
Laing early-onset distal myopathy (MPD1). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75:
703-708, 2004.

50. Meyer, B. F.: Reply to Oldfors et al. (Letter) Neurology 64:
581 only, 2005.

51. Moolman-Smook, J. C.; De Lange, W. J.; Bruwer, E. C. D.; Brink,
P. A.; Corfield, V. A.: The origins of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-causing
mutations in two South African subpopulations: a unique profile of
both independent and founder events. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 1308-1320,
1999.

52. Muelas, N.; Hackman, P.; Luque, H.; Garces-Sanchez, M.; Azorin,
I.; Suominen, T.; Sevilla, T.; Mayordomo, F.; Gomez, L.; Marti, P.;
Maria Millan, J.; Udd, B.; Vilchez, J. J.: MYH7 gene tail mutation
causing myopathic profiles beyond Laing distal myopathy. Neurology 75:
732-741, 2010.

53. Muelas, N.; Hackman, P.; Luque, H.; Suominen, T.; Espinos, C.;
Garces-Sanchez, M.; Sevilla, T.; Azorin, I.; Millan, J. M.; Udd, B.;
Vilchez, J. J.: Spanish MYH7 founder mutation of Italian ancestry
causing a large cluster of Laing myopathy patients. Clin. Genet. 81:
491-494, 2012.

54. Nishi, H.; Kimura, A.; Harada, H.; Adachi, K.; Koga, Y.; Sasazuki,
T.; Toshima, H.: Possible gene dose effect of a mutant cardiac beta-myosin
heavy chain gene on the clinical expression of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 200: 549-556, 1994.

55. Oldfors, A.; Tajsharghi, H.; Thornell, L. E.: Mutation of the
slow myosin heavy chain rod domain underlies hyaline body myopathy.
(Letter) Neurology 64: 580-581, 2005.

56. Pare, J. A. P.; Fraser, R. G.; Pirozynski, W. J.; Shanks, J. A.;
Stubington, D.: Hereditary cardiovascular dysplasia: a form of familial
cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Med. 31: 37-62, 1961.

57. Pegoraro, E.; Gavassini, B. F.; Borsato, C.; Melacini, P.; Vianello,
A.; Stramere, R.; Cenacchi, G.; Angelini, C.: MYH7 gene mutation
in myosin storage myopathy and scapulo-peroneal myopathy. Neuromuscular
Disord. 17: 321-329, 2007.

58. Perryman, M. B.; Yu, Q.; Marian, A. J.; Mares, A., Jr.; Czernuszewicz,
G.; Ifegwu, J.; Hill, R.; Roberts, R.: Expression of a missense mutation
in the messenger RNA for beta-myosin heavy chain in myocardial tissue
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 271-277, 1992.

59. Postma, A. V.; van Engelen, K.; van de Meerakker, J.; Rahman,
T.; Probst, S.; Baars, M. J. H.; Bauer, U.; Pickardt, T.; Sperling,
S. R.; Berger, F.; Moorman, A. F. M.; Mulder, B. J. M.; Thierfelder,
L.; Keavney, B.; Goodship, J.; Klaassen, S.: Mutations in the sarcomere
gene MYH7 in Ebstein anomaly. Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet. 4: 43-50,
2011.

60. Qin, H.; Kemp, J.; Yip, M.-Y.; Lam-Po-Tang, P. R. L.; Hoh, J.
F. Y.; Morris, B. J.: Localization of human cardiac beta-myosin heavy
chain gene (MYH7) to chromosome 14q12 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 54: 74-76, 1990.

61. Rayment, I.; Holden, H. M.; Sellers, J. R.; Fananapazir, L.; Epstein,
N. D.: Structural interpretation of the mutations in the beta-cardiac
myosin that have been implicated in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 3864-3868, 1995.

62. Richard, P.; Isnard, R.; Carrier, L.; Dubourg, O.; Donatien, Y.;
Mathieu, B.; Bonne, G.; Gary, F.; Charron, P.; Hagege, A.; Komajda,
M.; Schwartz, K.; Hainque, B.: Double heterozygosity for mutations
in the beta-myosin heavy chain and in the cardiac myosin binding protein
C genes in a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Med. Genet. 36:
542-545, 1999.

63. Ross, R. S.; Knowlton, K. U.: Two brothers with unexplained cardiomegaly:
initial clues to the molecular basis of a hereditary cardiac disease. Trends
Cardiovasc. Med. 2: 2-5, 1992.

64. Saez, L. J.; Gianola, K. M.; McNally, E. M.; Feghali, R.; Eddy,
R.; Shows, T. B.; Leinwand, L. A.: Human cardiac myosin heavy chain
genes and their linkage in the genome. Nucleic Acids Res. 15: 5443-5459,
1987.

65. Sasse-Klaassen, S.; Gerull, B.; Oechslin, E.; Jenni, R.; Thierfelder,
L.: Isolated noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium in
the adult is an autosomal dominant disorder in the majority of patients. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 119A: 162-167, 2003.

66. Seidman, C.: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from man to mouse. J.
Clin. Invest. 106: S9-S13, 2000.

67. Spindler, M.; Saupe, K. W.; Christe, M. E.; Sweeney, H. L.; Seidman,
C. E.; Seidman, J. G.; Ingwall, J. S.: Diastolic dysfunction and
altered energetics in the alpha-MHC-403/+ mouse model of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 1775-1783, 1998.

68. Tajsharghi, H.; Oldfors, A.; Macleod, D. P.; Swash, M.: Homozygous
mutation in MYH7 in myosin storage myopathy and cardiomyopathy. Neurology 68:
962 only, 2007.

69. Tajsharghi, H.; Thornell, L.-E.; Lindberg, C.; Lindvall, B.; Henriksson,
K.-G.; Oldfors, A.: Myosin storage myopathy associated with a heterozygous
missense mutation in MYH7. Ann. Neurol. 54: 494-500, 2003.

70. Tanjore, R. R.; Sikindlapuram, A. D.; Calambur, N.; Thakkar, B.;
Kerkar, P. G.; Nallari, P.: Genotype-phenotype correlation of R870H
mutation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 69:
434-436, 2006.

71. Tesson, F.; Dufour, C.; Moolman, J. C.; Carrier, L.; Al-Mahdawi,
S.; Chojnowska, L.; Dubourg, O.; Soubrier, F.; Brink, P.; Komajda,
M.; Guicheney, P.; Schwartz, K.; Feingold, J.: The influence of the
angiotensin I converting enzyme genotype in familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy varies with the disease gene mutation. J. Molec. Cell
Cardiol. 29: 831-838, 1997.

72. Uro-Coste, E.; Arne-Bes, M.-C.; Pellissier, J.-F.; Richard, P.;
Levade, T.; Heitz, F.; Figarella-Branger, D.; Delisle, M.-B.: Striking
phenotypic variability in two familial cases of myosin storage myopathy
with a MYH7 leu1793pro mutation. Neuromusc. Disord. 19: 163-166,
2009.

73. van Rooij, E.; Quiat, D.; Johnson, B. A.; Sutherland, L. B.; Qi,
X.; Richardson, J. A.; Kelm, R. J., Jr.; Olson, E. N.: A family of
microRNAs encoded by myosin genes governs myosin expression and muscle
performance. Dev. Cell 17: 662-673, 2009.

74. van Rooij, E.; Sutherland, L. B.; Qi, X.; Richardson, J. A.; Hill,
J.; Olson, E. N.: Control of stress-dependent cardiac growth and
gene expression by a microRNA. Science 316: 575-579, 2007.

75. Voit, T.; Kutz, P.; Leube, B.; Neuen-Jacob, E.; Schroder, J. M.;
Cavallotti, D.; Vaccario, M. L.; Schaper, J.; Broich, P.; Cohn, R.;
Baethmann, M.; Gohlich-Ratmann, G.; Scoppetta, C.; Herrmann, R.:
Autosomal dominant distal myopathy: further evidence of a chromosome
14 locus. Neuromusc. Disord. 11: 11-19, 2001.

76. Watkins, H.; Rosenzweig, A.; Hwang, D.-S.; Levi, T.; McKenna,
W.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: Characteristics and prognostic
implications of myosin missense mutations in familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. New Eng. J. Med. 326: 1108-1114, 1992.

77. Watkins, H.; Thierfelder, L.; Hwang, D.-S.; McKenna, W.; Seidman,
J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy due to
de novo myosin mutations. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 1666-1671, 1992.

78. Wolf, C. M.; Moskowitz, I. P. G.; Arno, S.; Branco, D. M.; Semsarian,
C.; Bernstein, S. A.; Peterson, M.; Maida, M.; Morley, G. E.; Fishman,
G.; Berul, C. I.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: Somatic events
modify hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pathology and link hypertrophy
to arrhythmia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 18123-18128, 2005.

79. Woo, A.; Rakowski, H.; Liew, J. C.; Zhao, M.-S.; Liew, C.-C.;
Parker, T. G.; Zeller, M.; Wigle, E. D.; Sole, M. J.: Mutations of
the beta myosin heavy chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: critical
functional sites determine prognosis. Heart 89: 1179-1185, 2003.

80. Yamauchi-Takihara, K.; Sole, M. J.; Liew, J.; Ing, D.; Liew, C.
C.: Characterization of human cardiac myosin heavy chain genes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 3504-3508, 1989. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 86: 7416-7417, 1989.

81. Zimprich, F.; Djamshidian, A.; Hainfellner, J. A.; Budka, H.;
Zeitlhofer, J.: An autosomal dominant early adult-onset distal muscular
dystrophy. Muscle Nerve 23: 1876-1879, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/09/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/4/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/3/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/26/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/5/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/7/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/7/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/4/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/31/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/23/2006
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/12/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/13/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/9/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/5/2002
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/2/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/4/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/1998
Clair A. Francomano - updated: 5/7/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 10/09/2013
carol: 10/8/2013
carol: 9/4/2013
carol: 4/1/2013
terry: 5/10/2012
carol: 5/9/2012
ckniffin: 5/3/2012
mgross: 8/9/2011
wwang: 4/7/2011
terry: 4/7/2011
wwang: 11/29/2010
ckniffin: 10/26/2010
mgross: 10/25/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
alopez: 9/28/2010
terry: 9/27/2010
wwang: 8/9/2010
terry: 8/5/2010
carol: 6/8/2010
carol: 6/7/2010
wwang: 10/26/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
terry: 3/4/2009
alopez: 2/21/2008
alopez: 2/20/2008
terry: 2/19/2008
wwang: 1/17/2008
ckniffin: 1/7/2008
carol: 12/6/2007
carol: 12/4/2007
terry: 12/4/2007
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
carol: 9/4/2007
alopez: 6/15/2007
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
wwang: 6/13/2006
ckniffin: 5/31/2006
carol: 4/18/2006
carol: 2/27/2006
joanna: 2/24/2006
wwang: 2/23/2006
terry: 1/17/2006
carol: 8/12/2005
terry: 7/13/2005
carol: 7/1/2005
wwang: 6/30/2005
ckniffin: 6/27/2005
wwang: 6/15/2005
wwang: 6/14/2005
ckniffin: 6/9/2005
wwang: 6/6/2005
ckniffin: 5/18/2005
wwang: 4/28/2005
wwang: 4/20/2005
terry: 4/11/2005
tkritzer: 2/2/2005
ckniffin: 1/25/2005
tkritzer: 9/9/2004
terry: 9/9/2004
cwells: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/15/2004
tkritzer: 12/31/2003
ckniffin: 12/24/2003
carol: 5/9/2003
terry: 5/9/2003
tkritzer: 5/7/2003
cwells: 3/12/2003
terry: 3/7/2003
carol: 11/12/2002
tkritzer: 11/11/2002
terry: 11/5/2002
tkritzer: 8/2/2002
carol: 3/1/2002
mgross: 12/17/2001
carol: 1/11/2001
cwells: 1/11/2001
cwells: 1/9/2001
terry: 1/4/2001
mcapotos: 2/2/2000
mcapotos: 2/1/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
mgross: 11/24/1999
terry: 11/15/1999
carol: 10/28/1999
alopez: 4/30/1999
dkim: 12/10/1998
carol: 6/9/1998
terry: 5/18/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
dholmes: 5/7/1998
mark: 3/3/1998
mark: 12/26/1996
mark: 4/16/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 9/14/1995
davew: 8/5/1994
jason: 6/13/1994
warfield: 4/21/1994
carol: 4/2/1994
carol: 9/24/1993

604963	TITLE *604963 PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN 1; PGLYRP1
;;PGLYRP; PGRP;;
PGRP, SHORT; PGRPS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Innate nonself immune recognition relies on structures common among
invading microbes, a process termed pattern recognition. Peptidoglycan
is a fundamental component of the bacterial cell wall and is thus a
candidate for a pattern recognized by the immune system. Using
differential display to identify bacteria-induced genes in the moth
Trichoplusia ni, Kang et al. (1998) cloned a cDNA encoding the T. ni
peptidoglycan recognition protein (PGRP, or PGLYRP). Recombinant T. ni
PGLYRP bound to peptidoglycan and to gram-positive bacteria. By PCR of
human and mouse spleen cDNAs, they isolated human and mouse PGLYRP
cDNAs, respectively. The deduced human PGLYRP protein has 196 amino
acids. Both the human and mouse PGLYRP proteins share 43% sequence
identity with the T. ni PGLYRP protein. Recombinant mouse Pglyrp protein
expressed in insect cells possessed an affinity for peptidoglycan. Dot
blot analysis of a number of human tissue mRNAs detected strong
expression in bone marrow and weak expression in lung, kidney, liver,
small intestine, spleen, thymus, peripheral leukocyte, and fetal spleen.

Liu et al. (2001) cloned PGLYRP, which they called PGRPS, by PCR of a
bone marrow cDNA library. The deduced 196-amino acid protein contains an
N-terminal signal peptide, followed by the extracellular PGRP domains
III, II, and I, which are highly conserved in mammalian and insect
PGRPs. PGRPS shares 40%, 43%, and 42% amino acid identity with PGRPL
(608199), PGRPI-alpha (PGLYRP3; 608197), and PGRPI-beta (PGLYRP4;
608198). RNA dot blot analysis detected strong PGRPS expression in bone
marrow and expression that was 50 to 100 times lower in
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and fetal liver. Northern blot analysis
detected 1.4-, 0.9-, and 0.5-kb transcripts in bone marrow, a 0.9-kb
transcript in fetal liver, and 1.4- and 0.9-kb transcripts in peripheral
blood leukocytes. PCR detected low expression of PGRPS in spleen,
jejunum, and thymus, possibly due to the presence of polymorphonuclear
leukocytes in these tissues. Transiently transfected COS-7 and human
embryonic kidney cells expressed PGRPS as a protein with an apparent
molecular mass of 24 kD. About half of the expressed PGRPS was detected
in the culture medium, and the remainder was a Triton X-100-soluble
membrane protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2001) determined that recombinant PGRPS expressed by COS-7
cells and human embryonic kidney cells bound to gram-positive bacteria,
B. subtilis and M. luteus, with high affinity.

Using purified PGLYRP1, PGLYRP3, PGLYRP4, and a PGLYRP3/PGLYRP4
heterodimer, Kashyap et al. (2011) showed that these PGRPs interacted
with the bacterial cell wall and activated bacterial 2-component
systems, resulting in membrane depolarization, cessation of
peptidoglycan, protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis, and production of
hydroxyl radicals to cause bacterial death. Fluorescence microscopy
demonstrated that, in B. subtilis, a gram-positive bacteria, PGRPs
entered the cell wall at the site of daughter cell separation during
cell division and activated the CssR-CssS 2-component system. In E.
coli, a gram-negative bacteria, PGRPs bound the outer membrane and
activated the CpxA-CpxR 2-component system. Kashyap et al. (2011)
excluded other bactericidal mechanisms, including inhibition of
peptidoglycan synthesis, peptidoglycan hydrolysis, and membrane
permeabilization. They concluded that PGRPs are innate immunity proteins
that bind the cell wall or outer membrane and exploit the bacterial
stress response to kill bacteria.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2001) determined that the PGLYRP gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the PGLYRP gene
to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Kang, D.; Liu, G.; Lundstrom, A.; Gelius, E.; Steiner, H.: A peptidoglycan
recognition protein in innate immunity conserved from insects to humans. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10078-10082, 1998.

2. Kashyap, D. R.; Wang, M.; Liu, L.-H.; Boons, G.-J.; Gupta, D.;
Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition proteins kill bacteria by
activating protein-sensing two-component systems. Nature Med. 17:
676-683, 2011.

3. Liu, C.; Xu, Z.; Gupta, D.; Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins: a novel family of four human innate immunity pattern recognition
molecules. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 34686-34694, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/14/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2003

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 5/12/2000

EDITED mgross: 09/15/2011
terry: 9/14/2011
mgross: 9/28/2004
mgross: 10/24/2003
terry: 11/14/2001
mcapotos: 6/2/2000
psherman: 5/19/2000

610631	TITLE *610631 PROTEIN TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, NONRECEPTOR-TYPE, 20B; PTPN20B
;;PTPN20, TELOMERIC COPY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PTPN20B is a nearly identical copy of the PTPN20A gene (610630).

MAPPING

Hartz (2006) determined that the PTPN20B gene is telomeric to the
PTPN20A gene on chromosome 10q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/7/2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/7/2006

EDITED mgross: 12/07/2006

608665	TITLE *608665 PSMC3-INTERACTING PROTEIN; PSMC3IP
;;TBP1-INTERACTING PROTEIN; TBPIP;;
GT198;;
HOP2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; HOP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PSMC3IP gene encodes a nuclear, tissue-specific protein with
multiple functions, including a role in meiotic recombination and as a
coactivator of ligand-dependent transcription mediated by nuclear
hormone receptors (summary by Zangen et al., 2011).

CLONING

By sequencing putative genes centromeric to the BRCA1 gene (113705) on
chromosome 17, followed by screening a breast cancer cell line cDNA
library, Rommens et al. (1995) cloned GT198. The deduced protein
contains 203 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.6-kb
transcript in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with abundant
expression in testis, colon, a breast cancer cell line, and a lymphoma.

Tanaka et al. (1997) cloned Gt198, which they called Tbpip, from a mouse
testis cDNA library. The deduced 217-amino acid protein has several
putative phosphorylation sites. RT-PCR detected Tbpip expression in CD4
(186940)-positive T cells and in macrophages. In situ hybridization
found Tbpip mRNA colocalized with Tbp1 (186852) in seminiferous tubules
of adult mouse testis. Western blot analysis detected Tbpip at an
apparent molecular mass of 24 kD. Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse
testis detected Tbpip in nuclei of primary and secondary spermatocytes.

By PCR using primers designed from mouse Tbpip, Ijichi et al. (2000)
cloned full-length human TBPIP from breast cancer cell line mRNA and a
testis cDNA library. The deduced 217-amino acid protein contains an
acidic region near the C terminus and several putative phosphorylation
sites. Mouse and human TBPIP share 88% amino acid homology.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rommens et al. (1995) mapped the TBPIP
gene to chromosome 17q21. Using radiation hybrid analysis, Ijichi et al.
(2000) mapped the TBPIP gene to chromosome 17q12-q21.

GENE FUNCTION

The human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) regulatory protein Tat is
essential for HIV-1 gene expression and replication in infected cells.
TBP1 is a cellular protein that suppresses Tat-mediated transactivation
of HIV replication. Tanaka et al. (1997) found that mouse Tbpip
synergistically cooperated with Tbp1 to suppress Tat-mediated
transactivation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat promoter.

Ijichi et al. (2000) showed that human TBPIP interacted directly with
TBP1 and enhanced TBP1-mediated inhibition of HIV Tat-mediated
transactivation.

Enomoto et al. (2006) demonstrated that coexpression of human MND1
(611422) and HOP2 in E. coli resulted in the formation of stable
heterodimers. The HOP2-MND1 complex stimulated DMC1 (602721)- and RAD51
(179617)-mediated DNA strand exchange, and preferentially bound to a
3-stranded DNA branch, which mimics the strand-exchange intermediate.
Enomoto et al. (2006) concluded that the HOP2-MND1 complex may ensure
proper pairing between homologous chromosomes by stimulating strand
exchange during meiosis.

Chi et al. (2007) found that the Hop2 component of the mouse recombinant
Hop2-Mnd1 complex was the major DNA-binding subunit, and that Mnd1 was
the Rad51-interacting entity. Hop2-Mnd1 stabilized the
Rad51-single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) nucleoprotein filament, and enhanced
the ability of the Rad51-ssDNA nucleoprotein filament to capture duplex
DNA, which is an obligatory step in the formation of the synaptic
complex critical for DNA joint formation. Pezza et al. (2007) showed
that the mouse Hop2-Mnd1 complex stimulated Dmc1 to promote synaptic
complex formation on long duplex DNAs. Synaptic alignment was a
consequence of the ability of Hop2-Mnd1 to stabilize the Dmc1-ssDNA
nucleoprotein complex and facilitate the conjoining of DNA molecules
through the capture of double-stranded DNA by the Dmc1-ssDNA
nucleoprotein filament.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a large consanguineous Arab Palestinian pedigree with
hypergonadotropic ovarian dysgenesis mapping to chromosome 17 (ODG3;
614324), Zangen et al. (2011) analyzed candidate genes and identified
homozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the PSMC3IP gene (608665.0001) that
segregated with disease in the family. In cell lines, the glu201del
mutation abolished PSMC3IP activation of estrogen-driven transcription.

ANIMAL MODEL

Petukhova et al. (2003) found that Hop2 knockout mice showed no gross
anomalies in somatic tissues but developed a profound deficiency in
gametogenesis. Hop2 -/- spermatocytes arrested at the stage of
pachytene-like chromosome condensation. Axial elements were fully
developed, but synapsis was limited. While meiotic double-stranded
breaks were formed and processed in Hop2 -/- mice, they failed to be
repaired.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OVARIAN DYSGENESIS 3
PSMC3IP, 3-BP DEL, 600GAG

In affected members of a large consanguineous Arab Palestinian pedigree
with hypergonadotropic ovarian dysgenesis (ODG3; 614324), Zangen et al.
(2011) identified homozygosity for an in-frame 3-bp deletion in the
acceptor splice junction of exon 8 of the PSMC3IP gene, resulting in
deletion of glu201. The unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
deletion, which was not found in 254 ethnically matched chromosomes.
RT-PCR analysis of leukocyte DNA from affected and unaffected family
members showed no alternative splicing, suggesting that the mutation
does not affect PSMC3IP splicing. Transfection studies in the IGROV1
ovarian carcinoma and MCF7 breast cancer cell lines demonstrated that
the glu201del mutation abolished PSMC3IP activation of estrogen-driven
transcription.

REFERENCE 1. Chi, P.; San Filippo, J.; Sehorn, M. G.; Petukhova, G. V.; Sung,
P.: Bipartite stimulatory action of the Hop2-Mnd1 complex on the
Rad51 recombinase. Genes Dev. 21: 1747-1757, 2007.

2. Enomoto, R.; Kinebuchi, T.; Sato, M.; Yagi, H.; Kurumizaka, H.;
Yokoyama, S.: Stimulation of DNA strand exchange by the human TBPIP/Hop2-Mnd1
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 5575-5581, 2006.

3. Ijichi, H.; Tanaka, T.; Nakamura, T.; Yagi, H.; Hakuba, A.; Sato,
M.: Molecular cloning and characterization of a human homologue of
TBPIP, a BRCA1 locus-related gene. Gene 248: 99-107, 2000.

4. Petukhova, G. V.; Romanienko, P. J.; Camerini-Otero, R. D.: The
Hop2 protein has a direct role in promoting interhomolog interactions
during mouse meiosis. Dev. Cell 5: 927-936, 2003.

5. Pezza, R. J.; Voloshin, O. N.; Vanevski, F.; Camerini-Otero, R.
D.: Hop2/Mnd1 acts on two critical steps in Dmc1-promoted homologous
pairing. Genes Dev. 21: 1758-1766, 2007.

6. Rommens, J. M.; Durocher, F.; McArthur, J.; Tonin, P.; LeBlanc,
J.-F.; Allen, T.; Samson, C.; Ferri, L.; Narod, S.; Morgan, K.; Simard,
J.: Generation of a transcription map at the HSD17B locus centromeric
to BRCA1 at 17q21. Genomics 28: 530-542, 1995.

7. Tanaka, T.; Nakamura, T.; Takagi, H.; Sato, M.: Molecular cloning
and characterization of a novel TBP-1 interacting protein (TBPIP):
enhancement of TBP-1 action on Tat by TBPIP. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 239: 176-181, 1997.

8. Zangen, D.; Kaufman, Y.; Zeligson, S.; Perlberg, S.; Fridman, H.;
Kanaan, M.; Abdulhadi-Atwan, M.; Abu Libdeh, A.; Gussow, A.; Kisslov,
I.; Carmel, L.; Renbaum, P.; Levy-Lahad, E.: XX ovarian dysgenesis
is caused by a PSMC3IP/HOP2 mutation that abolishes coactivation of
estrogen-driven transcription. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 572-579, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/28/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/18/2004

EDITED alopez: 11/02/2011
alopez: 11/2/2011
terry: 10/28/2011
alopez: 9/11/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 5/18/2004

608080	TITLE *608080 MAESTRO; MRO
;;GENE BESIDE THE MA29 DELETION; B29;;
C18ORF3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing a region of chromosome 18 that contains a segment deleted
in the Ma29 lung cancer cell line, followed by screening a brain cDNA
library, Yanaihara et al. (2001) cloned B29. B29 is located outside the
Ma29 deletion. The deduced B29 protein contains 248 amino acids.
Yanaihara et al. (2001) also identified 3 minor isoforms that differ in
the reading frame utilized and in the presence or absence of exon 3
and/or exon 6. Expression levels were below the limit of detection for
Northern blot analysis, but RT-PCR found near ubiquitous expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yanaihara et al. (2001) determined that the B29 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yanaihara et al. (2001) mapped the B29
gene to chromosome 18q21.

REFERENCE 1. Yanaihara, N.; Kohno, T.; Takakura, S.; Takei, K.; Otsuka, A.;
Sunaga, N.; Takahashi, M.; Yamazaki, M.; Tashiro, H.; Fukuzumi, Y.;
Fujimori, Y.; Hagiwara, K.; Tanaka, T.; Yokota, J.: Physical and
transcriptional map of a 311-kb segment of chromosome 18q21, a candidate
lung tumor suppressor locus. Genomics 72: 169-179, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/8/2003

EDITED carol: 08/27/2008
mgross: 9/8/2003

602950	TITLE *602950 PROTEIN ARGININE N-METHYLTRANSFERASE 1; PRMT1
;;HETEROGENEOUS NUCLEAR RIBONUCLEOPROTEIN METHYLTRANSFERASE 1-LIKE 2;
HRMT1L2;;
HMT1-LIKE 2;;
INTERFERON RECEPTOR 1-BOUND PROTEIN 4; IR1B4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PRMT1 gene encodes a protein arginine methyltransferase that
functions as a histone methyltransferase specific for H4 (see 602822).

CLONING

Protein arginine methylation is catalyzed by arginine
methyltransferases. The bulk of methylated arginine residues in
eukaryotic cells are found in heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(hnRNPs), RNA-binding proteins that play essential roles in the
metabolism of nuclear pre-mRNA. Lin et al. (1996) identified a rat cDNA
encoding PRMT1 (protein-arginine N-methyltransferase 1; EC 2.1.1.23).
Recombinant PRMT1 methylated histones and hnRNPA1 (164017) in vitro. By
using a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with
the intracytoplasmic domain of the interferon-alpha/beta receptor-1
(IFNAR1; 107450), Abramovich et al. (1997) identified a human cDNA
encoding a protein that was nearly identical to PRMT1. The deduced
361-amino acid protein was designated IR1B4 for 'interferon
receptor-1-bound protein 4.' Epitope-tagged IR1B4 bound the IFNAR1
intracytoplasmic domain in vitro. Antibodies against IFNAR1
coimmunoprecipitated a methyltransferase activity from human cell
extracts. An antisense oligonucleotide strongly reduced
methyltransferase activity in human cells, and caused them to become
more resistant to growth inhibition by interferon. Abramovich et al.
(1997) concluded that protein methylation, like phosphorylation, may be
an important signaling mechanism for certain cytokine receptors.

Scott et al. (1998) identified HRMT1L2 transcripts with variable 5-prime
ends that encode 3 protein variants with different N-terminal regions.
Rat PRMT1 and HRMT1L2 variant 2 (v2) share 95% sequence identity, but
diverge at their N termini. The amino acid sequences of HRMT1L2 and
HRMT1L1 (601961) are 27% identical. Recombinant protein methylated human
hnRNPA1 and a yeast hnRNP in vitro. The HRMT1L2 gene complemented
mutations in the yeast hnRNP methyltransferase gene HMT1. Northern blot
analysis revealed that HRMT1L2 is expressed as a predominant 1.4-kb mRNA
in various adult and fetal tissues. Additional larger and smaller bands
were observed in some tissues.

Scorilas et al. (2000) identified 3 splice variants of PRMT1, encoding
deduced polypeptides of 343 (variant 1), 361 (variant 2), and 347
(variant 3) amino acids with molecular masses of 39.6, 41.5, and 39.9
kD, respectively. The full-length protein (v3) contains an in-frame stop
codon in the middle of exon 3, and a second downstream start codon that
resumes transcription. Variant 2 is predicted to contain 3 hydrophobic
stretches, one of which may be a signal peptide. PRMT1 shares 96%, 34%
and 29% sequence identity with rat PRMT1, human PRMT3 (603190), and
human PRMT2 (HRMT1L1), respectively. RT-PCR revealed ubiquitous
expression of all 3 splice variants, with highest expression in
cerebellum, mammary gland, prostate, brain, and thyroid. The predominant
variant differed among tissues. By PCR analysis, Scorilas et al. (2000)
found that variants 1 and 2 were frequently downregulated in breast
cancers in comparison to normal breast tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

The S. cerevisiae ire15 mutation has an inositol auxotrophic phenotype
and a defect in the expression of the inositol 1-phosphate synthase
(INO1) gene. Nikawa et al. (1996) identified HRMT1L2, which they called
HCP1, as a gene that suppressed the ire15 mutation. Multicopy HRMT1L2
increased the level of INO1 mRNA in ire15 mutants. Both Abramovich et
al. (1997) and Scott et al. (1998) noted that the nucleotide sequence
reported by Nikawa et al. (1996) contained 3 deletions that resulted in
a frameshift between amino acids 147-175.

Wang et al. (2001) reported the purification, molecular identification,
and functional characterization of the histone H4-specific
methyltransferase PRMT1, a protein arginine methyltransferase. PRMT1
specifically methylates arginine-3 of histone H4 (see 602822) in vitro
and in vivo. Methylation of arg3 by PRMT1 facilitates subsequent
acetylation of H4 tails by p300 (602700). However, acetylation of H4
inhibits its methylation by PRMT1. Most important, a mutation in the
S-adenosyl-L-methionine-binding site of PRMT1 substantially crippled its
nuclear receptor coactivator activity. Wang et al. (2001) concluded that
their findings reveal arg3 of H4 as a novel methylation site by PRMT1
and indicate that arg3 methylation plays an important role in
transcriptional regulation.

Mowen et al. (2001) demonstrated that methylation of arg31 of STAT1
(600555) by PRMT1 is required for transcription induced by
IFN-alpha/IFN-beta. They concluded that arginine methylation of STAT1 is
an additional posttranslational modification regulating transcription
factor function, and alteration of arginine methylation might be
responsible for the lack of interferon responsiveness observed in many
malignancies.

Using systems reconstituted with recombinant chromatin templates and
coactivators, An et al. (2004) demonstrated the involvement of PRMT1 and
CARM1 (603934) in p53 (191170) function; both independent and ordered
cooperative functions of p300 (602700), PRMT1, and CARM1; and mechanisms
involving direct interactions with p53 and obligatory modifications of
corresponding histone substrates. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
confirmed the ordered accumulation of these (and other) coactivators and
cognate histone modifications on a p53-responsive gene, GADD45 (126335),
following ectopic p53 expression and/or ultraviolet irradiation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Scorilas et al. (2000) determined that the PRMT1 gene (variant 3)
contains 12 exons and spans 11.2 kb, and that the 2 additional splice
variants contain 10 (variant 1) or 11 exons (variant 2). They found that
PRMT1 is located in close proximity to the IRF3 (603734) and RRAS
(165090) genes and is transcribed in the opposite direction. RRAS is the
most telomeric, followed by IRF3 and PRMT1.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrid panels and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Scott et al. (1998) mapped the HRMT1L2 gene to 19q13.
Noting sequence identity between HRMT1L2 and a BAC clone, Scorilas et
al. (2000) refined the mapping to 19q13.3.

Pawlak et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Prmt1 gene to chromosome 7 by
interspecific backcross analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pawlak et al. (2000) characterized a null mutation of the mouse Prmt1
gene, which is 95% identical to HRMT1L2. Prmt1 expression was greatest
along the midline of the neural plate and in the forming head fold from
embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) to E8.5 and in the developing central nervous
system from E8.5 to E13.5. Homozygous mutant embryos failed to develop
beyond E6.5, with death occurring shortly after implantation and before
gastrulation. Prmt1, however, was not detected in embryonic stem cell
lines established from mutant blastocysts, suggesting it is not
necessary for cell viability. Prmt1 -/- cells expressed approximately 8
times less methyltransferase activity than wildtype cells, indicating
that the loss of Prmt1 activity is not compensated by an increase in
other methyltransferases. In addition, high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and methyl acceptor activity analysis determined
that the cell proteins of mutant cells were hypomethylated, whereas most
potential substrates were already methylated in wildtype cells.

REFERENCE 1. Abramovich, C.; Yakobson, B.; Chebath, J.; Revel, M.: A protein-arginine
methyltransferase binds to the intracytoplasmic domain of the IFNAR1
chain in the type I interferon receptor. EMBO J. 16: 260-266, 1997.

2. An, W.; Kim, J.; Roeder, R. G.: Ordered cooperative functions
of PRMT1, p300, and CARM1 in transcriptional activation by p53. Cell 117:
735-748, 2004.

3. Lin, W.-J.; Gary, J. D.; Yang, M. C.; Clarke, S.; Herschman, H.
R.: The mammalian immediate-early TIS21 protein and the leukemia-associated
BTG1 protein interact with a protein-arginine N-methyltransferase. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 15034-15044, 1996.

4. Mowen, K. A.; Tang, J.; Zhu, W.; Schurter, B. T.; Shuai, K.; Herschman,
H. R.; David, M.: Arginine methylation of STAT1 modulates IFN-alpha/beta-induce
d transcription. Cell 104: 731-741, 2001.

5. Nikawa, J.; Nakano, H.; Ohi, N.: Structural and functional conservation
of human and yeast HCP1 genes which can suppress the growth defect
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ire15 mutant. Gene 171: 107-111,
1996.

6. Pawlak, M. R.; Scherer, C. A.; Chen, J.; Roshon, M. J.; Ruley,
H. E.: Arginine N-methyltransferase 1 is required for early postimplantation
mouse development, but cells deficient in the enzyme are viable. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 4859-4869, 2000.

7. Scorilas, A.; Black, M. H.; Talieri, M.; Diamandis, E. P.: Genomic
organization, physical mapping, and expression analysis of the human
protein arginine methyltransferase 1 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 278: 349-359, 2000.

8. Scott, H. S.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Lalioti, M. D.; Rossier, C.;
Silver, P. A.; Henry, M. F.: Identification and characterization
of two putative human arginine methyltransferases (HRMT1L1 and HRMT1L2). Genomics 48:
330-340, 1998.

9. Wang, H.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Xia, L.; Feng, Q.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.;
Strahl, B. D.; Briggs, S. D.; Allis, C. D.; Wong, J.; Tempst, P.;
Zhang, Y.: Methylation of histone H4 at arginine 3 facilitating transcriptional
activation by nuclear hormone receptor. Science 293: 853-857, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/5/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/26/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/15/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/7/1998

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2006
mgross: 8/5/2004
carol: 8/5/2002
mgross: 9/26/2001
alopez: 8/31/2001
terry: 8/27/2001
mgross: 9/15/2000
carol: 6/21/2000
psherman: 10/23/1998
alopez: 8/7/1998

300793	TITLE *300793 CANCER/TESTIS ANTIGEN FAMILY 45, MEMBER A2; CT45A2
;;CANCER/TESTIS ANTIGEN 45, MEMBER 2; CT45.2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes upregulated in testis, followed by RT-PCR and
genomic sequence analysis, Chen et al. (2005) identified 6 nearly
identical copies of the CT45 gene, designated CT45A1 through CT45A6, on
chromosome X. The CT45 genes appeared to be products of a recent gene
duplication. RT-PCR and EST analysis revealed 3 CT45 transcript variants
that differ in their 3-prime ends and represent the accumulated
expression of the CT45 genes. All 3 transcripts encode a deduced
189-amino acid protein that shares significant similarity with DDX26B,
SAGE (300359), and DDX26 (604331). RT-PCR detected high CT45 expression
in testis and variable expression in several cell lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chen et al. (2005) determined that each CT45 gene contains 5 exons and
spans 8 to 9 kb. The first exon is untranslated.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Chen et al. (2005) mapped the CT45 gene
cluster to a 125-kb region on chromosome Xq26.3. The 3 centromeric genes
are transcribed in the centromeric-to-telomeric direction, and the 3
telomeric genes are transcribed in the opposite direction.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, Y.-T.; Scanlan, M. J.; Venditti, C. A.; Chua, R.; Theiler,
G.; Stevenson, B. J.; Iseli, C.; Gure, A. O.; Vasicek, T.; Strausberg,
R. L.; Jongeneel, C. V.; Old, L. J.; Simpson, A. J. G.: Identification
of cancer/testis-antigen genes by massively parallel signature sequencing. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7940-7945, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/31/2009

EDITED wwang: 08/31/2009

601045	TITLE *601045 CATENIN, DELTA-1; CTNND1
;;CATENIN, DELTA; CTNND;;
CADHERIN-ASSOCIATED SRC SUBSTRATE; CAS;;
p120(CTN)
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Catenins were discovered as proteins that are linked ('catena' means
'chain' in Latin) to the cytoplasmic domain of transmembrane cadherin
(see 601120) proteins. Delta-catenin, also called CAS, p120(cas), or
p120(ctn), is a tyrosine kinase substrate implicated in ligand-induced
receptor signaling through the EGF receptor (131550), the PDGF receptor
(PDGFR; see 173490), and the CSF1 receptor (164770), as well as in cell
transformation by SRC (190090). Delta-catenin is a major component of
multiprotein cell-cell adhesion complexes containing E-cadherin
(192090), alpha-catenin (116805), beta-catenin (116806), and
gamma-catenin, also known as plakoglobin (173325) (summary by
Keirsebilck et al., 1998).

CLONING

Reynolds et al. (1992) isolated a mouse p120(ctn) cDNA. Like
beta-catenin and plakoglobin, the predicted protein contains copies of a
repeat originally identified in the Drosophila 'Armadillo' protein.

Keirsebilck et al. (1998) identified human p120(ctn) isoforms, which
they designated 1 to 4, that arise by alternative use of start codons
and additional isoforms that differ due to alternative splicing of 3
exons, which they named A, B, and C. The longest isoform was of type
1ABC and contained 968 amino acids. Isoform 1A contains 933 amino acids
and is 97% identical to mouse p120(ctn). Human p120(ctn) contains up to
10 Armadillo repeats. Keirsebilck et al. (1998) used RT-PCR to
demonstrate tissue-specific and cell line-specific expression of various
isoforms.

Independently, Nagase et al. (1997) identified KIAA0384, a human
p120(ctn) cDNA that encodes isoform 1AC, in a screen for brain cDNAs
encoding proteins larger than 100 kD. RT-PCR detected expression in all
tissues examined except skeletal muscle. Highest expression was detected
in placenta, lung, liver, and kidney, followed by ovary and small
intestine.

GENE FUNCTION

Dillon et al. (1998) reported that a complete loss of p120(ctn)
expression was observed in approximately 10% of invasive ductal breast
carcinomas investigated.

Wildenberg et al. (2006) found that depletion of p120-catenin in NIH3T3
mouse fibroblasts by small interfering RNA caused constitutive
activation of Rho (RHOA; 165390), cell transformation, loss of contact
inhibition, and growth in the absence of serum. Moreover, Pdgfr and
integrin (see 135630) signaling pathways involved in remodeling the
actin cytoskeleton were selectively impaired. Wildenberg et al. (2006)
traced these effects to obligatory roles of p120-catenin and Arhgap5
(602680) in a pathway that connects Rac (RAC1; 602048) activation to Rho
inhibition. They concluded that p120-catenin and ARHGAP5 use Rho GTPases
to mediate crosstalk between a wide variety of receptors to coordinate
cadherin function with other activities that direct cell adhesion,
motility, and proliferation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Keirsebilck et al. (1998) determined that the human p120(ctn) gene
contains 21 exons, potentially encoding up to 32 protein isoforms as
products of alternative splicing.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Reynolds et al. (1996) determined
that the human gene, symbolized CTNND, is localized immediately adjacent
to the centromere in band 11q11. By interspecific backcross analysis,
they assigned the murine gene, symbolized Catns, to the middle of mouse
chromosome 2. By analysis of radiation hybrids, Nagase et al. (1997)
confirmed that the p120 gene maps to human chromosome 11. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization and analysis of a somatic cell hybrid
mapping panel, Bonne et al. (1998) mapped the CTNND1 gene to chromosome
11q11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using conditional targeting of p120(ctn) in mouse epidermis,
Perez-Moreno et al. (2006) found that p120-null neonatal epidermis
exhibited reduced intercellular adherens junction components, but no
overt disruption in barrier function or intercellular adhesion. As the
mice aged, they displayed epidermal hypoplasia and chronic inflammation,
typified by hair degeneration and loss of body fat. Use of skin
engraftments and antiinflammatory drugs showed that these features were
not due to reductions in junctional cadherins and catenins, but rather
to NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activation. Both in vivo and in vitro,
p120-null epidermal cells activated NF-kappa-B, triggering a cascade of
proinflammatory NF-kappa-B targets. NF-kappa-B activation in p120-null
keratinocytes was accompanied by alterations in Rho GTPase activity that
appeared to reside upstream from NF-kappa-B activation and downstream
from p120 loss.

REFERENCE 1. Bonne, S.; van Hengel, J.; van Roy, F.: Chromosomal mapping of
human armadillo genes belonging to the p120(ctn)/plakophilin subfamily. Genomics 51:
452-454, 1998.

2. Dillon, D. A.; D'Aquila, T.; Reynolds, A. B.; Fearon, E. R.; Rimm,
D. L.: The expression of p120ctn protein in breast cancer is independent
of alpha- and beta-catenin and E-cadherin. Am. J. Path. 152: 75-82,
1998.

3. Keirsebilck, A.; Bonne, S.; Staes, K.; van Hengel, J.; Nollet,
F.; Reynolds, A.; van Roy, F.: Molecular cloning of the human p120(ctn)
catenin gene (CTNND1): expression of multiple alternatively spliced
isoforms. Genomics 50: 129-146, 1998.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

5. Perez-Moreno, M.; Davis, M. A.; Wong, E.; Pasolli, H. A.; Reynolds,
A. B.; Fuchs, E.: p120-catenin mediates inflammatory responses in
the skin. Cell 124: 631-644, 2006.

6. Reynolds, A. B.; Herbert, L.; Cleveland, J. L.; Berg, S. T.; Gaut,
J. R.: p120, a novel substrate of protein tyrosine kinase receptors
and of p60v-src, is related to cadherin-binding factors beta-catenin,
plakoglobin and armadillo. Oncogene 7: 2439-2445, 1992.

7. Reynolds, A. B.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland, N. G.;
Shapiro, D. N.; Wu, J.; Daniel,  J. M.: The gene encoding p120(cas),
a novel catenin, localizes on human chromosome 11q11 (CTNND) and mouse
chromosome 2 (Catns). Genomics 31: 127-129, 1996.

8. Wildenberg, G. A.; Dohn, M. R.; Carnahan, R. H.; Davis, M. A.;
Lobdell, N. A.; Settleman, J.; Reynolds, A. B.: p120-catenin and
p190RhoGAP regulate cell-cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism
between Rac and Rho. Cell 127: 1027-1039, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/2/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2009
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 11/2/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/7/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/7/1996

EDITED mgross: 05/21/2013
mgross: 9/27/2011
terry: 9/2/2011
mgross: 12/9/2010
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/22/2009
mgross: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/30/2009
mgross: 11/12/2008
terry: 10/31/2008
psherman: 11/3/1999
psherman: 11/2/1999
alopez: 6/7/1999
dkim: 10/12/1998
alopez: 9/8/1998
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
mark: 2/7/1996

611053	TITLE *611053 RUN AND SH3 DOMAIN-CONTAINING 2; RUSC2
;;KIAA0375;;
IPORIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA library, Nagase
et al. (1997) cloned a partial RUSC2 cDNA, which they called KIAA0375.
RT-PCR detected high expression in human kidney, ovary, and testis,
followed by moderate expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, and
skeletal muscle, and low expression in prostate and small intestine.

By yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human placental cDNA library with mutant
Rab1b (612565) as prey, Bayer et al. (2005) identified RUSC2, which they
called iporin. The deduced 1516-amino acid protein contains a RUN domain
and an SH3 domain, as well as proline and glutamic acid-rich regions.
The mouse homolog shares 84% similarity to human RUSC2. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 5.5-kb
transcript, with highest levels in brain and testis. The RUN domain of
RUSC2 mediated binding to Rab1. Western blot analysis detected a 220-kD
protein mainly associated with membrane fractions. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed a cytosolic distribution with punctate perinuclear
enrichment. RUSC2 interacted with the Rab1-binding protein GM130
(GOLGA2; 602580) on yeast 2-hybrid and in vitro binding assays.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bayer et al., 2005 determined that the RUSC2 gene contains 11 exons and
spans about 14 kb.

MAPPING

Bayer et al. (2005) noted that the RUSC2 gene maps to chromosome 9p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bayer, M.; Fischer, J.; Kremerskothen, J.; Ossendorf, E.; Matanis,
T.; Konczal, M.; Weide, T.; Barnekow, A.: Identification and characterization
of iporin as a novel interaction partner for rab1. BMC Cell Biol. 6:
15, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 5/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2009
wwang: 5/23/2007

601762	TITLE *601762 CASPASE 10, APOPTOSIS-RELATED CYSTEINE PROTEASE; CASP10
;;MCH4
CASPASE 10, ISOFORM B, INCLUDED; CASP10B, INCLUDED;;
FADD-LIKE ICE 2, INCLUDED; FLICE2, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase-10 is an aspartate-specific cysteine protease of the ICE/CED3
(see 147678) family. These proteases take part in a cascade of reactions
thought to be responsible for the apoptotic changes observed in
mammalian cells undergoing programmed cell death.

CLONING

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) used degenerate PCR to identify CASP10,
a novel member of the ICE/CED3 protease family. They subsequently cloned
the cDNA, which they termed MCH4, from a human Jurkat T-cell cDNA
library. Sequence analysis revealed that MCH4 encodes a 479-amino acid
polypeptide. They found that MCH4 is most closely related to MCH5
(CASP8; 601763) and that MCH4 and MCH5 contain the active site
pentapeptide QACQG instead of the QACRG present in all other known
members of the family. Furthermore, the authors found that the sequences
of MCH4 and MCH5 contain Fas-associating protein with death domain
(FADD; 602457)-like domains, suggesting possible interaction with FADD.
Northern blot analysis showed that MCH4 was expressed as a 4-kb message
in most human tissues examined.

By searching an EST database for clones containing the conserved GSW
sequences found in the small catalytic subunit of caspases, Vincenz and
Dixit (1997) identified a cDNA encoding a splice variant of CASP10,
CASP10B, which they called FLICE2. Sequence analysis predicted that the
deduced 521-amino acid FLICE2 protein contains a 50-amino acid insert in
the C terminus of the prodomain and a 48-amino acid sequence distinct
from CASP10 at the C terminus. FLICE2 also contains 2 death effector
domains (DEDs). Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb FLICE2
transcript particularly in tissues enriched in lymphoid cells and in the
K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) stated that MCH4, like other members of
the ICE/CED3 family, forms an active protease only after cleavage of its
proenzyme into 2 subunits which dimerize to form the active enzyme. They
found that the mature enzyme cleaves both CPP32 (CASP3; 600636) and MCH3
(601761) proenzymes into their mature forms.

Functional analysis by Vincenz and Dixit (1997) showed that FLICE2
cleaves poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP; 173870) to its 85-kD
apoptotic form, binds FADD through the DEDs of each molecule, and binds
to the CD95 (TNFRSF6, or FAS; 134637) and TNFR1 (191190) death
receptors. The binding of CD95 and TNFR1 by FLICE2 is enhanced in the
presence of FADD. Overexpression of FLICE2, but not overexpression of an
active-site mutant, induced apoptosis.

Wang et al. (2001) showed that caspase-10 can function independently of
caspase-8 (CASP8; 601763) in initiating FAS- and tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-receptor-mediated apoptosis.
Moreover, FAS crosslinking in primary human T cells leads to the
recruitment and activation of caspase-10. They showed that the
death-effector domains of caspases 8 and 10 interact with the
death-effector domain of FADD. Nonetheless, they found that caspases 8
and 10 may have different apoptosis substrates and therefore potentially
distinct roles in death receptor signaling or other cellular processes.

Lee et al. (2007) showed that intrinsic apoptosis in human cells that
was induced by the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide or the antibiotic
staurosporine, but not by FAS ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) or TRAIL (TNFSF10;
603598), caused translocation of AK2 (103020) from mitochondria to the
cytoplasm, followed by formation of a complex between AK2, FADD, and
CASP10. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the N- and C-terminal domains
of AK2, which include nucleoside- and substrate-binding domains,
respectively, bound the C-terminal death domain of FADD. AK2 binding
promoted association of CASP10 with FADD, and addition of purified AK2
protein to cell extracts induced activation of CASP10 via FADD, leading
to subsequent activation of CASP9 (602234) and CASP3. Apoptosis through
the AK2 complex did not correlate with the adenylate kinase activity of
AK2, did not require CASP8-mediated apoptotic responses, and did not
involve mitochondrial cytochrome c release. Immunodepletion or knockdown
of AK2, FADD, or CASP10 abrogated etoposide-induced apoptosis, and AK2
complexes were not observed in several etoposide-resistant human tumor
cell lines that were deficient in expression of FADD, CASP10, or CASP3.
In contrast to the findings in human cells, etoposide-induced apoptosis
was observed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts that lacked Fadd expression.
Since mice also lack Casp10, Lee et al. (2007) concluded that mice lack
an apoptotic pathway comparable to the AK2-FADD-CASP10 pathway in
humans.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hadano et al. (2001) determined that the CASP10 gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 48 kb. It is transcribed in the centromere-to-telomere
direction.

MAPPING

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) mapped the MCH4 gene to 2q33-q34 by
FISH. Hadano et al. (2001) determined that the CFLAR (603599), CASP10,
and CASP8 genes are tandemly located within 200 kb.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome type IIA

In an African American girl with type IIA autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (ALPS2A; 603909) characterized by abnormal lymphocyte and
dendritic cell homeostasis and immune regulatory defects, Wang et al.
(1999) identified a heterozygous mutation in the CASP10 gene (L285F;
601762.0001). The mutation resulted in decreased caspase activity and
interfered with death receptor-induced apoptosis, particularly that
stimulated by Fas ligand (134638) and TRAIL (603598). These results
provided evidence that inherited nonlethal caspase abnormalities cause
pleiotropic apoptosis defects underlying autoimmunity in ALPS2. A second
patient, of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, was reported to have a homozygous
substitution in the CASP10 gene (V410I), which was later determined to
be a polymorphism with apoptotic activity similar to the wildtype CASP10
protein (Gronbaek et al., 2000; Zhu et al., 2006). In addition, the
Ashkenazi Jewish patient was found to have a mutation in the TNFRSF1A
gene (191190), which is mutated in the TNF receptor-associated periodic
syndrome (TRAPS; 142680) (Zhu et al., 2006). Zhu et al. (2006) presented
association data suggesting that the V410I substitution may offer some
protection from severe disease in patients with ALPS1A (601859) who have
mutations in the TNFRSF6 gene (134637).

In 2 sisters and an unrelated boy with APLS2A, Zhu et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous pathogenic mutation in the CASP10 gene (I406L;
601762.0007).

- Cancer

To explore the possibility that mutation in the CASP10 gene might be
involved in the development of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL; 605027), Shin
et al. (2002) analyzed the entire coding region and all splice sites of
the CASP10 gene for the detection of somatic mutations in 117 human
NHLs. Seventeen NHLs (14.5%) had CASP10 mutations, of which 3 were
identified in the coding regions of the prodomain, 11 in the p17 large
protease subunit, and 3 in the p12 small protease subunit. There were 2
frameshift mutations and 1 nonsense mutation; the remaining 14 were
missense mutations. Shin et al. (2002) expressed the tumor-derived
CASP10 mutants in 293 cells and found that apoptosis was suppressed.
These data suggested that the inactivating mutations of the CASP10 gene
may lead to the loss of its apoptotic function and contribute to the
pathogenesis of some human NHLs.

Park et al. (2002) analyzed the genetic alterations of the entire coding
region and all splice sites of the CASP8 and CASP10 genes in 99 gastric
cancers by PCR-SSCP and sequencing. Of the 99 gastric cancers, 3 had
CASP10 mutations, whereas no mutations were detected in CASP8. In vitro
expression studies showed that the met147-to-thr (M147T; 601762.0006)
and gln257-to-ter (Q257X; 601762.0004) mutants severely impaired
CASP10-mediated apoptosis. Park et al. (2002) suggested that somatic
alterations of the CASP10 gene may contribute to pathogenesis in a
subset of gastric cancers through loss of apoptotic function.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AUTOIMMUNE LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE SYNDROME, TYPE IIA
CASP10, LEU285PHE

In an African American patient with ALPS2A (603909), Wang et al. (1999)
identified a heterozygous 724C-T transition in the CASP10 gene,
resulting in a leu242-to-phe (L242F) substitution (L285F in the longer
CASP10 isoform). The proband's mother, who exhibited high levels of
autoantibodies to nuclear antigens and defective lymphocyte apoptosis,
also had the mutation. The proband's unaffected father and 2 sisters did
not have the mutation. The mutation was not found in 200 normal
chromosomes or in any patient with ALPS type I (601859).

.0002
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0003
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, SOMATIC
CASP10, ALA414VAL

In a peripheral T-cell lymphoma (605027), Shin et al. (2002) observed a
1241C-T transition in exon 9 of the CASP10 gene, resulting in an
ala414-to-val (A414V) amino acid change.

.0004
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, SOMATIC
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
CASP10, GLN257TER

In a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (605027), Shin et al. (2002) observed
a 769C-T transition in exon 7 of the CASP10 gene, converting gln257 to
ter (Q257X).

Park et al. (2002) identified a somatic Q257X mutation in gastric cancer
tissue. In vitro expression studies showed that Q257X mutation severely
impaired caspase-10-mediated apoptosis.

.0005
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, SOMATIC
CASP10, 1-BP INS, 1042A

In a patient with MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) lymphoma
(605027), Shin et al. (2002) found a 1-bp insertion, an adenine after
nucleotide 1042, resulting in frameshift and termination at amino acid
367.

.0006
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
CASP10, MET147THR

Park et al. (2002) identified 3 somatic mutations in the CASP10 gene in
gastric cancers (137215): met147 to thr (M147T), and the previously
described gln257 to ter (Q257X; 601762.0004). By in vitro expression
studies, they showed that the M147T and Q257X mutations severely
impaired caspase-10-mediated apoptosis.

.0007
AUTOIMMUNE LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE SYNDROME, TYPE IIA
CASP10, ILE406LEU

In a 7-year-old boy with ALPS2A (603909), Zhu et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous 1400A-T transversion in exon 9 of the CASP10 gene,
resulting in an ile406-to-leu (I406L) substitution near the active site
of the protein. Neither parent had a history suggestive of ALPS, but his
father, an adult-onset diabetic, also carried the mutation. The I406L
mutation was also identified in 2 sisters of mixed Jamaican and Guyanese
ancestry who had early-onset ALPS2A. Their mother and a third sister
were mutation carriers and asymptomatic at the time of evaluation, but
showed defective T cell apoptosis in vitro, increased numbers of
double-negative T cells, and positive direct antiglobulin IgG tests and
antithyroid antibodies. In vitro functional expression studies showed
that the I406L mutant protein had defective apoptosis and exerted a
dominant-negative effect when cotransfected with the wildtype protein.
The I406L substitution was not identified in 576 controls.

REFERENCE 1. Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Armstrong, R. C.; Krebs, J.; Srinivasula,
S. M.; Wang, L.; Bullrich, F.; Fritz, L. C.; Trapani, J. A.; Tomaselli,
K. J.; Litwack, G.; Alnemri, E. S.: In vitro activation of CPP32
and Mch3 by Mch4, a novel human apoptotic cysteine protease containing
two FADD-like domains. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 7464-7469, 1996.

2. Gronbaek, K.; Dalby, T.; Zeuthen, J.; Ralfkiaer, E.; Guidberg,
P.: The V410I (G1228A) variant of the caspase-10 gene is a common
polymorphism of the Danish population. (Letter) Blood 95: 2184-2185,
2000.

3. Hadano, S.; Yanagisawa, Y.; Skaug, J.; Fichter, K.; Nasir, J.;
Martindale, D.; Koop, B. F.; Scherer, S. W.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Ikeda, J.-E.; Hayden, M. R.: Cloning and characterization
of three novel genes, ALS2CR1, ALS2CR2, and ALS2CR3, in the juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS2) critical region at chromosome
2q33-q34: candidate genes for ALS2. Genomics 71: 200-213, 2001.

4. Lee, H.-J.; Pyo, J.-O.; Oh, Y.; Kim, H.-J.; Hong, S.; Jeon, Y.-J.;
Kim, H.; Cho, D.-H.; Woo, H.-N.; Song, S.; Nam, J.-H.; Kim, H. J.;
Kim, K.-S.; Jung, Y.-K.: AK2 activates a novel apoptotic pathway
through formation of a complex with FADD and caspase-10. Nature Cell
Biol. 9: 1303-1310, 2007.

5. Park, W. S.; Lee, J. H.; Shin, M. S.; Park, J. Y.; Kim, H. S.;
Lee, J. H.; Kim, Y. S.; Lee, S. N.; Xiao, W.; Park, C. H.; Lee, S.
H.; Yoo, N. J.; Lee, J. Y.: Inactivating mutations of the caspase-10
gene in gastric cancer. Oncogene 21: 2919-2925, 2002.

6. Shin, M. S.; Kim, H. S.; Kang, C. S.; Park, W. S.; Kim, S. Y.;
Lee, S. N.; Lee, J. H.; Park, J. Y.; Jang, J. J.; Kim, C. W.; Kim,
S. H.; Lee, J. Y.; Yoo, N. J.; Lee, S. H.: Inactivating mutations
of CASP10 gene in non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Blood 99: 4094-4099, 2002.

7. Vincenz, C.; Dixit, V. M.: Fas-associated death domain protein
interleukin-1-beta-converting enzyme 2 (FLICE2), an ICE/Ced-3 homologue,
is proximally involved in CD95- and p55-mediated death signaling. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 6578-6583, 1997.

8. Wang, J.; Chun, H. J.; Wong, W.; Spencer, D. M.; Lenardo, M. J.
: Caspase-10 is an initiator caspase in death receptor signaling. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13884-13888, 2001.

9. Wang, J.; Zheng, L.; Lobito, A.; Chan, F. K.; Dale, J.; Sneller,
M.; Yao, X.; Puck, J. M.; Straus, S. E.; Lenardo, M. J.: Inherited
human caspase 10 mutations underlie defective lymphocyte and dendritic
cell apoptosis in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II. Cell 98:
47-58, 1999.

10. Zhu, S.; Hsu, A. P.; Vacek, M. M.; Zheng, L.; Schaffer, A. A.;
Dale, J. K.; Davis, J.; Fischer, R. E.; Straus, S. E.; Boruchov, D.;
Saulsbury, F. T.; Lenardo, M. J.; Puck, J. M.: Genetic alterations
in caspase-10 may be causative or protective in autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome. Hum. Genet. 119: 284-294, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/22/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/21/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/20/1999

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/18/1997

EDITED mgross: 10/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
terry: 11/3/2006
wwang: 5/23/2006
ckniffin: 5/11/2006
carol: 11/18/2004
ckniffin: 11/3/2004
mgross: 11/8/2002
tkritzer: 10/24/2002
terry: 10/22/2002
mgross: 9/10/2002
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
tkritzer: 8/28/2002
terry: 8/23/2002
carol: 1/20/2002
mcapotos: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/7/2002
mgross: 7/21/2000
mgross: 7/21/1999
mgross: 7/20/1999
alopez: 6/5/1997
alopez: 5/30/1997

602566	TITLE *602566 PURINERGIC RECEPTOR P2X, LIGAND-GATED ION CHANNEL, 7; P2RX7
;;PURINOCEPTOR P2X7; P2X7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cell surface ATP receptors can be divided into 2 classes. The
metabotropic class (P2Y/P2U) are members of the 7-transmembrane
superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors (see 602451). The ionotropic
class (P2X) are ligand-gated channels (see 600843). P2Z receptors are
ionotropic but also cause cell permeabilization. Rassendren et al.
(1997) cloned the human gene for a receptor, called P2X7, that is
structurally related to the P2X family and exhibits the properties of a
P2Z receptor. They screened a human monocyte cDNA library with the rat
P2X7 gene as a probe, and recovered a cDNA encoding a predicted
595-amino acid protein that is 80% identical to the rat P2X7 protein. On
Northern blots, P2X7 was expressed as a 6-kb mRNA in many tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Rassendren et al. (1997) found that treatment of P2X7-transfected cells
with ATP or 2-prime, 3-prime-(4-benzoyl)-benzoyl ATP (BzATP) elicited
cation-selective currents. Longer applications of agonists permeabilized
the cell.

Worthington et al. (2002) studied the role of various residues in ATP
binding of P2X7 receptor. This was done by transfecting into a cell line
or Xenopus oocytes with either wildtype or site-directed mutants of the
protein. They concluded that K193 and K311 are essential residues in ATP
binding.

Atkinson et al. (2002) demonstrated that the P2RX7 ATP-binding receptor
calcium channel spans the nuclear envelope. Atkinson et al. (2002) used
in situ hybridization of the rat hippocampus to detect mRNA encoding
P2RX7. A positive signal was seen in the cytoplasm of all neurons in the
cell-body layer, 90% of which are excitatory cells. P2RX7 mRNA was also
seen in inhibitory neurons of the hippocampus.

Sugiyama et al. (2004) tested whether diabetes increases the
vulnerability of retinal microvessels to the potentially lethal
consequences of having their P2X7 purinoceptors activated. In
experiments using pericyte-containing microvessels isolated from adult
rat retina, they found that soon after the onset of
streptozotocin-induced diabetes, markedly lower P2X7 agonist
concentrations effectively opened pores and triggered apoptosis in the
retinal microvasculature. Sugiyama et al. (2004) suggested that
microvascular damage in the diabetic retina may be mediated by receptors
for vasoactive molecules.

Using rat alveolar macrophages expressing native P2x7 and human
embryonic kidney cells expressing full-length rat P2x7 or a C-terminally
truncated P2x7 mutant, Lemaire et al. (2006) showed that P2X7 was
involved in the fusion process leading to multinucleated giant cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Buell et al. (1998) determined that the P2RX7 gene contains 13 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Buell et al. (1998) localized the P2RX7 gene to chromosome
12q24. By radiation hybrid analysis, they found that the gene lies
within 130 kb of the homologous P2RX4 gene (600846).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Several investigators had shown that P2X7 is nonfunctional both in
lymphocytes and monocytes from some subjects. To study a possible
genetic basis, Gu et al. (2001) sequenced DNA coding for the
carboxyl-terminal tail of P2X7. They found a 1513A-C substitution, which
resulted in a glu496-to-ala (E496A) mutation. Nine of 45 normal subjects
were heterozygous, whereas 1 subject was homozygous. Surface expression
of P2X7 on lymphocytes was not affected by this E496A polymorphism,
demonstrated both by confocal microscopy and immunofluorescent staining.
Monocytes and lymphocytes from the E496A homozygote subject expressed
nonfunctional receptor, whereas heterozygotes showed P2X7 function that
was half that of germline P2X7. Transfection experiments showed that the
mutant P2X7 receptor was nonfunctional when expressed at low receptor
density but regained function at a high receptor density. This density
dependence of mutant P2X7 function was also seen on differentiation of
fresh monocytes to macrophages with interferon-gamma, which upregulated
mutant P2X7 and partially restored its function. P2X7-mediated apoptosis
of lymphocytes was impaired in homozygous mutant P2X7 compared with
germline (8.6 vs 35.2%). The data suggested that the glutamic acid at
position 496 is required for optimal assembly of the P2X7 receptor.

Treatment of mycobacteria-infected macrophages with ATP induces
P2X7-mediated apoptosis that leads to death of the host cell and
intracellular bacilli. Saunders et al. (2003) found that neither
apoptosis nor killing of mycobacteria occurred in macrophages from
individuals homozygous for E496A after brief ATP exposure.

Cabrini et al. (2005) noted that in addition to the E496A variant,
several other polymorphisms cause loss of function of P2X7R in CLL
patients. By monitoring ATP-induced Ca(2+) influx in peripheral blood
lymphocytes from CLL patients and in embryonic kidney cells transfected
with P2X7R variants, they confirmed loss of function with E496A, but
found that other cytoplasmic tail variants resulted in only minor
functional decreases. Cabrini et al. (2005) identified the 489C-T
polymorphism, which causes a his155-to-tyr (H155Y) change in the
extracellular portion of the receptor, as a gain-of-function
polymorphism. Significant Ca(2+) flux increase was observed in CLL
patient lymphocytes bearing 489C/T and 489T/T genotypes. None of the
polymorphisms studied occurred at a significantly different frequency in
CLL patients compared with controls.

Wiley et al. (2002) investigated whether a glu496-to-ala (E496A;
1513A-C) single-nucleotide polymorphism that results in loss of function
of P2X7 in healthy individuals was present in leukemic B lymphocytes of
patients with chronic lymphatic leukemia (CLL; 151400). They studied
genomic DNA from the peripheral blood leukocytes of 36 unrelated
individuals with CLL, 4 individuals with familial CLL, and 46
age-matched controls. The prevalence of the polymorphic mutation and the
frequency of the mutant allele were 3-fold greater in individuals with
CLL than in white, elderly controls. Individuals homozygous for the
polymorphic allele had no P2X7 receptor function and heterozygotes had
half the normal function of that seen in individuals homozygous for the
wildtype allele; amounts of ATP-induced apoptosis varied accordingly. In
2 families in which Wiley et al. (2002) studied a father-son pair and a
sister-sister pair with CLL, loss of P2X7 function arose because of
inheritance of 1 or 2 1513A-C alleles for P2X7. They concluded that
activation of the P2X7 receptor leads to apoptosis of lymphocytes in
individuals with CLL, and reduced function of this receptor has an
antiapoptotic effect, resulting in an increase in B-cell numbers. Thus,
inheritance of a loss-of-function polymorphic mutation at position 1513
in the P2X7 gene would contribute to the pathogenesis of CLL.

To explore further the involvement of P2X7 as a susceptibility gene in
CLL, Dao-Ung et al. (2004) expanded the study of Wiley et al. (2002) to
include 42 cases of familial and 74 cases of sporadic CLL. Three
intergenerational pairs, 6 sib pairs, and 8 single familial cases
(affected relatives unavailable for study) were recruited. The 1513C
allele frequency was significantly increased in familial CLL patients
(0.286) compared with normal subjects (0.157) (OR = 2.1, p = 0.008). In
contrast, the 1513C allele frequency in patients with sporadic CLL was
very similar to that observed in normal subjects, with an OR close to 1.

Thunberg et al. (2002) found that the 1513A-C polymorphism affected
clinical outcome in CLL, especially in patients with mutated
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable genes (V(H); see 147070). Survival
was significantly longer for patients with CLL heterozygous for the
1513C allele than those with the 1513A/A genotype: median survival was
104 months and 72 months, respectively (P = 0.009). Of the 165 patients
with CLL in whom they assessed V(H) gene mutation status, the genes were
mutated in 71 (43%) patients and unmutated in 94; 18 (25%) of the 71
patients with mutated genes had the 1513C allele, compared with 17 (18%)
of the 94 who had unmutated genes. In patients with mutated
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable genes, those with CLL who were
1513C-positive had 53 months' longer median survival than those with the
1513A/A genotype (151 vs 98 months, P = 0.011). Di Virgilio and Wiley
(2002) commented on these findings.

ANIMAL MODEL

Solle et al. (2001) generated P2rx7-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. Macrophages from the mutant mice were unable to respond
to extracellular ATP as measured by fluorescent dye accumulation. In
addition, ATP or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation of macrophages
resulted in the accumulation of 35-kD pro-Il1b (147720) in amounts
comparable to wildtype, but only wildtype macrophages secreted the 17-kD
Il1b. Both wildtype and mutant macrophages produced and released the
17-kD form in response to the potassium ionophore nigericin. Likewise,
in vivo, mutant mice primed with LPS and challenged with ATP failed to
generate significant levels of Il1b. Il6 (147620), on the other hand,
was produced by the mutant mice in response to LPS but without
additional production after ATP challenge, suggesting that ATP affects
IL6 production via both P2RX7-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

The capacity of P2X7R to form large pores and mediate apoptosis depends
on its large cytoplasmic tail, which harbors a putative TNFR-related
death domain. Adriouch et al. (2002) stated that transfected mouse P2x7r
forms pores less efficiently than its human and rat counterparts. Using
flow cytometric analysis, they demonstrated that splenic T cells from
C57BL/6 mice were less sensitive to extracellular ATP-induced calcium
uptake and apoptosis than were those from BALB/c mice. Adriouch et al.
(2002) identified a coding mutation in the C57BL/6 allele, a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 1352, that led to a pro451-to-leu (P451L)
substitution in the TNFR-related death domain. In contrast, the BALB/c
sequence was in accord with those of human and rat P2X7R. The mutant
form of P2x7r was present in 2 C57BL and 2 DBA strains, but not in 10
other strains examined, including 4 derived from wild mice. Adriouch et
al. (2002) suggested that the P451L mutation has effects analogous to
those seen with the human E496A mutation.

Weber et al. (2010) found that P2x7 -/- mice were resistant to contact
hypersensitivity (CHS). Injection of Il1b restored the capacity to
develop CHS in P2x7 -/- mice. P2x7 -/- dendritic cells failed to make
Il1b in response to LPS and ATP, but they did make Il1b, in an Nlrp3
(606416)- and Asc (PYCARD; 606838)-dependent manner, if primed with LPS
and alum. Weber et al. (2010) concluded that P2X7 is a crucial receptor
for extracellular ATP released in skin in response to contact allergens
and for the release of IL1B, which is also essential in the
sensitization process.

REFERENCE 1. Adriouch, S.; Dox, C.; Welge, V.; Seman, M.; Koch-Nolte, F.; Haag,
F.: Cutting edge: a natural P451L mutation in the cytoplasmic domain
impairs the function of the mouse P2X7 receptor. J. Immun. 169:
4108-4112, 2002.

2. Atkinson, L.; Milligan, C. J.; Buckley, N. J.; Deuchars, J.: An
ATP-gated ion channel at the cell nucleus. Nature 420: 42 only,
2002.

3. Buell, G. N.; Talabot, F.; Gos, A.; Lorenz, J.; Lai, E.; Morris,
M. A.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Gene structure and chromosomal localization
of the human P2X7 receptor. Receptors Channels 5: 347-354, 1998.

4. Cabrini, G.; Falzoni, S.; Forchap, S. L.; Pellegatti, P.; Balboni,
A.; Agostini, P.; Cuneo, A.; Castoldi, G.; Baricordi, O. R.; Di Virgilio,
F.: A his-155 to tyr polymorphism confers gain-of-function to the
human P2X7 receptor of human leukemic lymphocytes. J. Immun. 175:
82-89, 2005.

5. Dao-Ung, L.-P.; Fuller, S. J.; Sluyter, R.; SkarRatt, K. K.; Thunberg,
U.; Tobin, G.; Byth, K.; Ban, M.; Rosenquist, R.; Stewart, G. J.;
Wiley, J. S.: Association of the 1513C polymorphism in the P2X7 gene
with familial forms of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. (Letter) Brit.
J. Haemat. 125: 815-817, 2004.

6. Di Virgilio, F.; Wiley, J. S.: The P2X7 receptor of CLL lymphocytes--a
molecule with a split personality. (Commentary) Lancet 360: 1898-1899,
2002.

7. Gu, B. J.; Zhang, W.; Worthington, R. A.; Sluyter, R.; Dao-Ung,
P.; Petrou, S.; Barden, J. A.; Wiley, J. S.: A glu-496 to ala polymorphism
leads to loss of function of the human P2X(7) receptor. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 11135-11142, 2001.

8. Lemaire, I.; Falzoni, S.; Leduc, N.; Zhang, B.; Pellegatti, P.;
Adinolfi, E.; Chiozzi, P.; Di Virgilio, F.: Involvement of the purinergic
P2X7 receptor in the formation of multinucleated giant cells. J.
Immun. 177: 7257-7265, 2006.

9. Rassendren, F.; Buell, G. N.; Virginio, C.; Collo, G.; North, R.
A.; Surprenant, A.: The permeabilizing ATP receptor, P2X(7). J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 5482-5486, 1997.

10. Saunders, B. M.; Fernando, S. L.; Sluyter, R.; Britton, W. J.;
Wiley, J. S.: A loss-of-function polymorphism in the human P2X(7)
receptor abolishes ATP-mediated killing of mycobacteria. J. Immun. 171:
5442-5446, 2003.

11. Solle, M.; Labasi, J.; Perregaux, D. G.; Stam, E.; Petrushova,
N.; Koller, B. H.; Griffiths, R. J.; Gabel, C. A.: Altered cytokine
production in mice lacking P2X7 receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 125-132,
2001.

12. Sugiyama, T.; Kobayashi, M.; Kawamura, H.; Li, Q.; Puro, D. G.
: Enhancement of P2X7-induced pore formation and apoptosis: an early
effect of diabetes on the retinal microvasculature. Invest. Ophthal.
Vis. Sci. 45: 1026-1032, 2004. Note: Erratum: Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 45: 1296 only, 2004.

13. Thunberg, U.; Tobin, G.; Johnson, A.; Soderberg, O.; Padyukov,
L.; Hultdin, M.; Klareskog, L.; Enblad, G.; Sundstrom, C.; Roos, G.;
Rosenquist, R.: Polymorphism in the P2X7 receptor gene and survival
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Lancet 360: 1935-1939, 2002.

14. Weber, F. C.; Esser, P. R.; Muller, T.; Ganesan, J.; Pellegatti,
P.; Simon, M. M.; Zeiser, R.; Idzko, M.; Jakob, T.; Martin, S. F.
: Lack of the purinergic receptor P2X(7) results in resistance to
contact hypersensitivity. J. Exp. Med. 207: 2609-2619, 2010.

15. Wiley, J. S.; Dao-Ung, L. P.; Gu, B. J.; Sluyter, R.; Shemon,
A. N.; Li, C.; Taper, J.; Gallo, J.; Manoharan, A.: A loss-of-function
polymorphic mutation in the cytolytic P2X7 receptor gene and chronic
lymphocyte leukaemia: a molecular study. Lancet 359: 1114-1119,
2002.

16. Worthington, R. A.; Smart, M. L.; Gu, B. J.; Williams, D. A.;
Petrou, S.; Wiley, J. S.; Barden, J. A.: Point mutations confer loss
of ATP-induced human P2X(7) receptor function. FEBS Lett. 512: 43-46,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/18/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/4/2006
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/13/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/2/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/20/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/24/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/06/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
carol: 2/3/2009
alopez: 1/27/2009
mgross: 10/26/2007
terry: 9/18/2007
mgross: 8/30/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 5/8/2006
terry: 5/5/2006
mgross: 1/4/2006
carol: 1/14/2005
tkritzer: 1/13/2005
tkritzer: 8/20/2004
terry: 8/20/2004
tkritzer: 2/13/2003
tkritzer: 1/30/2003
terry: 1/29/2003
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
cwells: 7/11/2002
terry: 6/26/2002
cwells: 2/7/2001
cwells: 2/2/2001
terry: 4/21/1999
carol: 4/20/1999
alopez: 4/24/1998

300463	TITLE *300463 POLYGLUTAMINE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; PQBP1
;;NUCLEAR PROTEIN CONTAINING A WW DOMAIN, 38-KD; NPW38
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PQBP1 is a nuclear polyglutamine-binding protein that contains a WW
domain (Waragai et al., 1999).

CLONING

Using the polyglutamine tract of murine Brn2 (POU3F2; 600494) as bait in
a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human embryonic brain cDNA library, Imafuku
et al. (1998) cloned PQBP1. The deduced protein contains an arginine-
and aspartic acid-rich domain that assumes a helical structure. Northern
blot analysis confirmed expression of PQBP1 in human brain.

Waragai et al. (1999) further characterized PQBP1, which they had
previously cloned (Imafuku et al., 1998). The deduced 265-amino acid
PQBP1 protein contains an N-terminal WW domain, a protein-protein
interaction motif that has 2 conserved trp (W) residues, which lies
between an acidic region and an acidic-basic amino acid repetitive
region. PQBP1 also has a putative nuclear localization signal. Using
Northern blot analysis, Waragai et al. (1999) detected a 1.0-kb
transcript in all 8 tissues examined. Northern blot analysis and in situ
hybridization revealed PQBP1 in several regions of the brain, with
highest expression in cerebellum, hippocampus, and olfactory bulb.
Immunohistochemistry indicated that, in the brain, PQBP1 was present
primarily in neurons. By immunofluorescence studies and expression of a
PQBP1-GFP fusion protein, Waragai et al. (1999) showed that the PQBP1
protein localized in the nucleus.

By searching a full-length cDNA database for sequences encoding proteins
with protein-protein interaction domains, Komuro et al. (1999)
identified PQBP1, which they called NPW38. Using SDS-PAGE and Western
blot analysis, Komuro et al. (1999) showed that PQBP1 had an apparent
molecular mass of 38 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.3-kb PQBP1
transcript in all 16 tissues examined.

Iwamoto et al. (2000) identified 4 alternative PQBP1 transcripts, which
they designated PQBP1a to PQBP1d, in addition to the PQBP1 transcript
identified by Komuro et al. (1999) and Waragai et al. (1999). All of the
PQBP1 transcripts encode proteins that retain the WW domain in their
N-terminal regions, but there is wide variation in their C-terminal
regions. Iwamoto et al. (2000) noted that PQBP1a and PQBP1d lack the
domain responsible for interaction with homopolymeric glutamine repeats
and the nuclear localization signal.

GENE FUNCTION

Using deletion analysis, Imafuku et al. (1998) showed that the arg- and
asp-rich motif of PQBP1 was essential for binding the polyglutamine
tract of mouse Brn2.

Waragai et al. (1999) proposed that PQBP1 mediates cellular functions by
binding to polyglutamine tracts via its polar amino acid-rich domain.
Using immunoprecipitation, they confirmed that PQBP1 binds mouse Brn2.
In cotransfection experiments, PQBP1 suppressed the ability of Brn2 to
transactivate a target gene. Waragai et al. (1999) noted that PQBP1
binds with a higher affinity to an expanded polyglutamine tract, and
they confirmed that PQBP1 interacts with the polyglutamine tracts of
huntingtin (613004) and androgen receptor (AR; 313700). Overexpression
of PQBP1 suppressed the growth of cells in culture and increased their
susceptibility to various stresses.

Komuro et al. (1999) observed that the WW domain of PQBP1 functioned as
a transcriptional activator in yeast 2-hybrid assays and in mammalian
cells in vivo. However, the transcriptional activity of the WW domain
was repressed by regions of PQBP1 flanking the WW domain. In vitro
translated PQBP1 specifically bound to poly(rG) resin, suggesting that
PQBP1 functions as an RNA-binding protein.

Okazawa et al. (2002) proposed that modified transcription may underlie
polyglutamine-mediated pathology and that PQBP1 may be involved in the
pathology of spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (SCA1; 164400). Using in vitro and
in vivo assays, they showed that interaction between ataxin-1 (ATX1;
601556) and PQBP1 was positively influenced by expanded polyglutamine
sequences. In immunoprecipitation experiments, mutant ataxin-1 enhanced
interaction between PQBP1 and the RNA polymerase II (pol II) large
subunit (180660), and the authors proposed that a ternary complex is
formed by PQBP1 in the presence of mutant ataxin-1. PQBP1 and mutant
ataxin-1 acted cooperatively in cell lines to repress transcription and
induce cell death. Okazawa et al. (2002) hypothesized that high
expression of PQBP1 in the cerebellum promotes mutant ataxin-1-induced
cell death, contributing to the region-specific neurodegeneration seen
in SCA1 patient tissues.

Enokido et al. (2002) examined the effects of PQBP1 on primary-cultured
cerebellar neurons and concluded that overexpression of PQBP1 inhibits
the basal transcription in cerebellar neurons and increases their
vulnerability to low potassium conditions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Iwamoto et al. (2000) determined that the PQBP1 gene contains 6 exons
and spans at least 4.6 kb.

MAPPING

Kalscheuer et al. (2003) stated that the PQBP1 gene maps to chromosome
Xp11.23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Based on the distribution of linkage intervals in 125 unrelated families
with X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), Ropers et al. (2003) estimated
that one-third of all mutations underlying XLMR are clustered on
proximal Xp. In 5 of 29 families with XLMR, Kalscheuer et al. (2003)
identified mutations in the PQBP1 gene that caused frameshifts in the
fourth coding exon, which contains a stretch of 6 AG dinucleotides in
the DR/ER repeat. In 1 family not previously reported and a family with
Sutherland-Haan syndrome (309500), Kalscheuer et al. (2003) found that
affected males carried an extra AG dinucleotide (300463.0001). Two other
families, one not previously reported and the other reported as MRX55
(see 309500) by Deqaqi et al. (1998), had a deletion of 2 AG
dinucleotides (300463.0002). A single AG unit was deleted (300463.0003)
in affected males of a family that had been reported by Hamel et al.
(1994) as having mental retardation, congenital heart defect, cleft
palate, short stature, and facial anomalies. Considerable phenotypic
variability was observed between families with different mutations and
even between families with the same mutation.

In affected members of a Canadian Mennonite family with Renpenning
syndrome (309500), Lenski et al. (2004) identified a 1-bp insertion in
the PQBP1 gene (300463.0004). They commented that mental retardation,
microcephaly, and short stature seem to be consistent findings among
individuals with PQBP1 mutations. As microcephaly is the most common
physical finding among males with mental retardation of unknown cause,
and is a reliably ascertained finding, they suggested that it may be
useful in the selection of cases for PQBP1 mutation testing.

Golabi et al. (1984) reported a family with X-linked mental retardation,
microcephaly, postnatal growth deficiency, and other anomalies including
atrial septal defect. Lubs et al. (2006) restudied the family, but no
significant linkage to X chromosome markers could be found. Because
microcephaly, short stature, and atrial septal defect in the family of
Golabi et al. (1984) had a clinical similarity to families with other
X-linked mental retardation syndromes, including Renpenning syndrome, in
which mutations in PQBP1 had been identified, Lubs et al. (2006) did a
mutation screen of that gene. A missense mutation in PQBP1 was
identified that changed the conserved tyrosine residue in the WW domain
at position 65 to a cysteine (Y65C; 300463.0007).

ANIMAL MODEL

Okuda et al. (2003) generated transgenic mice overexpressing human
PQBP1. The mice showed a late-onset and gradually progressive motor
neuron disease-like phenotype suggestive of the neurogenic muscular
atrophy observed in patients with SCA1. Ataxia could not be
discriminated from predominant progressive weakness. Pathologic
examinations of the transgenic mice revealed loss of Purkinje and
granular cells in the cerebellum as well as loss of motor neurons in the
spinal anterior horn, corresponding to the pathology of human SCA1.
Okuda et al. (2003) concluded that excessive action of PQBP1 causes
neuronal dysfunction and that PQBP1 may be involved in the pathology of
SCA1.

Ito et al. (2009) generated Pqbp1-knockdown mice using a transgene
expressing double-strand RNA that is endogenously cleaved to an siRNA,
which inhibited 50% of Pqbp1 expression. Pqbp1-knockdown mice possessed
normal ability in ordinary memory tests including water-maze test,
whereas they showed abnormal anxiety-related behavior in light/dark
exploration test and open-field test, and showed obvious declines of
anxiety-related cognition in the repetitive elevated plus maze or novel
object recognition test. C-fos upregulation and histone H3 acetylation
after behavior tests were decreased in neurons of amygdala, prefrontal
cortex, and hippocampus. Administration of 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA),
an HDAC inhibitor, efficiently improved expression of these genes and
rescued the abnormal phenotypes in adult Pqbp1-knockdown mice. Ito et
al. (2009) suggested that Pqbp1 dysfunction in regulating gene
expression may underlie the abnormal behavior and cognition of
Pqbp1-knockdown mice and that recovery of expression of such PQBP1
target genes might improve the symptoms in adult patients with
Renpenning syndrome and PQBP1-linked mental retardation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 2-BP INS, 3900AG

In all affected males from a family with an X-linked mental retardation
syndrome (309500) previously reported by Sutherland et al. (1988),
Kalscheuer et al. (2003) identified an insertion of an extra AG
dinucleotide at position 3900 of the PQBP1 gene. Affected males showed
mental retardation, short stature, microcephaly, brachycephaly, spastic
diplegia, small testes, and anal stenosis or atresia. Kalscheuer et al.
(2003) identified the same AG duplication in a second family with
X-linked mental retardation (see 309500), but the affected males showed
no spastic diplegia or small testes. In both families the disease was
not progressive.

.0002
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 4-BP DEL, 3896AGAG

In affected males of 2 families with X-linked mental retardation
(309500), Kalscheuer et al. (2003) identified a deletion of 2 AG
dinucleotides at position 3896 of the PQBP1 gene. The mutant protein was
predicted to differ by only 2 amino acids from the normal protein.
Affected individuals from 1 family, which had been reported as MRX55
(see 309500) by Deqaqi et al. (1998), were moderately retarded but had
no other clinical signs, except for a somewhat smaller body size in 1
individual. In contrast, all affected members of the second family,
which had not been reported previously, had microcephaly in addition to
mental retardation. One member also had anal atresia, and another had
complete situs inversus. Kalscheuer et al. (2003) suggested that this
clinical variability might be due to differences in the genetic
background; the mildly affected family was from Morocco, while the other
family was from the Netherlands. The disorder was not progressive in any
of these families.

In affected members and obligate carriers of a family with MRXS3,
previously described by Fichera et al. (2002), Fichera et al. (2005)
identified the 3896delAGAG mutation in the PQBP1 gene. The authors
observed skewed X inactivation in 8 of 9 heterozygous females in this
family; the inactivated X chromosome was of maternal origin.

In a family (K8600) with Renpenning syndrome, Stevenson et al. (2005)
identified a 4-bp deletion in exon 4 of the PQBP1 gene, which they
stated was identical to that previously identified by Kalscheuer et al.
(2003) in the MRX55 family, although Stevenson et al. (2005) denoted the
mutation as 459-462delAGAG. The deletion causes a frameshift and a
premature stop codon, resulting in a protein that partially lacks the
PRD domain and completely lacks the NLS and C2 domains. The deletion was
found in all affected males and obligate carriers.

.0003
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 2-BP DEL, 3898AG

In affected males from a family with an X-linked mental retardation
syndrome (309500) reported by Hamel et al. (1994), Kalscheuer et al.
(2003) identified a deletion of a single AG dinucleotide at position
3898 in the PQBP1 gene. All affected males had congenital heart defects
in addition to severe mental retardation, microcephaly, spasticity,
short stature, cleft or highly arched palate, and other craniofacial
abnormalities. The mother of 2 of the affected individuals had a
corrected atrial septal defect. Facial features coarsened with age.

Lenski et al. (2004) referred to this as the cerebropalatocardiac
syndrome or Hamel syndrome.

In 2 male cousins with right microphthalmia and left choroid coloboma,
microcephaly, mental retardation, renal hypoplasia, and spastic
diplegia, Martinez-Garay et al. (2007) identified a 2-bp deletion in the
PQBP1 gene that they designated 461delAG; they stated that it was the
same deletion previously reported by Kalscheuer et al. (2003). The
deletion was also found in both obligate carrier mothers; haplotype
analysis suggested germline mosaicism for the deletion in the maternal
grandmother.

.0004
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 1-BP INS, 641C

Renpenning et al. (1962) described a Canadian Mennonite family in which
20 males in 3 generations had mental retardation (309500).
Manifestations in affected males included microcephaly, short stature,
and small testes; carrier females appeared normal. Stevenson et al.
(1998) mapped the disorder in this family to Xp11.4-p11.2. In affected
members of this family, Lenski et al. (2004) identified a 1-bp insertion
in the PQBP1 gene, 641insC, resulting in a frameshift with a premature
stop codon.

.0005
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 23-BP DEL, NT547

In a French boy with X-linked mental retardation associated with
microcephaly, short stature, and hyperactivity (309500), Cossee et al.
(2006) identified a 23-bp deletion encompassing nucleotides 547-569 in
exon 4 of the PQBP1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a truncated
PQPB1 protein lacking the NLS signal and the C2 domain. The same
mutation was identified in a maternal half-brother who had mild mental
retardation, microcephaly, short stature, facial dysmorphism, choanal
atresia, and anal imperforation.

.0006
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 21-BP DEL, NT334

In 3 unrelated boys with X-linked mental retardation (309500), Cossee et
al. (2006) identified a 21-bp in-frame deletion encompassing nucleotides
334 to 354 in exon 4 of the PQBP1 gene. Two of the boys had mild mental
retardation and mostly behavioral abnormalities without microcephaly or
short stature. The third boy had severe global developmental delay and
borderline short stature without microcephaly. The 21-bp deletion
affects a region of 5 imperfect 7-amino acid tandem repeats in the PRD
domain of the protein, present in the predominant isoform. The deletion
may not affect some of the rarer isoforms, and may not have drastic
functional effects, which may underlie the milder phenotype in these
patients.

.0007
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, TYR65CYS

Lubs et al. (2006) identified a 194A-G transition, resulting in a
tyr65-to-cys (Y65C) substitution, in the PQBP1 gene in affected members
of a family with an X-linked mental retardation syndrome originally
described by Golabi et al. (1984) under the moniker 'Golabi-Ito-Hall
syndrome.' Features included microcephaly, postnatal growth deficiency,
and other anomalies, such as atrial septal defect, all of which are also
found in the Renpenning type of X-linked mental retardation (309500)
(Stevenson et al., 2005; Tapia et al., 2010). The Y65C substitution was
the first missense mutation identified in the PQBP1 gene and the first
mutation found in its WW domain. The WW domain had been shown to play an
important role in regulation of transcription by interacting with the
PPxY motif in transcription factors. The Y65C mutation was thought to
affect the proper functioning of the PQBP1 protein as a transcriptional
coactivator.

The highly conserved quartet of hydrophobic residues trp52, tyr65,
asn67, and pro78 of PQBP1 constitutes the core of its WW domain. Tapia
et al. (2010) found that the T65C substitution disturbed folding of the
isolated WW domain and rendered it vulnerable to oxidation and
dimerization compared with wildtype. The W65C mutant WW domain also
showed impaired binding to PPxY-containing peptides, and the full-length
mutant protein showed reduced binding to the mRNA splicing factor WBP11.
Consistent with these findings, lymphoblasts from a Golabi-Ito-Hall
syndrome patient showed more than 80% reduced splicing efficiency
compared with normal control cells. The T65C mutant protein did not show
reduced stability compared with wildtype, suggesting that it is not
recognized as a misfolded protein.

REFERENCE 1. Cossee, M.; Demeer, B.; Blanchet, P.; Echenne, B.; Singh, D.; Hagens,
O.; Antin, M.; Finck, S.; Vallee, L.; Dollfus, H.; Hegde, S.; Springell,
K.; Thelma, B. K.; Woods, G.; Kalscheuer, V.; Mandel, J.-L.: Exonic
microdeletions in the X-linked PQBP1 gene in mentally retarded patients:
a pathogenic mutation and in-frame deletions of uncertain effect. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 14: 418-425, 2006.

2. Deqaqi, S. C.; N'Guessan, M.; Forner, J.; Sbiti, A.; Beldjord,
C.; Chelly, J.; Sefiani, A.; Des Portes, V.: A gene for non-specific
X-linked mental retardation (MRX55) is located in Xp11. Ann. Genet. 41:
11-16, 1998.

3. Enokido, Y.; Maruoka, H.; Hatanaka, H.; Kanazawa, I.; Okazawa,
H.: PQBP-1 increases vulnerability to low potassium stress and represses
transcription in primary cerebellar neurons. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 294: 268-271, 2002.

4. Fichera, M.; Borgione, E.; Avola, E.; Amata, S.; Sturnio, M.; Romano,
C.; Ragusa, A.: A new MRXS locus maps to the X chromosome pericentromeric
region: a new syndrome or narrow definition of Sutherland-Haan genetic
locus? J. Med. Genet. 39: 276-280, 2002.

5. Fichera, M.; Falco, M.; Lo Giudice, M.; Castiglia, L.; Guarnaccia,
V.; Cali, F.; Spalletta, A.; Scuderi, C.; Avola, E.; Romano, C.:
Skewed X-inactivation in a family with mental retardation and PQBP1
gene mutation. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 67: 446-447, 2005.

6. Golabi, M.; Ito, M.; Hall, B. D.: A new X-linked multiple congenital
anomalies/mental retardation syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 17: 367-374,
1984.

7. Hamel, B. C. J.; Mariman, E. C. M.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; Schoonbrood-Lenssen,
A. M. J.; Ropers, H.-H.: Mental retardation, congenital heart defect,
cleft palate, short stature, and facial anomalies: a new X-linked
multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome: clinical
description and molecular studies. Am. J. Med. Genet. 51: 591-597,
1994.

8. Imafuku, I.; Waragai, M.; Takeuchi, S.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawabata,
M.; Mouradian, M. M.; Okazawa, H.: Polar amino acid-rich sequences
bind to polyglutamine tracts. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 253:
16-20, 1998.

9. Ito, H.; Yoshimura, N.; Kurosawa, M.; Ishii, S.; Nukina, N.; Okazawa,
H.: Knock-down of PQBP1 impairs anxiety-related cognition in mouse. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 4239-4254, 2009.

10. Iwamoto, K.; Huang, Y.; Ueda, S.: Genomic organization and alternative
transcripts of the human PQBP-1 gene. Gene 259: 69-73, 2000.

11. Kalscheuer, V. M.; Freude, K.; Musante, L.; Jensen, L. R.; Yntema,
H. G.; Gecz, J.; Sefiani, A.; Hoffmann, K.; Moser, B.; Haas, S.; Gurok,
U.; Haesler, S.; and 21 others: Mutations in the polyglutamine
binding protein 1 gene cause X-linked mental retardation. Nature
Genet. 35: 313-315, 2003.

12. Komuro, A.; Saeki, M.; Kato, S.: Npw38, a novel nuclear protein
possessing a WW domain capable of activating basal transcription. Nucleic
Acids Res. 27: 1957-1965, 1999.

13. Lenski, C.; Abidi, F.; Meindl, A.; Gibson, A.; Platzer, M.; Kooy,
R. F.; Lubs, H. A.; Stevenson, R. E.; Ramser, J.; Schwartz, C. E.
: Novel truncating mutations in the polyglutamine tract binding protein
1 gene (PQBP1) cause Renpenning syndrome and X-linked mental retardation
in another family with microcephaly. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74:
777-780, 2004.

14. Lubs, H.; Abidi, F. E.; Echeverri, R.; Holloway, L.; Meindl, A.;
Stevenson, R. E.; Schwartz, C. E.: Golabi-Ito-Hall syndrome results
from a missense mutation in the WW domain of the PQBP1 gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: e30, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

15. Martinez-Garay, I.; Tomas, M.; Oltra, S.; Ramser, J.; Molto, M.
D.; Prieto, F.; Meindl, A.; Kutsche, K.; Martinez, F.: A two base
pair deletion in the PQBP1 gene is associated with microphthalmia,
microcephaly, and mental retardation. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15:
29-34, 2007.

16. Okazawa, H.; Rich, T.; Chang, A.; Lin, X.; Waragai, M.; Kajikawa,
M.; Enokido, Y.; Komuro, A.; Kato, S.; Shibata, M.; Hatanaka, H.;
Mouradian, M. M.; Sudol, M.; Kanazawa, I.: Interaction between mutant
ataxin-1 and PQBP-1 affects transcription and cell death. Neuron 34:
701-713, 2002.

17. Okuda, T.; Hattori, H.; Takeuchi, S.; Shimizu, J.; Ueda, H.; Palvimo,
J. J.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawano, H.; Nakagawa, M.; Okazawa, H.: PQBP-1
transgenic mice show a late-onset motor neuron disease-like phenotype. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 711-725, 2003.

18. Renpenning, H. J.; Gerrard, J. W.; Zaleski, W. A.; Tabata, T.
: Familial sex-linked mental retardation. Canad. Med. Assoc. J. 87:
954-956, 1962.

19. Ropers, H.-H.; Hoeltzenbein, M.; Kalscheuer, V.; Yntema, H.; Hamel,
B.; Fryns, J.-P.; Chelly, J.; Partington, M.; Gecz, J.; Moraine, C.
: Nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation: where are the missing
mutations? Trends Genet. 19: 316-320, 2003.

20. Stevenson, R. E.; Arena, J. F.; Ouzts, E.; Gibson, A.; Shokeir,
M. H. K.; Vnencak-Jones, C.; Lubs, H. A.; May, M.; Schwartz, C. E.
: Renpenning syndrome maps to Xp11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1092-1101,
1998.

21. Stevenson, R. E.; Bennett, C. W.; Abidi, F.; Kleefstra, T.; Porteous,
M.; Simensen, R. J.; Lubs, H. A.; Hamel, B. C. J.; Schwartz, C. E.
: Renpenning syndrome comes into focus. Am. J. Med. Genet. 134A:
415-421, 2005.

22. Sutherland, G. R.; Gedeon, A. K.; Haan, E. A.; Woodroffe, P.;
Mulley, J. C.: Linkage studies with the gene for an X-linked syndrome
of mental retardation, microcephaly and spastic diplegia. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 30: 493-508, 1988.

23. Tapia, V. E.; Nicolaescu, E.; McDonald, C. B.; Musi, V.; Oka,
T.; Inayoshi, Y.; Satteson, A. C.; Mazack, V.; Humbert, J.; Gaffney,
C. J.; Beullens, M.; Schwartz, C. E.; Landgraf, C.; Volkmer, R.; Pastore,
A.; Farooq, A.; Bollen, M.; Sudol, M.: Y65C missense mutation in
the WW domain of the Golabi-Ito-Hall syndrome protein PQBP1 affects
its binding activity and deregulates pre-mRNA splicing. J. Biol.
Chem. 285: 19391-19401, 2010.

24. Waragai, M.; Lammers, C.-H.; Takeuchi, S.; Imafuku, I.; Udagawa,
Y.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawabata, M.; Mouradian, M. M.; Okazawa, H.: PQBP-1,
a novel polyglutamine tract-binding protein, inhibits transcription
activation by Brn-2 and affects cell survival. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
977-987, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/27/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/7/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/1/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/9/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/24/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/20/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2003

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 12/2/2003

EDITED mgross: 04/04/2011
ckniffin: 4/4/2011
mgross: 1/11/2011
terry: 12/27/2010
terry: 12/8/2010
wwang: 10/21/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
mgross: 7/8/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
carol: 9/15/2009
wwang: 2/4/2008
terry: 2/1/2008
carol: 7/14/2006
terry: 6/27/2006
wwang: 6/1/2006
ckniffin: 5/9/2006
wwang: 7/18/2005
terry: 6/24/2005
carol: 6/21/2005
carol: 6/20/2005
wwang: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/17/2005
terry: 7/20/2004
tkritzer: 4/26/2004
tkritzer: 4/16/2004
terry: 4/8/2004
ckniffin: 12/19/2003
carol: 12/15/2003
ckniffin: 12/11/2003
alopez: 12/9/2003
mgross: 12/5/2003
terry: 12/4/2003
mgross: 12/2/2003

600764	TITLE *600764 MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS I-RELATED; MR1
;;MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS I-LIKE SEQUENCE; HLALS;;
MHC-RELATED PROTEIN 1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hashimoto et al. (1995) identified an expressed class I gene, which they
called MR1 (or MHC-related 1), by means of a PCR-based strategy using 2
primers that correspond to the 2 conserved regions in the alpha-3 domain
of class I molecules. Similar to a typical class I molecule, the MR1
protein comprises a signal sequence, 3 extracellular domains (alpha-1,
alpha-2, and alpha-3), a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Treiner et al. (2003) showed that T cells that express the canonical
hV-alpha-7.2-J-alpha-33 TCR rearrangement are preferentially located in
the gut lamina propria of humans and are therefore genuine
mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells. Selection and/or expansion
of this population requires B lymphocytes, as MAIT cells are absent in
B-cell-deficient patients. In addition, Treiner et al. (2003)
demonstrated that MAIT cells are selected and/or restricted by MR1, a
monomorphic major histocompatibility complex class I-related molecule
that is markedly conserved in diverse mammalian species. MAIT cells are
not present in germ-free mice, indicating that commensal flora are
required for their expansion in the gut lamina propria. Treiner et al.
(2003) concluded that this indicates that MAIT cells are probably
involved in the host response at the site of pathogen entry, and may
regulate intestinal B-cell activity.

Kjer-Nielsen et al. (2012) demonstrated that the structure and chemistry
within the antigen-binding cleft of MR1 is distinct from the MHC and CD1
families. MR1 is ideally suited to bind ligands originating from vitamin
metabolites. The structure of MR1 in complex with 6-formyl pterin, a
folic acid (vitamin B9) metabolite, shows the pterin ring sequestered
within MR1. Furthermore, Kjer-Nielsen et al. (2012) characterized
related MR1-restricted vitamin derivatives, originating from the
bacterial riboflavin (vitamin B2) biosynthetic pathway, which
specifically and potently activate MAIT cells. Accordingly, the authors
showed that metabolites of vitamin B represent a class of antigen that
are presented by MR1 for MAIT cell immunosurveillance. Kjer-Nielsen et
al. (2012) concluded that since many vitamin biosynthetic pathways are
unique to bacteria and yeast, MAIT cells use these metabolites to detect
microbial infection.

MAPPING

Hashimoto et al. (1995) mapped the MR1 gene by fluorescence in situ
hybridization to 1q25.3. The localization of MR1 on chromosome 1 was
also supported by the results of PCR amplification of the MR1 fragment
from somatic cell hybrid DNAs.

GENE FAMILY

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules present
antigenic peptides to CD8-positive T cells. The HLA class I gene family
in humans consists of 6 members: polymorphic HLA-A (142800), HLA-B
(142830), and HLA-C (142840), and oligomorphic HLA-E (143010), HLA-F
(143110), and HLA-G (142871). The functions of HLA-E, -F, and -G
molecules are unknown, although HLA-G may play a role in the
maternal-fetal interaction. Several groups of human class I-related
molecules have been identified, including the CD1 family (e.g., CD1A;
188370), zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein (AZGP1; 194460), MHC class I
chain-related molecule A (MICA; 600169), and a human homolog of the rat
neonatal Fc receptor (Simister and Mostov, 1989) (summary by Hashimoto
et al., 1995).

EVOLUTION

In contrast to other known human divergent class I genes, MR1 encodes
peptide-binding domains similar to those encoded by HLA class I genes on
chromosome 6 and by nonmammalian classical MHC class I genes.
Identification of a homolog of MR1 in the mouse genome implied that the
ancestor of MR1 was present in the primordial mammalian species.
Hashimoto et al. (1995) suggested that species at distinct evolutionary
stages may adapt distinct gene lineages for their MHC. For example, in a
New World primate (the cotton-top tamarin), the most broadly expressed
class I gene lineage is HLA-G, which in the human is expressed only in a
highly restricted manner and is oligomorphic. They suggested further
that the location of the CD1 gene family, also on 1q, as well as many
other members of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, may be
significant.

REFERENCE 1. Hashimoto, K.; Hirai, M.; Kurosawa, Y.: A gene outside the human
MHC related to classical HLA class I genes. Science 269: 693-695,
1995.

2. Kjer-Nielsen, L.; Patel, O.; Corbett, A. J.; Le Nours, J.; Meehan,
B.; Liu, L.; Bhati, M.; Chen, Z.; Kostenko, L.; Reantragoon, R.; Williamson,
N. A.; Purcell, A. W.; Dudek, N. L.; McConville, M. J.; O'Hair, R.
A. J.; Khairallah, G. N.; Godfrey, D. I.; Fairlie, D. P.; Rossjohn,
J.; McCluskey, J.: MR1 presents microbial vitamin B metabolites to
MAIT cells. Nature 491: 717-723, 2012.

3. Simister, N. E.; Mostov, K. E.: An Fc receptor structurally related
to MHC class I antigens. Nature 337: 184-187, 1989.

4. Treiner, E.; Duban, L.; Bahram, S.; Radosavljevic, M.; Wanner,
V.; Tilloy, F.; Affaticati, P.; Gilfillan, S.; Lantz, O.: Selection
of evolutionarily conserved mucosal-associated invariant T cells by
MRI. Nature 422: 164-169, 2003. Note: Erratum: Nature 423: 1018
only, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/24/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/7/1995

EDITED carol: 04/01/2013
carol: 4/1/2013
alopez: 1/11/2013
terry: 1/9/2013
terry: 11/28/2012
alopez: 10/14/2003
alopez: 3/24/2003
terry: 3/24/2003
carol: 3/13/2003
terry: 12/11/2000
terry: 11/18/1998
mark: 2/24/1997
jenny: 2/21/1997
terry: 9/12/1995
mark: 9/7/1995

600412	TITLE *600412 GUANYLATE-BINDING PROTEIN 2, INTERFERON-INDUCIBLE; GBP2
;;GUANYLATE-BINDING PROTEIN 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; GBP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Guanylate-binding proteins, such as GBP2, are induced by interferon and
hydrolyze GTP to both GDP and GMP (Vestal, 2005).

CLONING

Cheng et al. (1991) cloned cDNAs for GBP1 (600411) and GBP2.

Vestal (2005) reported that the 592-amino acid GBP2 protein shares 76%
and 64% identity with GBP1 (600411) and GBP5 (611467), respectively.
Like GBP1 and GBP5, GBP2 has a C-terminal CaaX isoprenylation motif.

Olszewski et al. (2006) found that GBP2 shares 76% amino acid identity
with GBP3 (600413), but only 54% and 57% identity with GBP6 (612467) and
GBP7 (612468), respectively. All GBPs, including GBP2, have a conserved
N-terminal globular GTP-binding domain containing 2 consensus sequences
and a third T(L/V)RD sequence not found in other GTPases. EST database
analysis indicated wide expression of GBP2 in human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR, Tripal et al. (2007) detected high expression of GBP1,
GBP2, and GBP3 in endothelial cells after stimulation with IFNG
(147570), TNF (191160), or IL1B (147720). Immunofluorescence analysis
demonstrated cytoplasmic expression of GBP2. In the presence of aluminum
fluoride, IFNG induced translocation of GBP2 to the Golgi apparatus.

Kim et al. (2011) examined a complete mouse 65-kD guanylate-binding
protein (Gbp) gene family as part of a 43-member
interferon-gamma-inducible guanosine triphosphatase superfamily in mouse
and human genomes. Family-wide loss of function analysis found that at
least 4 Gbps--Gbp1, Gbp6, Gbp7 (612468), and Gbp10--conferred
cell-autonomous immunity to listerial or mycobacterial infection within
macrophages and gene-deficient animals. These Gbps solicited host
defense proteins, including the phagocyte oxidase, antimicrobial
peptides, and autophagy effectors, to kill intracellular bacteria. Thus,
Kim et al. (2011) concluded that specific 65-kD Gbps coordinate a potent
oxidative and vesicular trafficking program to protect the host from
infection.

GENE STRUCTURE

Olszewski et al. (2006) determined that, like other GBPs, the GBP2 gene
contains 11 exons and begins translation in exon 2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Olszewski et al. (2006) mapped the GBP2
gene to the GBP gene cluster on chromosome 1p22.2. It is located
telomeric to GBP7 and centromeric to GBP1.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, Y.-S. E.; Patterson, C. E.; Staeheli, P.: Interferon-induced
guanylate-binding proteins lack an N(T)KXD consensus motif and bind
GMP in addition to GDP and GTP. Molec. Cell. Biol. 11: 4717-4725,
1991.

2. Kim, B.-H.; Shenoy, A. R.; Kumar, P.; Das, R.; Tiwari, S.; MacMicking,
J. D.: A family of IFN-gamma-inducible 65-kD GTPases protects against
bacterial infection. Science 332: 717-721, 2011.

3. Olszewski, M. A.; Gray, J.; Vestal, D. J.: In silico genomic analysis
of the human and murine guanylate-binding protein (GBP) gene clusters. J.
Interferon Cytokine Res. 26: 328-352, 2006.

4. Tripal, P.; Bauer, M.; Naschberger, E.; Mortinger, T.; Hohenadl,
C.; Cornali, E.; Thurau, M.; Sturzl, M.: Unique features of different
members of the human guanylate-binding protein family. J. Interferon
Cytokine Res. 27: 44-52, 2007.

5. Vestal, D. J.: The guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs): proinflammatory
cytokine-induced members of the dynamin superfamily with unique GTPase
activity. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 25: 435-443, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 08/16/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/11/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/14/1995

EDITED alopez: 08/16/2011
mgross: 12/11/2008
terry: 12/11/2008
wwang: 9/26/2007
carol: 2/14/1995

604791	TITLE *604791 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 10; TAS2R10
;;T2R10;;
TASTE RECEPTOR, FAMILY B, MEMBER 2; TRB2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TAS2R10 belongs to a family of intronless genes that encode highly
related bitter taste receptors (TAS2Rs). TAS2Rs are G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs), which are characterized by 7 transmembrane domains
(summary by Fischer et al., 2005). For further information on the TAS2R
gene family, see 604791.

CLONING

The gustatory system of mammals can sense 4 basic taste qualities,
bitter, sweet, salty, and sour, as well as umami, the taste of
glutamate. It had been suggested that the detection of bitter and sweet
tastants by taste receptor cells in the mouth may involve GPCRs. The
chemical diversity of bitter and sweet compounds leads one to expect a
large number of different receptors. Matsunami et al. (2000) used in
silico methods to identify a family of candidate taste receptors that
are members of the GPCR superfamily and that are specifically expressed
in taste receptor cells. In the mouse, the Prp (proline-rich protein)
gene locus is tightly associated with the SOA genetic locus, which is
involved in detecting the bitter compound sucrose octaacetate. The SOA
locus is on mouse chromosome 6, in a region that is syntenic to human
chromosome 12p13. The human homolog of the Prp gene (PRH1; 168730) was
found on a chromosome 12 contig. By searching the human chromosome 12
database with the sequence of V1R5, a candidate pheromone receptor,
Matsunami et al. (2000) identified an intronless gene encoding a
putative receptor protein in the contig containing the PRH1 gene. The
TRB2 gene (taste receptor, family B, member 2) encodes a 311-amino acid
protein with weak homology to the V1R5 protein. RT-PCR detected
expression of mouse Trb2 and Trb3 (604792) in the circumvallate and
foliate taste papillae, as well as the tip of the tongue, which contains
fungiform taste papillae, and the palate, which also contains taste
buds. Trb2 and Trb3 expression was not detected in the vomeronasal
organ, but appropriately sized PCR products were obtained from the
testis. In situ hybridization to mouse tissue showed that Trb genes are
expressed in taste receptor cells in both the circumvallate and foliate
taste papillae. Matsunami et al. (2000) concluded that the TRBs are
diverse in protein sequence, which is consistent with an ability to
detect a variety of tastants with very different chemical structures.

GENE FAMILY

Using the TRB2 sequence to search the chromosome 12 database, Matsunami
et al. (2000) identified 8 related genes, all in the same contig. Of the
8 TRB genes, 6 encode receptors related to TRB2 and 2 are pseudogenes.
Using these TRB sequences, Matsunami et al. (2000) were unable to find
any members of this family in either the NCBI or EST databases,
consistent with the idea that these receptors might be expressed
exclusively in taste tissue. However, Matsunami et al. (2000) did
identify the TRB7 gene (604796) in a contig assigned to human chromosome
5p15, the location of PROP (171200), the genetic locus that governs the
ability of humans to taste 6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil, a bitter compound.
Matsunami et al. (2000) also identified 5 TRB genes (1 a pseudogene) on
3 chromosome 7 contigs, 2 of which are assigned to 7q31-q32. All TRB
genes have the 7 transmembrane domain structure characteristic of GPCRs,
but are unrelated in sequence to both mouse GluR4 (138246), which
detects glutamate, and the candidate taste receptors TR1 and TR2. In
addition, GluR4, TR1, and TR2 have long extracellular N-terminal domains
that are proposed to bind ligand, whereas TRBs have very short N
termini, suggesting that they use a different mode of ligand binding.

Adler et al. (2000) identified members of a family of 40 to 80 human and
rodent GPCRs expressed in subsets of taste receptor cells of the tongue
and palate epithelia. These candidate taste receptors, which the authors
called T2Rs, are organized in the genome in clusters and are genetically
linked to loci that influence bitter perception in mice and humans. Each
T2R gene encodes a 7-transmembrane receptor protein. The amino acid
sequence identities between human and mouse T2Rs range from 46 to 67%.
The authors determined that a single taste receptor cell expresses a
large repertoire of T2Rs, suggesting that each cell may be capable of
recognizing multiple tastants. In situ hybridization demonstrated that
T2Rs are exclusively expressed in taste receptor cells that contain the
G protein subunit gustducin (see 139395), implying that they function as
gustducin-linked receptors.

Chandrashekar et al. (2006) reviewed the receptors and cells for
mammalian taste.

GENE STRUCTURE

The TAS2R10 is intronless (Matsunami et al., 2000).

MAPPING

Matsunami et al. (2000) identified the TAS2R10 gene on chromosome 12p13.

Adler et al. (2000) identified T2R10, which is identical to the TRB2
gene reported by Matsunami et al. (2000), in a BAC clone from 12p13.

GENE FUNCTION

Deshpande et al. (2010) found that bitter taste receptor agonists evoked
increased intracellular calcium in cultured human airway smooth muscle
(ASM) cells at levels comparable to GPCR agonists, such as bradykinin
and histamine. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis detected multiple TAS2R
transcripts in ASM cells, with highest expression of TAS2R10, TAS2R14
(604790), and TAS2R31 (612669), intermediate expression of TAS2R5
(605062), TAS2R4 (604869), and TAS2R19 (613961), and detectable
expression of 11 other TAS2Rs, with results normalized for expression of
ADRB2 (109690). Expression of 8 other TAS2Rs and TAS1R1 (606225) and
TAS1R2 (606226) was undetectable. Using isolated intact mouse airways,
Deshpande et al. (2010) observed dose-dependent relaxation in response
to bitter taste receptor agonists, such as chloroquine, denatorium, and
quinine, after challenge with contracting agents, such as acetylcholine
or serotonin. Magnet twisting cytometry showed that isolated ASM cells
challenged with histamine relaxed after treatment with bitter taste
receptor agonists. Bitter taste receptor agonists were a more effective
treatment than albuterol in a mouse model of allergic airway
inflammation. Deshpande et al. (2010) proposed that agents that bind
bitter taste receptors and cause bronchodilation may provide an
alternative and/or supplement to beta agonist for the treatment of
asthma.

- Reviews

Kinnamon (2000) reviewed the role of taste receptors in taste
transduction.

POPULATION GENETICS

Kim et al. (2005) sequenced 24 human TAS2R genes in 55 unrelated
individuals of African, Asian, European, and North American Native
ancestry, and found a high degree of nucleotide variation. A total of
144 SNPs were identified with an average of 4.2 variant amino acids per
gene. In aggregate, the 24 genes analyzed specified 151 different
protein-coding haplotypes. Data analysis showed that the observed excess
of nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions was much higher than expected
given observations in other genes. Kim et al. (2005) hypothesized that
natural selection may have been relaxed on these genes and that local
adaptation in human bitter taste receptor genes is common, driven by the
fitness advantages of avoiding toxins found in plants. The findings were
consistent with the view that different alleles of the TAS2R genes
encode receptors that recognize different ligands.

EVOLUTION

Parry et al. (2004) compared all human T2R genes with those of the
closely related primate species Pan paniscus (bonobo) and Pan
troglodytes (chimpanzee). Several of the great ape T2Rs have significant
differences from the human homologs. Most differences are at the single
basepair level, and some are identical to SNPs within the human
population. Moreover, some genes that exist in humans are pseudogenes in
the animals studied, and vise versa. Parry et al. (2004) concluded that
there is ongoing evolutionary diversification of T2R receptors and that
the variability in T2R receptors may account for dietary adaptation and
personalized taste perception.

Bitter taste perception prevents mammals from ingesting poisonous
substances, because many toxins taste bitter and cause aversion. Wang et
al. (2004) examined intraspecific variations of all 25 genes of the
human TAS2R family. Their data showed hallmarks of neutral evolution,
including similar rates of synonymous (dS) and nonsynonymous (dN)
nucleotide changes among rare polymorphisms, common polymorphisms and
substitutions; no variation in dN/dS among functional domains;
segregation of pseudogene alleles within species and fixation of
loss-of-function mutations. Their results suggested surprisingly reduced
sensory capabilities of humans in comparison with many other mammals.
Wang et al. (2004) hypothesized that human TAS2R genes might be relaxed
from selective constraints because of dietary changes, use of fire, and
reliance on other means of toxin avoidance that emerged in human
evolution.

Fischer et al. (2005) stated that there are large T2R gene clusters on
chromosomes 12p13 and 7q31, in addition to the single T2R1 gene (TAS2R1;
604796) on chromosome 5p15. They sequenced the T2R gene repertoires of a
human and all extant ape species (chimpanzee, bonobo, gorilla, and
orangutan), as well as rhesus macaque and a baboon. Fischer et al.
(2005) found that the proportions of pseudogenes, and probably the total
number of genes, did not differ substantially among apes and humans.
Within the human T2R gene family, the sequence similarity between T2R
genes within the T2R gene cluster on chromosome 12 was higher than that
among the T2R genes on chromosome 7 (61% vs 47%, respectively),
suggesting that these genes evolved by tandem gene duplication and that
more recent duplication events occurred among the T2R genes on
chromosome 12 than among those on chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. Adler, E.; Hoon, M. A.; Mueller, K. L.; Chandrashekar, J.; Ryba,
N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.: A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100:
693-702, 2000.

2. Chandrashekar, J.; Hoon, M. A.; Ryba, N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.:
The receptors and cells for mammalian taste. Nature 444: 288-294,
2006.

3. Deshpande, D. A.; Wang, W. C. H.; McIlmoyle, E. L.; Robinett, K.
S.; Schillinger, R. M.; An, S. S.; Sham, J. S. K.; Liggett, S. B.
: Bitter taste receptors on airway smooth muscle bronchodilate by
localized calcium signaling and reverse obstruction. Nature Med. 16:
1299-1304, 2010.

4. Fischer, A.; Gilad, Y.; Man, O.; Paabo, S.: Evolution of bitter
taste receptors in humans and apes. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 432-436,
2005. Note: Erratum: Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 1157 only, 2005.

5. Kim, U.; Wooding, S.; Ricci, D.; Jorde, L. B.; Drayna, D.: Worldwide
haplotype diversity and coding sequence variation at human bitter
taste receptor loci. Hum. Mutat. 26: 199-204, 2005.

6. Kinnamon, S. C.: A plethora of taste receptors. Neuron 25: 507-510,
2000.

7. Matsunami, H.; Montmayeur, J.-P.; Buck, L. B.: A family of candidate
taste receptors in human and mouse. Nature 404: 601-604, 2000.

8. Parry, C. M.; Erkner, A.; le Coutre, J.: Divergence of T2R chemosensory
receptor families in humans, bonobos, and chimpanzees. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 101: 14830-14834, 2004.

9. Wang, X.; Thomas, S. D.; Zhang, J.: Relaxation of selective constraint
and loss of function in the evolution of human bitter taste receptor
genes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2671-2678, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/20/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/10/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/21/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 4/5/2000

EDITED terry: 06/08/2012
mgross: 5/12/2011
terry: 4/20/2011
alopez: 12/3/2010
wwang: 6/15/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
wwang: 1/10/2006
mgross: 11/22/2004
mgross: 3/22/2001
alopez: 7/10/2000
mgross: 4/24/2000
mgross: 4/21/2000
alopez: 4/5/2000

604398	TITLE *604398 SECRETOGLOBIN, FAMILY 2A, MEMBER 1; SCGB2A1
;;MAMMAGLOBIN 2; MGB2;;
MAMMAGLOBIN B;;
LACRYGLOBIN;;
LIPOPHILIN C; LPNC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the secretoglobin family, such as SCGB2A1, are secreted
proteins of about 10 kD that are found in high concentrations in fluids
of lung, lacrimal gland, salivary gland, prostate, uterus, and other
tissues. Secretoglobins form stable dimers prior to secretion (summary
by Jackson et al., 2011).

CLONING

The uteroglobin gene family includes the uteroglobin (UGB; 192020) and
mammaglobin (MGB) genes. By screening a human genomic library with an
MGB gene fragment, Becker et al. (1998) isolated a segment of a novel
gene showing high sequence similarity to MGB. Based on this similarity,
they named the novel gene mammaglobin B, which is also called
mammaglobin-2 (MGB2). The authors isolated a full-length MGB2 cDNA by
RACE PCR using mRNA from a human breast cancer cell line. The predicted
95-amino acid MGB2 protein contains the conserved residues
characteristic of the uteroglobin family. MGB2 shares 58% amino acid
sequence identity with MGB and 23% identity with UGB. Becker et al.
(1998) found that MGB2 is identical to a 68-amino acid peptide of
lacryglobin, a human tear protein identified and sequenced by Molloy et
al. (1997), except that MGB2 contains 18 additional amino acids at the N
terminus and 9 additional amino acids at the C terminus. Becker et al.
(1998) suggested that the 18 N-terminal amino acids are cleaved prior to
secretion from the lacrimal gland and that the 9 amino acids at the C
terminus represent amino acids not identified in the lacryglobin
fragment sequenced. RNA dot blot analysis found MGB2 expression in
normal human breast, uterus, and salivary gland, but not in prostate or
stomach. Northern blot analysis detected MGB2 expression in normal
breast and breast tumor samples, with an apparent overexpression in
tumor samples compared with patient-matched normal samples. Northern
blot analysis of uterus samples showed MGB2 expression in 2 of 8 normal
samples and 2 of 8 tumor samples.

Zhao et al. (1999) cloned SCGB2A1, which they called lipophilin C, from
a human lacrimal gland cDNA library. The deduced 95-amino acid
prelipophilin C protein has a calculated molecular mass of 10.9 kD.
Removal of the N-terminal signal sequence yields a mature 77-amino acid
protein with a predicted molecular mass of 8.9 kD. RT-PCR detected
lipophilin C expression in thymus, prostate, testis, salivary gland,
kidney, trachea, uterus, mammary gland, ovary, and lacrimal gland.
Little to no expression was present in skeletal muscle, small intestine,
spleen, placenta, bone marrow, and leukocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Becker et al. (1998) determined that the MGB2 gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Becker et al. (1998) mapped the MGB2 gene to 11q13, which is
where the MGB and UGB genes are located. Independently, Zhao et al.
(1999) mapped the SCGB2A1 gene to chromosome 11q12-q13.1 using FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Becker, R. M.; Darrow, C.; Zimonjic, D. B.; Popescu, N. C.; Watson,
M. A.; Fleming, T. P.: Identification of mammaglobin B, a novel member
of the uteroglobin gene family. Genomics 54: 70-78, 1998.

2. Jackson, B. C.; Thompson, D. C.; Wright, M. W.; McAndrews, M.;
Bernard, A.; Nebert, D. W.: Update of the human secretoglobin (SCGB)
gene superfamily and an example of 'evolutionary bloom' of androgen-binding
protein genes within the mouse Scgb gene superfamily. Hum. Genomics 5:
691-702, 2011.

3. Molloy, M. P.; Bolis, S.; Herbert, B. R.; Ou, K.; Tyler, M. I.;
van Dyk, D. D.; Willcox, M. D.; Gooley, A. A.; Williams, K. L.; Morris,
C. A.; Walsh, B. J.: Establishment of the human reflex tear two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis reference map: new proteins of
potential diagnostic value. Electrophoresis 18: 2811-2815, 1997.

4. Zhao, C.; Nguyen, T.; Yusifov, T.; Glasgow, B. J.; Lehrer, R. I.
: Lipophilins: human peptides homologous to rat prostatein. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 256: 147-155, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/30/2013

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/4/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2013
mgross: 1/31/2013
terry: 1/30/2013
terry: 3/27/2002
mgross: 1/5/2000
psherman: 1/4/2000

606119	TITLE *606119 SECRETED LY6/PLAUR DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; SLURP1
;;SECRETED LY6/UPAR-RELATED PROTEIN 1;;
ARS COMPONENT B;;
ARS COMPONENT B-81/S PRECURSOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the leukocyte antigen-6 (Ly6)/urokinase-type plasminogen
activator (uPAR, or PLAUR; 173391) protein family share 1 or several
repeat units of the Ly6/uPAR domain that is defined by a distinct
disulfide bonding pattern of 8 or 10 cysteine residues. The Ly6/uPAR
protein family can be divided into 2 subfamilies. One comprises
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored glycoprotein receptors with
10 cysteine residues. The other subfamily includes the secreted
single-domain snake and frog cytotoxins, and its members generally
possess only 8 cysteines and no GPI-anchoring signal sequence (Adermann
et al., 1999).

CLONING

Adermann et al. (1999) reported the purification and structural
characterization of human SLURP1 from blood and urine peptide libraries.
SLURP1 is encoded by the ARS component B-81/s locus, and appears to be
the first mammalian member of the Ly6/uPAR family lacking a
GPI-anchoring signal sequence.

GENE FUNCTION

Fischer et al. (2001) noted that secreted and receptor proteins of the
Ly6/uPAR superfamily have been implicated in transmembrane signal
transduction, cell activation, and cell adhesion.

The high degree of structural similarity between SLURP1 and the 3-finger
motif of snake neurotoxins and LYNX1 (606110) suggested that SLURP1 may
interact with neuronal acetylcholine receptors. Chimienti et al. (2003)
found that SLURP1 potentiated the human alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors (CHRNA7; 118511) present in keratinocytes. The authors
concluded that SLURP1 acts as a secreted epidermal neuromodulator that
may be essential for both epidermal homeostasis and inhibition of
TNF-alpha (191160) release by macrophages during wound healing. This may
explain both the hyperproliferative as well as the inflammatory clinical
phenotype of Mal de Meleda (MDM; 248300).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SLURP1
gene to chromosome 8 (TMAP X99977).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mal de Meleda is a rare autosomal recessive skin disorder characterized
by transgressive palmoplantar keratoderma, keratotic skin lesions,
perioral erythema, brachydactyly, and nail abnormalities. Fischer et al.
(1998) first reported linkage of MDM to a 3-cM region on the distal long
arm of chromosome 8, and Fischer et al. (2001) identified mutations in
affected individuals in SLURP1. Three different homozygous mutations
(82delT, 606119.0001; 178G+1A, 606119.0002; and C286T, 606119.0003) were
detected in 19 families of Algerian and Croatian origin, suggesting
founder effects. Moreover, one of the common haplotypes presenting the
same mutation was shared by families from both populations.

Eckl et al. (2003) analyzed 4 MDM families for mutations in the SLURP1
gene, which they designated LY6LS. In a large Palestinian pedigree with
multiple consanguinity, patients were homozygous for a novel
gly86-to-arg (G86R; 606119.0004) mutation. A different mutation
(606119.0005) in Turkish patients resulted in the same amino acid
exchange. Some remarkable similarities were seen in the clinical picture
of patients in these 2 families. Patients in an Emirati Bedouin family
had a homozygous alteration of the translation initiation codon of the
SLURP1 gene (606119.0006). In a German family with no known
consanguinity, Eckl et al. (2003) found pseudodominant inheritance.
Three affected children and their affected mother were homozygous for a
trp15-to-arg (W15R; 606119.0007) mutation.

EVOLUTION

Adermann et al. (1999) showed that a phylogenetic analysis based on the
SLURP1 primary protein structure revealed a closer relationship to the
subfamily of cytotoxins. Since the SLURP1 gene maps to the same
chromosomal region as several members of the Ly6/uPAR subfamily of
glycoprotein receptors, the authors suggested that both biologically
distinct subfamilies might have coevolved from local chromosomal
duplication events.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, 1-BP DEL, 82T

In 13 mal de Meleda (248300) families of Algerian and/or Croatian
origin, Fischer et al. (2001) identified a single nucleotide deletion
(82delT) in the SLURP1 gene, which was predicted to result in premature
termination at codon 32.

In 2 Tunisian women with Mal de Meleda, Mokni et al. (2004) identified
the 82delT mutation in heterozygous state. Both had mild palmoplantar
keratodermas, and one had interdigital fissures.

.0002
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, IVS2, G-A, +1

In 3 Algerian mal de Meleda (248300) families, Fischer et al. (2001)
identified a donor splice site mutation, 178+1G-A, in the second intron
of the SLURP1 gene.

.0003
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, ARG96TER

In 3 Croatian families with mal de Meleda (248300), Fischer et al.
(2001) identified a point mutation at nucleotide position 286 (C286T) in
the SLURP1 gene, which was predicted to result in premature termination
at codon 96.

.0004
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, 1764G-A, GLY86ARG

In a Palestinian family, Eckl et al. (2003) found that mal de Meleda
(248300) was associated with a gly86-to-arg (G86R) mutation arising from
a 1764G-A transition in exon 3 of the SLURP1 gene. See also 606119.0005.

.0005
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, 1764G-C, GLY86ARG

In a Turkish family with mal de Meleda (248300), Eckl et al. (2003)
found a gly86-to-arg (G86R) mutation, as in the Palestinian family they
studied (606119.0004); the nucleotide substitution involved the same
base but was a transversion, 1764G-C, in the SLURP1 gene. The patients
in the Palestinian and Turkish families had clinical features similar to
those in patients from the island of Meleda. Patients from both families
had the characteristic 'glove-and-stocking' keratosis. However, they did
not show any extension onto the knees or elbows as seen in 2 other
families, one German and the other Emirati Bedouin, studied by Eckl et
al. (2003). Similarly, nail involvement present in the Bedouin and
German families and in many of the Algerian families described by
Fischer et al. (1998, 2001) was absent in these 2 families. Patients
from both families had had severe fungal infections of the
hyperkeratotic skin.

.0006
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, MET1LEU

Eckl et al. (2003) found that mal de Meleda (248300) in an Emirati
Bedouin family was associated with an initiator codon mutation in the
SLURP1 gene. A 578A-C change in the genomic DNA was predicted to change
the initiator codon from ATG (met) to CTG (leu).

.0007
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, TRP15ARG

In a German family with mal de Meleda (248300), Eckl et al. (2003) found
that 3 affected children and their affected mother were homozygous for a
trp15-to-arg (W15R) mutation. They showed palmoplantar erythema with
pronounced keratosis extending onto the dorsal surface of the hands and
feet. The hyperkeratosis was most extensive in the affected mother. Nail
dystrophy with subungual hyperkeratosis was present in all affected
family members, most distinctively in 1 of the twin brothers. He also
showed hyperkeratosis with erythema on the knees. Perioral involvement
was seen in the affected sister.

.0008
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, CYS77ALA

In 3 women from a Tunisian family with Mal de Meleda (248300), Mokni et
al. (2004) identified a heterozygous cys77-to-ala (C77A) mutation in the
SLURP1 gene. All 3 had mild palmoplantar keratodermas, 2 had keratotic
papules, and 1 had interdigital fissures. The authors illustrated
cobblestone changes in the skin of the palm of one of the women.
Charfeddine et al. (2003) had described homozygosity for this mutation
in this family.

.0009
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, CYS99TYR

In 6 Tunisian women with Mal de Meleda (248300), 5 of whom were from 1
family, Mokni et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous cys99-to-tyr
(C99Y) mutation in the SLURP1 gene. The authors illustrated cobblestone
changes in the skin of the palm of one of the women and a homogeneous
diffuse plantar keratoderma on the sole of another. Charfeddine et al.
(2003) had described homozygosity for this mutation in this family.

REFERENCE 1. Adermann, K.; Wattler, F.; Wattler, S.; Heine, G.; Meyer, M.; Forssmann,
W. G.; Nehls, M.: Structural and phylogenetic characterization of
human SLURP-1, the first secreted member of the Ly6/uPAR protein superfamily. Protein
Sci. 8: 810-819, 1999.

2. Charfeddine, C.; Mokni, M.; Ben Mousli, R.; Elkares, R.; Bouchlaka,
C.; Boubaker, S.; Ghedamsi, S.; Baccouche, D.; Ben Osman, A.; Dellagi,
K.; Abdelhak, S.: A novel missense mutation in the gene encoding
SLURP-1 in patients with Mal de Meleda from northern Tunisia. Brit.
J. Derm. 149: 1108-1115, 2003.

3. Chimienti, F.; Hogg, R. C.; Plantard, L.; Lehmann, C.; Brakch,
N.; Fischer, J.; Huber, M.; Bertrand, D.; Hohl, D.: Identification
of SLURP-1 as an epidermal neuromodulator explains the clinical phenotype
of Mal de Meleda. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 3017-3024, 2003.

4. Eckl, K. M.; Stevens, H. P.; Lestringant, G. G.; Westenberger-Treumann,
M.; Traupe, H.; Hinz, B.; Frossard, P. M.; Stadler, R.; Leigh, I.
M.; Nurnberg, P.; Reis, A.; Hennies, H. C.: Mal de Meleda (MDM) caused
by mutations in the gene for SLURP-1 in patients from Germany, Turkey,
Palestine, and the United Arab Emirates. Hum. Genet. 112: 50-56,
2003.

5. Fischer, J.; Bouadjar, B.; Heilig, R.; Fizames, C.; Prudhomme,
J.F.; Weissenbach, J.: Genetic linkage of Meleda disease to chromosome
8qter. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 542-547, 1998.

6. Fischer, J.; Bouadjar, B.; Heilig, R.; Huber, M.; Lefevre, C.;
Jobard, F.; Macari, F.; Bakija-Konsuo, A.; Ait-Belkacem, F.; Weissenbach,
J.; Lathrop, M.; Hohl, D.; Prudhomme, J.-F.: Mutations in the gene
encoding SLURP-1 in mal de Meleda. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 875-880,
2001.

7. Mokni, M.; Charfeddine, C.; Ben Mously, R.; Baccouche, D.; Kaabi,
B.; Ben Osman, A.; Dellagi, K.; Abdelhak, S.: Heterozygous manifestations
in female carriers of Mal de Meleda. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 65: 244-246,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/9/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - reorganized: 1/8/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/2002

CREATED George E. Tiller: 7/18/2001

EDITED wwang: 09/27/2006
wwang: 1/23/2006
terry: 1/11/2006
tkritzer: 3/3/2004
carol: 1/9/2003
ckniffin: 1/9/2003
carol: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 1/3/2003
terry: 12/30/2002
cwells: 7/24/2001
cwells: 7/19/2001
cwells: 7/18/2001

613314	TITLE *613314 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L37A; RPL37A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RPL37A encodes a protein component of the large ribosomal subunit (Sim
et al., 2010).

CLONING

Saha et al. (1993) obtained a partial clone homologous to rat Rpl37a
from a human neuroblastoma cell line cDNA library, and by RT-PCR, they
obtained the full-length human RPL37A clone. The 5-prime terminus
contains a CTTTCC-like sequence characteristic of transcripts encoding
ribosomal proteins. The deduced 92-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 10.3 kD. It is highly basic and contains a putative
zinc finger domain. The human and rat transcripts share 85% nucleotide
identity, and the proteins are 100% identical. Northern blot analysis
detected RPL37A expression in normal human lymphocytes and in human
neuroblastoma and Molt4 cells. Variable Rpl37a expression was detected
in all rat tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR, Sim et al. (2010) found that a subset of genes encoding
proteins of the large ribosomal subunit was differentially expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (see 607107) cell lines compared with a normal
nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line. RPL37A was 1 of 3 genes
significantly downregulated in the carcinoma cell lines.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the RPL37A gene to chromosome 2q35 based on an
alignment of the RPL37A sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000555) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/19/2010.

2. Saha, D. P.; Tirumalai, P. S.; Scala, L. A.; Howells, R. D.: Human
ribosomal protein L37a: cloning of the cDNA and analysis of differential
gene expression in tissues and cell lines. Gene 132: 285-289, 1993.

3. Sim, E. U. H.; Ang, C. H.; Ng, C. C.; Lee, C. W.; Narayanan, K.
: Differential expression of a subset of ribosomal protein genes in
cell lines derived from human nasopharyngeal epithelium. J. Hum.
Genet. 55: 118-120, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/7/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/22/2010

EDITED mgross: 04/08/2010
terry: 4/7/2010
mgross: 3/23/2010
mgross: 3/22/2010

142709	TITLE *142709 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER A; HIST1H1A
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1A;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H1A;;
H1A;;
H1.1;;
H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER 1, FORMERLY; H1F1, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The nucleosome is the fundamental repeat unit of eukaryotic chromatin.
The nucleosome core particle consists of an octamer formed by 2 each of
the core histones H2A (see 613499), H2B (see 609904), H3 (see 602810),
and H4 (see 602822), around which DNA is wrapped. A fifth histone, the
linker H1 histone, completes the nucleosome by interacting with DNA
entering and exiting the nucleosome core particle. H1 histones, such as
HIST1H1A, are involved in the formation of higher order chromatin
structures, and they modulate the accessibility of regulatory proteins,
chromatin-remodeling factors, and histone modification enzymes to their
target sites (reviewed by Izzo et al. (2008) and Happel and Doenecke
(2009)).

For additional background information on histones, histone gene
clusters, and the H1 histone family, see GENE FAMILY below.

GENE FAMILY

The H1 histone family is the most divergent class of histones, with at
least 11 different H1 histones present in humans. H1 histones have a
tripartite structure that consists of a short N-terminal domain enriched
in basic amino acids, a central conserved globular domain involved in
DNA binding, and a long C-terminal tail enriched in lysine, serine, and
proline. Like other histones, H1 histones can be subgrouped according to
their temporal expression. Replication-dependent histones, such as H1.1
through H1.5 (HIST1HB; 142711) and H1T (HIST1H1T; 142712), are mainly
expressed during S phase. In contrast, replication-independent histones,
or replacement histones, such as H1.0 (H1F0; 142708), H1T2 (H1FNT), H1OO
(H1FOO), H1X (H1FX; 602785), and HILS1 (608101), are expressed
throughout the cell cycle. All replication-dependent H1 histone genes,
as well as other core histone genes, are located within histone gene
cluster-1 (HIST1) on chromosome 6p22-p21. Two other histone gene
clusters, HIST2 and HIST3, are located on chromosomes 1q21 and 1q42,
respectively, but they are devoid of H1 genes. In mouse, the Hist1,
Hist2, and Hist3 gene clusters are located on chromosomes 13A2-A3,
3F1-F2, and 11B2, respectively. All replication-dependent histone genes
are intronless, and they encode mRNAs that lack a poly(A) tail, ending
instead in a conserved stem-loop sequence. Unlike replication-dependent
histone genes, replication-independent histone genes are solitary genes
that are located on chromosomes apart from any other H1 or core histone
genes. Some replication-independent histone genes contain introns and
encode mRNAs with poly(A) tails. H1 histones, as well as core histones,
can also be subgrouped based on their spatial expression. Somatic H1
histones (H1.1 through H1.5 and H1X) are expressed ubiquitously, whereas
other H1 histones are expressed mainly in terminally differentiated
cells (H1.0) or in germ cells (H1T, H1T2, H1OO, and HILS1) (summary by
Marzluff et al. (2002), Izzo et al. (2008), and Happel and Doenecke
(2009)).

CLONING

Eick et al. (1989) cloned the genes encoding H1.1 and H1.2 (HIST1H1C;
142710).

Using Northern blot analysis, Burfeind et al. (1994) found that the H1.1
gene was expressed in testis and thymus, but not in other human tissues.
In testis, it was restricted to early round spermatids that belonged to
the fraction of postmeiotic sperm cells. Burfeind et al. (1994) found
that the H1.1 gene is highly conserved in higher primates, whereas no
cross-hybridization could be detected with DNA from other mammalian
species, such as mouse, rat, hamster, and bull.

GENE FUNCTION

Histone H1 functions in the compaction of chromatin into higher order
structures derived from the repeating 'beads-on-a-string' nucleosome
polymer. Modulation of H1 binding activity is thought to be an important
step in the potentiation/depotentiation of chromatin structure for
transcription. It is generally accepted that H1 binds less tightly than
other histones to DNA in chromatin and can readily exchange in living
cells. Fusion proteins of histone H1 and green fluorescent protein (GFP)
have been shown to associate with chromatin in an apparently identical
fashion to native histone H1, providing a means by which to study
histone H1-chromatin interactions in living cells. Lever et al. (2000)
used human cells with a stably integrated H1.1-GFP fusion protein to
monitor histone H1 movement directly by fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching in living cells. They found that exchange is rapid in
both condensed and decondensed chromatin, occurs throughout the cell
cycle, and does not require fiber-fiber interactions. Treatment with
drugs that alter protein phosphorylation significantly reduced exchange
rates. Lever et al. (2000) concluded that histone H1 exchange in vivo is
rapid, occurs through a soluble intermediate, and is modulated by the
phosphorylation of a protein or proteins as yet to be determined.

Using techniques similar to those of Lever et al. (2000), Misteli et al.
(2000) showed that almost the entire population of H1-GFP is bound to
chromatin at any 1 time; however, H1-GFP is exchanged continuously
between chromatin regions. The residence time of H1-GFP on chromatin
between exchange events is several minutes in both euchromatin and
heterochromatin. In addition to the mobile fraction, Misteli et al.
(2000) detected a kinetically distinct, less mobile fraction. After
hyperacetylation of core histones, the residence time of H1-GFP was
reduced, suggesting a higher rate of exchange upon chromatin remodeling.
Misteli et al. (2000) concluded that their results support a model in
which linker histones bind dynamically to chromatin in a stop-and-go
mode.

Hizume et al. (2005) noted that addition of histone H1 to reconstituted
nucleosomes represses transcriptional activity and prevents sliding of
core histones along DNA. They used nucleosome core particles and histone
H1 purified from HeLa cells for in vitro nucleosome reconstitution
assays. Under optimal salt concentrations, nucleosome core particles
alone formed beads-on-a-string chromatin fibers on plasmid DNA. However,
addition of purified histone H1 induced higher order folding in a
concentration-dependent manner. Hizume et al. (2005) proposed a model of
chromatin fiber formation where fiber compaction is dependent on both
the local salt environment and histone H1 availability.

Krishnakumar et al. (2008) used genomic and gene-specific approaches to
show that 2 factors, histone H1 and PARP1 (173870), exhibit a reciprocal
pattern of chromatin binding at many RNA polymerase II-transcribed
promoters. PARP1 was enriched and H1 was depleted at these promoters.
This pattern of binding was associated with actively transcribed genes.
Furthermore, Krishnakumar et al. (2008) showed that PARP1 acts to
exclude H1 from a subset of PARP1-stimulated promoters, suggesting a
functional interplay between PARP1 and H1 at the level of nucleosome
binding. Krishnakumar et al. (2008) concluded that although H1 and PARP1
have similar nucleosome-binding properties and effects on chromatin
structure in vitro, they have distinct roles in determining gene
expression in vivo.

- Reviews

Doenecke et al. (1994) reviewed the organization and expression of H1
histone and H1 replacement histone genes.

Izzo et al. (2008) reviewed the H1 histone family and discussed specific
roles of H1 proteins that challenged the concept of H1 being a mere
structural component of chromatin and a general repressor of
transcription.

Happel and Doenecke (2009) reviewed the structural and functional
aspects of H1 histones, with an emphasis on the structural role and
impact of H1 histones on the functional state of chromatin.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of chromosomal DNA from a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, Albig et al. (1993) found that 5 human H1 histone genes,
H1.1 through H1.5, and the gene encoding the testis-specific H1T subtype
are located on chromosome 6. They found that the H1.0 subtype, which is
not neighbored by core histone genes, maps to chromosome 22. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization with human metaphase chromosomes and
PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs carrying only fragments of
chromosome 6, they demonstrated that the histone genes are clustered in
the 6p22.2-p21.1 region.

By PCR analysis of human/rodent cell hybrid DNAs, Burfeind et al. (1994)
confirmed the localization of histone H1.1 to chromosome 6 and by
radioactive in situ hybridization regionalized the locus to 6p21.3.

Through detailed localization of the H1 histone genes with radiation
hybrids and long range pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Volz et al.
(1997) found that the histone genes on the short arm of chromosome 6 are
organized into 2 clusters. The major cluster at 6p22-p21.3 contains 32
histone genes, including the H1 genes H1.1, H1.2, H1.3 (HIST1H1D;
142210), H1.4 (HIST1H1E; 142220), and H1T, numerous core histone genes,
and the HFE gene (613609).

By analysis of a YAC contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H1.1 gene to
chromosome 6p21.3 within a cluster of 35 histone genes, including H1.1
to H1.4 and H1T. They found that the H1.5 gene is located in a second
cluster on 6p about 2 Mb centromeric of the major cluster. In a contig
of the histone gene-containing cosmids from this second cluster on
chromosome 6p, Albig and Doenecke (1997) found 1 H1 gene (H1.5), 5 H2A
genes, 4 H2B genes, 1 H2B pseudogene, 3 H3 genes, 3 H4 genes, and 1 H4
pseudogene. The cluster extends about 80 kb with a nonordered
arrangement of the histone genes. The dinucleotide repeat polymorphic
marker D6S105 was localized at the telomeric end of this histone gene
cluster. Almost all human histone genes isolated to that time had been
localized within the 2 clusters on 6p or in a small group of histone
genes on chromosome 1.

Albig and Doenecke (1997) reviewed the organization of histone genes in
mouse. Both the human and mouse histone gene clusters are found on 2
chromosomes and have nearly the same composition and number of genes.
The 2 histone gene clusters on human chromosome 6p correspond to 2
clusters located on mouse chromosome 13. The relative localization of
the histone H1 and H3 genes appears to be highly conserved. The 2
clusters are 0.6 Mb apart in mouse and 2 Mb apart in human. A third
cluster of mouse histone genes on chromosome 3 corresponds to the group
of human genes located on chromosome 1. The authors stated that, to that
time, a total of 55 clustered histone genes had been identified in
mouse. Albig and Doenecke (1997) gave a pictorial representation of the
mapping of the other histone genes as well as a tabular summary of human
histone gene sequences deposited in the EMBL nucleotide sequence
database.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
HIST1 cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21 contains 55 histone genes,
including all 6 replication-dependent H1 genes. The HIST1 cluster spans
over 2 Mb and includes 2 large gaps (over 250 kb each) where there are
no histone genes, but many other genes. The organization of histone
genes in the mouse Hist1 cluster on chromosome 13A2-A3 is essentially
identical to that in human HIST1. The HIST2 cluster on chromosome 1q21
contains 6 histone genes, and the HIST3 cluster on chromosome 1q42
contains 3 histone genes. Hist2 and Hist3 are located on mouse
chromosomes 3F1-F2 and 11B2, respectively.

NOMENCLATURE

Marzluff et al. (2002) provided a nomenclature for replication-dependent
histone genes located within the HIST1, HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. The
symbols for these genes all begin with HIST1, HIST2, or HIST3 according
to which cluster they are located in. The H1 genes, all of which are
located within HIST1, were named according to their mouse homologs.
Thus, HIST1H1A is homologous to mouse H1a, HIST1H1B is homologous to
mouse H1b, and so on. In contrast, the H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 genes were
named systematically according to their location within the HIST1,
HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. For example, HIST1H4A (602822) is the most
telomeric H4 gene within HIST1, and HIST1H4L (602831) is the most
centromeric.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Hardin and Thomas (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.: The human histone gene cluster at the
D6S105 locus. Hum. Genet. 101: 284-294, 1997.

2. Albig, W.; Drabent, B.; Kunz, J.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.;
Doenecke, D.: All known human H1 histone genes except the H1(0) gene
are clustered on chromosome 6. Genomics 16: 649-654, 1993.

3. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

4. Burfeind, P.; Hoyer-Fender, S.; Doenecke, D.; Hochhuth, C.; Engel,
W.: Expression and chromosomal mapping of the gene encoding the human
histone H1.1. Hum. Genet. 94: 633-639, 1994.

5. Doenecke, D.; Albig, W.; Bouterfa, H.; Drabent, B.: Organization
and expression of H1 histone and H1 replacement histone genes. J.
Cell. Biochem. 54: 423-431, 1994.

6. Eick, S.; Nicolai, M.; Mumberg, D.; Doenecke, D.: Human H1 histones:
conserved and varied sequence elements in two H1 subtype genes. Europ.
J. Cell Biol. 49: 110-115, 1989.

7. Happel, N.; Doenecke, D.: Histone H1 and its isoforms: contribution
to chromatin structure and function. Gene 431: 1-12, 2009.

8. Hardin, J. A.; Thomas, J. O.: Antibodies to histones in systemic
lupus erythematosus: localization of prominent autoantigens on histones
H1 and H2B. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 7410-7414, 1983.

9. Hizume, K.; Yoshimura, S. H.; Takeyasu, K.: Linker histone H1
per se can induce three-dimensional folding of chromatin fiber. Biochemistry 44:
12978-12989, 2005.

10. Izzo, A.; Kamieniarz, K.; Schneider, R.: The histone H1 family:
specific members, specific functions? Biol. Chem. 389: 333-343,
2008.

11. Krishnakumar, R.; Gamble, M. J.; Frizzell, K. M.; Berrocal, J.
G.; Kininis, M.; Kraus, W. L.: Reciprocal binding of PARP-1 and histone
H1 at promoters specifies transcriptional outcomes. Science 319:
819-821, 2008.

12. Lever, M. A.; Th'ng, J. P. H.; Sun, X.; Hendzel, M. J.: Rapid
exchange of histone H1.1 on chromatin in living human cells. Nature 408:
873-876, 2000.

13. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais,
L. J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

14. Misteli, T.; Gunjan, A.; Hock, R.; Bustin, M.; Brown, D. T.:
Dynamic binding of histone H1 to chromatin in living cells. Nature 408:
877-881, 2000.

15. Volz, A.; Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.; Ziegler, A.: Physical mapping
of the region around the large histone gene cluster on human chromosome
6p22.2. DNA Seq. 8: 173-180, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/23/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/21/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1993

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
carol: 10/21/2010
mgross: 6/24/2010
mgross: 6/23/2010
mgross: 5/26/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
carol: 12/23/2000
terry: 12/21/2000
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/8/1998
alopez: 2/11/1998
mark: 9/22/1996
carol: 1/12/1995
carol: 6/28/1993

605453	TITLE *605453 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 9; ABCB9
DESCRIPTION For background information on the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of
transporter proteins, see ABCA4 (601691). In addition to the 'full' ABC
transporters with 2 transmembrane domains and 2 nucleotide-binding
domains, there are 'half' proteins that contain only 1 of each domain
(e.g., ABCB1; 171050). Full transporters are usually found in the plasma
membrane, whereas half transporters are found in subcellular organelles.

By searching an EST database and screening a T-lymphoblast cDNA library,
Zhang et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA encoding ABCB9. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 766-amino acid ABCB9 protein has 10 potential
N-terminal transmembrane segments. ABCB9 shares 94% identity with the
rodent sequences and is approximately 39% identical to 2 human
endoplasmic reticulum half transporters, TAP1 (ABCB2; 170260) and TAP2
(ABCB3; 170261). RT-PCR and genomic sequence analysis established the
existence of a splice variant with a 129-bp deletion expressed in testis
and brain. Northern blot analysis detected low expression of a 3.7-kb
transcript in most tissues tested, with an additional 2.2-kb transcript
detected in tissues with relatively high expression, such as testis.
Western blot analysis showed expression of a 72-kD nonglycosylated
protein, significantly smaller than the predicted mass of 84.5 kD, that
was enriched in lysosomes. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of ABCB9 with the lysosomal proteins LAMP1 (153330) and
LAMP2 (309060). Immunohistochemical analysis detected ABCB9 expression
in Sertoli cells of rodent seminiferous tubules.

Allikmets et al. (1996) mapped an EST corresponding to the ABCB9 gene to
12q24.

REFERENCE 1. Allikmets, R.; Gerrard, B.; Hutchinson, A.; Dean, M.: Characterization
of the human ABC superfamily: isolation and mapping of 21 new genes
using the expressed sequence tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
1649-1655, 1996.

2. Zhang, F.; Zhang, W.; Liu, L.; Fisher, C. L.; Hui, D.; Childs,
S.; Dorovini-Zis, K.; Ling, V.: Characterization of ABCB9, an ATP
binding cassette protein associated with lysosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
23287-23294, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/5/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/05/2000

605876	TITLE *605876 Fc RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN 4; FCRL4
;;IMMUNOGLOBULIN SUPERFAMILY RECEPTOR TRANSLOCATION-ASSOCIATED GENE
1; IRTA1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chromosomal abnormalities involving translocation breakpoints at
1q21-q23 are frequent in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (see BCL9; 602597)
and multiple myeloma (MM; see 254500). By cloning the breakpoints of a
(1;14)(q21;q32) chromosomal translocation in the FR4 multiple myeloma
cell line, followed by exon trapping and screening a spleen cDNA
library, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) obtained cDNAs encoding 3 isoforms
of IRTA1 and 4 isoforms of IRTA2 (605877). The differences in the
IRTA1A, IRTA1B, and IRTA1C isoforms arise from alternate usage of 3
potential polyadenylation sites in the 3-prime untranslated region;
however, the isoforms are identical at the amino acid level. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 515-amino acid IRTA1 protein contains a
signal peptide; 4 extracellular Ig-type domains with 3 potential
N-linked glycosylation sites; a 16-amino acid transmembrane region; and
a 106-amino acid cytoplasmic domain with 3 putative consensus
SH2-binding domains. The SH2-binding domains exhibit features of both
ITIMs (immune receptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs) and ITAMs
(immune receptor tyrosine-based activation motifs) and have the
potential to give rise to either 3 ITIMs or 1 ITAM and 1 ITIM. Northern
blot analysis detected very low levels of 3.5-, 2.7-, and 2.5-kb
transcripts in spleen and lymph node, with no expression in other
tissues or lymphocyte cell lines tested. Expression of IRTA1 could be
induced in an estrogen-deprived, Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized cell
line. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis showed that
IRTA1 expression is concentrated in the perifollicular area of tonsil
tissue, a site rich in memory B cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) determined
that the IRTA1 and IRTA2 genes are separated by 21 kb and are
transcribed in the same orientation. Furthermore, the IRTA1 and IRTA2
genes form a contig on 1q21 with additional IRTA-related genes (IRTA3,
IRTA4, and IRTA5) and are telomeric to the MUC1 gene (158340) and
centromeric to the FCGR2B gene (604590).

CYTOGENETICS

By Northern blot, RT-PCR, sequence, and Western blot analyses,
Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) demonstrated that the signal peptide and
first 2 extracellular residues of IRTA1 are fused to the extracellular
spacer, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail of the membrane IgA1
receptor (IGHA1; 146900) in the FR4 multiple myeloma cell line, but not
in other MM or lymphoma cell lines. They concluded that the IRTA1-IGHA1
fusion may be a rare event in B-cell malignancy.

REFERENCE 1. Hatzivassiliou, G.; Miller, I.; Takizawa, J.; Palanisamy, N.; Rao,
P. H.; Iida, S.; Tagawa, S.; Taniwaki, M.; Russo, J.; Neri, A.; Cattoretti,
G.; Clynes, R.; Mendelsohn, C.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Dalla-Favera,
R.: IRTA1 and IRTA2, novel immunoglobulin superfamily receptors expressed
in B cells and involved in chromosome 1q21 abnormalities in B cell
malignancy. Immunity 14: 277-289, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/24/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/14/2010
mgross: 4/25/2001
mgross: 4/24/2001

608537	TITLE *608537 VHL GENE; VHL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The evolutionarily conserved VHL gene encodes 2 protein products, a
30-kD full-length form (p30) and a 19-kD form (p19). The protein
products of the VHL gene play a role in the oxygen-sensing pathway, in
microtubule stability and orientation, tumor suppression, cilia
formation, regulation of senescence, cytokine signaling, collagen IV
(see 120130) regulation, and assembly of a normal extracellular
fibronectin matrix (summary by Nordstrom-O'Brien et al., 2010).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Latif et al. (1993) identified the VHL tumor
suppressor gene. The gene encodes a 213-amino acid protein with a
predicted acidic repeat domain found in the procyclic surface membrane
glycoprotein of Trypanosoma brucei. The authors identified 2 widely
expressed mRNA transcripts of approximately 6 and 6.5 kb.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) demonstrated that the product of the VHL gene
is an approximately 30-kD protein.

By screening a rat liver cDNA library, Duan et al. (1995) isolated the
rat VHL gene, which is predicted to encode a 185-amino acid protein. The
rat protein is 88% identical to the aligned 213-amino acid human VHL
gene product. The human and rat proteins had molecular masses of 28 and
21 kD, respectively.

Richards et al. (1996) used in situ hybridization to investigate the
principal sites of VHL expression during embryogenesis. They also
analyzed a variety of fetal tissues for levels of the 2 VHL isoforms,
isoform I, which contains all 3 exons, and isoform II, which contains
only exons 1 and 3. Although VHL expression was found to be ubiquitous,
particularly high levels of expression were detected in the urogenital
system, brain, spinal cord, sensory ganglia, eyes, and bronchial
epithelium. Richards et al. (1996) noted that this expression pattern
correlated to some extent with the pattern of organ involvement in VHL
syndrome but that there were significant differences. Both isoforms of
VHL were detected in all tissues, and the ratio of isoforms was similar
between tissues.

Schoenfeld et al. (1998) identified a second native VHL gene product.
They showed that this 18-kD protein is initiated from the second
translation start site at codon 54, which contains a more conserved
Kozak consensus sequence and thus may serve as a second, internal,
translation initiation site. The significance of a second translation
start site is underscored by the lack of mutations found between the
first and second methionine codons of the VHL gene in both sporadic and
VHL-associated renal carcinomas. This observation suggested that
mutation in this region may not lead to VHL inactivation if translation
could be initiated at the second methionine codon, producing a
functional VHL protein. Furthermore, both the rat and mouse contain only
19 of the 53 amino acids present in this region in the human VHL ORF.
Schoenfeld et al. (1998) concluded that the 18-kD protein contains the
biologic activity of the VHL gene.

Iliopoulos et al. (1998) also demonstrated that in addition to the
213-amino acid VHL protein with an apparent molecular mass of 30 kD
(VHL30), a second VHL protein (VHL19) resulted from internal translation
from the second methionine within the VHL ORF. VHL30 resides primarily
in the cytosol, with lower amounts found in the nucleus or associated
with cell membranes. In contrast, VHL19 is equally distributed between
the nucleus and cytosol and is not found in association with membranes.
VHL19, like VHL30, can bind to elongin B (600787), elongin C (600788),
and Hs-Cul2 in coimmunoprecipitation assays and can inhibit the
production of hypoxia-inducing proteins such as VEGF (192240) and GLUT1
(138140) when reintroduced into renal carcinoma cells that lack a
wildtype VHL allele. Thus, cells contain 2 biologically active VHL gene
products.

GENE STRUCTURE

Latif et al. (1993) determined that the VHL gene contains at least 3
exons.

Zatyka et al. (2002) analyzed the promoter region of the VHL gene and
found 4 regions of conservation between human, primate, and rodent
sequences. In silico analysis identified binding sites for numerous
transcription factors within the conserved regions, and deletion
analysis of the promoter in a reporter assay in 293 and HeLa cells
identified 1 negative and 2 positive regulatory elements. The promoter
contains a functional SP1 (189906) site and overlapping SP1/AP2 (107580)
sites.

GENE FUNCTION

- Role in Tumor Suppression

Maher et al. (1990) compared age incidence curves for sporadic
cerebellar hemangioblastoma and sporadic renal cell carcinoma to those
for familial forms of these tumors that occur as part of von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). The curves for tumors in VHL syndrome
were compatible with a single mutation model, whereas the age incidence
curves for sporadic tumors suggested a 2-stage mutation process. On the
whole, the findings suggested that the VHL gene functions as a recessive
tumor suppressor gene.

Crossey et al. (1994) presented convincing evidence that the VHL
syndrome gene functions as a recessive tumor suppressor gene and that
inactivation of both alleles of the VHL gene is a critical event in the
pathogenesis of VHL neoplasms. Studies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
showed that in 7 tumors from 7 familial cases in which the parental
origin of the 3p26-p25 allele loss could be determined, the allele had
been lost from the chromosome inherited from the unaffected parent. In 4
VHL tumors, LOH on other chromosomes (5q21, 13q, 17q) was found,
indicating that homozygous VHL gene mutations may be required but not
sufficient for tumorigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.

When expressed in COS-7 cells, Duan et al. (1995) found that both the
human and the rat VHL proteins showed predominant nuclear, nuclear and
cytosolic, or predominant cytosolic VHL staining by immunofluorescence.
A complicated pattern of cellular proteins was seen that could be
specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the introduced VHL protein. A
complex containing VHL and proteins with apparent molecular masses of 16
and 9 kD was the most consistently observed. Certain naturally occurring
VHL missense mutations demonstrated either complete or partial loss of
the p16-p9 complex. Duan et al. (1995) concluded that the VHL tumor
suppressor gene product is a nuclear protein, perhaps capable of
specifically translocating between the nucleus and the cytosol. They
suggested that VHL may execute its function via formation of specific
multiprotein complexes.

Vogelstein (1995) referred to the VHL gene as a gatekeeper gene for
cancers such as those of the kidney. Rubenstein and Yaari (1994)
suggested that the VHL gene may serve that role in relation to
astrocytoma. They presented the pedigree of a Puerto Rican family in
which at least 9 members had von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and 2 of these
had astrocytoma.

To elucidate the biochemical mechanisms underlying tumor suppression by
the VHL protein, Duan et al. (1995) and Kibel et al. (1995) searched for
cellular proteins that bind to wildtype VHL protein but not to
tumor-derived VHL protein mutants. They found that 2 transcriptional
elongation factors, elongin B (600787) and elongin C (600788), bind in
vitro and in vivo to a short, colinear region of the VHL protein that is
frequently mutated in human tumors. Kibel et al. (1995) showed that a
peptide replica of this region inhibited binding of VHL protein to
elongin B and elongin C, whereas a point-mutant derivative,
corresponding to a naturally occurring VHL missense mutation, had no
effect. Duan et al. (1995) showed that recombinant VHL competes with
elongin A (600786) for elongin B and C binding in vitro. The results
were interpreted as indicating that the normal tumor suppression
function of VHL protein involves the inhibition of transcription
elongation by its binding to elongin B and elongin C.

In a review article, Tyers and Willems (1999) stated that the VHL
protein is part of a complex that includes elongin B, elongin C, and
cullin-2 (CUL2; 603135), proteins that are associated with
transcriptional elongation and ubiquitination. Components of the VCB
(VHL/elongin C/elongin B) complex share sequence similarities with the
E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes SCF (SKP1, (601434); CUL1, (603134); F-box
protein) and APC (anaphase promoting complex; see 603462). Thus, elongin
B is ubiquitin-like, and elongin C and CUL2 are similar to the SKP1 and
CUL1 components of SCF, respectively. Substrate recognition by E3
enzymes such as SCF and APC is crucial because protein degradation must
be highly selective. Both SCF and APC interact with a set of adaptor
proteins that recruit different binding partners through specific
protein-protein interaction domains. SOCS-box-containing proteins (see
603597) may act as adaptors for the VCB complex.

Feldman et al. (1999) demonstrated that the folding and assembly of VHL
into a complex with its partner proteins, elongin B and elongin C, is
directly mediated by the chaperonin TRiC, also called CCT (see 600114).
Association of VHL with TRiC is required for formation of the
VHL-elongin B-elongin C complex. A 55-amino acid domain of VHL (amino
acids 100 to 155) is both necessary and sufficient for binding to TRiC.
Mutation or deletion of this domain is associated with VHL syndrome, and
2 mutations that disrupt the normal interaction with TRiC and impair VHL
folding were identified. These results defined a novel role for TRiC in
mediating oligomerization and suggested that inactivating mutations can
impair polypeptide function by interfering with chaperone-mediated
folding.

Lee et al. (1996) demonstrated that there is a tightly regulated,
cell-density-dependent transport of the VHL protein into and/or out of
the nucleus. In densely grown cells, it is predominantly in the
cytoplasm, whereas in sparse cultures, most of the protein can be
detected in the nucleus. They identified a putative nuclear localization
signal in the first 60 and first 28 amino acids of the human and rat VHL
protein, respectively. Sequences in the C-terminal region of VHL protein
may also be required for localization to the cytosol. The findings
indicated a novel cell-density-dependent pathway responsible for the
regulation of VHL cellular localization.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) showed that the renal cell carcinoma cell line
786-O, which is known to harbor a VHL mutation, fails to produce a
wildtype VHL protein. Reintroduction of wildtype, but not mutant, VHL
into these cells had no demonstrable effect on their growth in vitro but
inhibited their ability to form tumors in nude mice. Like many cancer
cells, the 786-0 RCC fails to exit the cell cycle upon serum withdrawal.
Pause et al. (1998) showed that reintroduction of the wildtype VHL gene
restores the ability of VHL-negative RCC cells to exit the cell cycle
and enter G0/quiescence in low serum. The cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27 (CDKN1B; 600778) accumulates upon serum withdrawal, only
in the presence of VHL, as a result of an increase in protein stability.
Pause et al. (1998) proposed that loss of the wildtype VHL gene results
in a specific cellular defect in serum-dependent growth control, which
may initiate tumor formation. Thus, VHL appears to be the first tumor
suppressor involved in the regulation of cell cycle exit, which is
consistent with its gatekeeper function in the kidney.

To discover genes involved in VHL-mediated carcinogenesis, Ivanov et al.
(1998) used renal cell carcinoma cell lines stably transfected with
wildtype VHL-expressing transgenes. Large-scale RNA differential display
technology applied to these cell lines identified several differentially
expressed genes, including an alpha carbonic anhydrase gene, termed CA12
(603263). The deduced protein sequence was classified as a one-pass
transmembrane carbonic anhydrase possessing an apparently intact
catalytic domain in the extracellular CA module. Reintroduced wildtype
VHL strongly inhibited the overexpression of the CA12 gene in the
parental renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Similar results were obtained
with CA9 (603179) which encodes another transmembrane carbonic anhydrase
with an intact catalytic domain. Although both domains of the VHL
protein contributed to regulation of CA12 expression, the elongin
binding domain alone could effectively regulate CA9 expression. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ivanov et al. (1998) mapped CA12 and
CA9 to chromosome bands 15q22 and 17q21.2, respectively, regions prone
to amplification in some human cancers. Ivanov et al. (1998) stated that
additional experiments were necessary to define the role of CA IX and CA
XII enzymes in the regulation of pH in the extracellular
microenvironment and its potential impact on cancer cell growth.

Roe et al. (2006) found that VHL directly associated with and stabilized
p53 (TP53; 191170) by suppressing MDM2 (164785)-mediated ubiquitination
and nuclear export of p53. Moreover, upon genotoxic stress, VHL invoked
an interaction between p53 and p300 (EP300; 602700) and the acetylation
of p53, which led to an increase in p53 transcriptional activity and
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Roe et al. (2006) concluded that VHL
has a function in upregulating p53.

Yang et al. (2007) noted that VHL-defective renal carcinoma cells
exhibit increased NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activity, which can promote
resistance to chemotherapy or cytokines. They showed that VHL
downregulates NF-kappa-B activity by acting as an adaptor to promote
casein kinase-2 (see 115440)-mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of
CARD9 (607212), an NF-kappa-B agonist.

- Role in Oxygen-Related Gene Expression

The highly vascular tumors associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
overproduce angiogenic peptides such as vascular endothelial growth
factor/vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF; 192240). Iliopoulos et
al. (1996) found that renal carcinoma cells lacking wildtype VHL protein
produce mRNAs encoding VEGF/VPF, the glucose transporter GLUT1 (SLC2A1;
138140), and the platelet-derived growth factor B chain (190040) under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Reintroduction of wildtype, but
not mutant, VHL protein into these cells specifically inhibited
production of these mRNAs under normoxic conditions, thus restoring
their previously described hypoxia-inducible profile. Iliopoulos et al.
(1996) concluded that the VHL protein appears to play a critical role in
the transduction of signals generated by changes in ambient oxygen
tension.

VEGF mRNA is upregulated in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated
tumors. Mukhopadhyay et al. (1997) assessed the effect of the VHL gene
product on VEGF expression. Using a VEGF promoter-luciferase construct
for cotransfection with a wildtype VHL vector in embryonic kidney and
renal cell carcinoma cell lines, they showed that wildtype VHL protein
inhibited VEGF promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner up to 5- to
10-fold. Deletion analysis defined a 144-bp region of the VEGF promoter
necessary for VHL repression. This VHL-responsive element is GC rich and
specifically bound the transcription factor Sp1 (189906) in crude
nuclear extracts. They further demonstrated that VHL and Sp1 directly
interact with an inhibitory effect on Sp1, suggesting that loss of Sp1
inhibition may be important in the pathogenesis of von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome and renal cell carcinoma.

Maxwell et al. (1999) studied the involvement of VHL in oxygen-regulated
gene expression using ribonuclease protection analysis of 2
VHL-deficient renal carcinoma cell lines, RCC4 and 786-O. Eleven genes
encoding products involved in glucose transport, glycolysis, high energy
phosphate metabolism, and angiogenesis were examined; 9 were induced by
hypoxia in other mammalian cells and 2 were repressed by hypoxia. None
of these responses were seen in the VHL-defective cell lines. Responses
to hypoxia were restored by stable transfection of a wildtype VHL gene,
with effects ranging from a modest action of hypoxia to substantial
regulation. These results indicated that the previously described
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible mRNAs in VHL-defective cells extend to
a broad range of oxygen-regulated genes and involves a constitutive
'hypoxia pattern' for both positively and negatively regulated genes.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF1; 603348) has a key role in cellular
response to hypoxia, including the regulation of genes involved in
energy metabolism, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. The alpha subunits of
HIF are rapidly degraded by the proteasome under normal conditions but
are stabilized by hypoxia. Cobaltous ions or iron chelators mimic
hypoxia, indicating that the stimuli may interact through effects on a
ferroprotein oxygen sensor. Maxwell et al. (1999) demonstrated a
critical role for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product
VHL in HIF1 regulation. In VHL-defective cells, HIF-alpha subunits were
constitutively stabilized and HIF1 was activated. Reexpression of VHL
restored oxygen-dependent instability. VHL and HIF-alpha subunits
coimmunoprecipitated, and VHL was present in the hypoxic HIF1
DNA-binding complex. In cells exposed to iron chelation or cobaltous
ions, HIF1 is dissociated from VHL. These findings indicated that the
interaction between HIF1 and VHL is iron dependent and that it is
necessary for the oxygen-dependent degradation of HIF-alpha subunits.
Maxwell et al. (1999) suggested that constitutive HIF1 activation may
underlie the angiogenic phenotype of VHL-associated tumors.

In the presence of oxygen, HIF is targeted for destruction by an E3
ubiquitin ligase containing the VHL tumor suppressor protein. Ivan et
al. (2001) found that human VHL protein binds to a short HIF-derived
peptide when a conserved proline residue at the core of this peptide is
hydroxylated. Because proline hydroxylation requires molecular oxygen
and iron, this protein modification may play a key role in mammalian
oxygen sensing. Jaakkola et al. (2001) also demonstrated that the
interaction between VHL protein and a specific domain of the HIF1-alpha
subunit is regulated through hydroxylation of a proline residue
(HIF1-alpha P564) by an enzyme which they termed HIF-alpha
prolyl-hydroxylase (HIF-PH). An absolute requirement for dioxygen as a
cosubstrate and iron as a cofactor suggests that HIF-PH functions
directly as a cellular oxygen sensor.

Mahon et al. (2001) showed that the N-terminal 155 residues of VHL
interact with HIF1AN (606615). They found that VHL functions as a
transcriptional corepressor inhibiting HIF1A transactivation by
recruiting HDAC1 (601241), HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3 (605166). Epstein
et al. (2001) defined a conserved HIF-VHL-prolyl hydroxylase pathway in
C. elegans and identified Egl9 as a dioxygenase that regulates HIF by
prolyl hydroxylation. In mammalian cells, they showed that the
HIF-prolyl hydroxylases are represented by 3 proteins, PHD1 (606424),
PHD2 (606425), and PHD3 (606426), with a conserved
2-histidine-1-carboxylate iron coordination motif at the catalytic site.
Direct modulation of recombinant enzyme activity by graded hypoxia, iron
chelation, and cobaltous ions mirrored the characteristics of HIF
induction in vivo, fulfilling requirements for these enzymes being
oxygen sensors that regulate HIF.

Hoffman et al. (2001) reported that the products of 4 different type 2C
VHL alleles retain the ability to downregulate HIF but are defective for
promotion of fibronectin (135600) matrix assembly. Furthermore, leu188
to val (L188V; 608537.0014), a well-studied type 2C mutation, retained
the ability to suppress renal carcinoma growth in vivo.

Clifford et al. (2001) investigated in detail the effect of 13 naturally
occurring VHL mutations (11 missense), representing each phenotypic
subclass, on HIF-alpha subunit regulation. Mutations associated with the
PHE-only phenotype (type 2C) promoted HIF-alpha ubiquitylation in vitro
and demonstrated wildtype binding patterns with VHL interacting
proteins, suggesting that loss of other VHL functions are necessary for
PHE susceptibility. Mutations causing HAB susceptibility (types 1, 2A,
and 2B) demonstrated variable effects on HIF-alpha subunit and elongin
binding, but all resulted in defective HIF-alpha regulation and loss of
fibronectin binding. All RCC-associated mutations caused complete
HIF-alpha dysregulation and loss of fibronectin binding. These studies
strengthened the notion that HIF deregulation plays a causal role in
hemangioblastoma and renal carcinoma, and raised the possibility that
abnormal fibronectin matrix assembly contributes to pheochromocytoma
pathogenesis in the setting of VHL syndrome.

Hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system and retina in VHL
patients overexpress vascular endothelial growth factor, which
represents a potential target for anti-angiogenic drugs. In 3 VHL
patients with CNS or retinal hemangioblastomas treated by the anti-VEGF
receptor SU5416, Richard et al. (2002) observed, after 3 to 4 months of
treatment, a secondary paradoxical polycythemia. Hematocrit was normal
before the beginning of the trial, and no progression of
hemangioblastomas was observed. Polycythemia had never been reported in
SU5416 trials for advanced malignancies. In the studies of Richard et
al. (2002), the polycythemia may have represented a specific action on
red blood cell precursors occurring only in the absence of a functional
VHL gene.

Staller et al. (2003) demonstrated that the VHL tumor suppressor protein
negatively regulates CXCR4 (162643) expression owing to its capacity to
target HIF1A (603348) for degradation under normoxic conditions. This
process is suppressed under hypoxic conditions, resulting in
HIF-dependent CXCR4 activation. An analysis of clear cell renal
carcinoma that manifests mutations in the VHL gene in most cases
revealed an association of strong CXCR4 expression with poor
tumor-specific survival. Staller et al. (2003) concluded that their
results suggest a mechanism for CXCR4 activation during tumor cell
evolution and imply that VHL inactivation acquired by incipient tumor
cells early in tumorigenesis confers not only a selective survival
advantage but also the tendency to home to selected organs.

Corn et al. (2003) established that the VHL protein binds to Tat-binding
protein-1 (TBP1; 186852). TBP1 associates with the beta-domain of VHL
and complexes with VHL and HIF1A in vivo. Overexpression of TBP1
promotes degradation of HIF1A in a VHL-dependent manner that requires
the ATPase domain of TBP1. Several distinct mutations in exon 2 of the
VHL gene disrupt binding of VHL to TBP1. A VHL protein mutant containing
an exon 2 missense substitution coimmunoprecipitated with HIF1A, but not
TBP1, and did not promote degradation of HIF1A. Thus, the ability of the
VHL protein to degrade HIF1A depends in part on its interaction with
TBP1 and suggests a new mechanism for HIF1A stabilization in some
VHL-deficient tumors.

To identify novel target genes of the VHL protein, Zatyka et al. (2002)
investigated the effect of wildtype VHL protein on the expression of 588
cancer-related genes in 2 VHL-defective renal cell carcinoma cell lines.
Expression array analysis identified 9 genes that demonstrated a greater
than 2-fold decrease in expression in both RCC cell lines after
restoration of wildtype VHL protein. Three of the 9 genes, VEGF, PAI1
(173360), and LRP1 (107770), had previously been reported as targets of
the VHL protein and are hypoxia-inducible. In addition, 6 novel targets
were detected, including cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461). No evidence was
found that CCND1 expression was influenced by hypoxia, suggesting that
VHL protein downregulates these targets by an HIF-independent mechanism.

Homozygous disruption of the Vhl gene in mice results in embryonic
lethality from lack of placental vasculogenesis (Gnarra et al., 1997).
To investigate Vhl function in the adult, Haase et al. (2001) generated
a conditional Vhl-null allele (2-lox allele) and a null allele (1-lox
allele) by Cre-mediated recombination in embryonic stem cells. They
showed that mice heterozygous for the 1-lox allele developed cavernous
hemangiomas of the liver, a rare manifestation in the human disease.
Histologically, these tumors were associated with hepatocellular
steatosis and focal proliferations of small vessels. To study the
cellular origin of these lesions, Haase et al. (2001) inactivated VHL
tissue specifically in hepatocytes. Deletion of VHL in the liver
resulted in severe steatosis, many blood-filled vascular cavities, and
foci of increased vascularization within the hepatic parenchyma. These
histopathologic changes were similar to those seen in livers from mice
heterozygous for the 1-lox allele. Hypoxia-inducible mRNAs encoding
vascular endothelial growth factor, glucose transporter-1, and
erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) were upregulated. Thus, targeted
inactivation of mouse Vhl replicated clinical features of the human
disease and underscored the importance of the VHL gene product in the
regulation of hypoxia-responsive genes in vivo.

Wang et al. (2007) showed that mice overexpressing Hif1a in osteoblasts
through selective deletion of Vhl expressed high levels of Vegf (192240)
and developed extremely dense, heavily vascularized long bones. In
contrast, mice lacking Hif1a in osteoblasts had long bones that were
significantly thinner and less vascularized than those of controls. Loss
of Vhl in osteoblasts increased endothelial sprouting from the embryonic
metatarsals in vitro but had little effect on osteoblast function in the
absence of blood vessels. Wang et al. (2007) concluded that activation
of the HIF1A pathway in osteoblasts during bone development couples
angiogenesis to osteogenesis.

Endocytosis plays a major role in the deactivation of receptors
localized to the plasma membrane, and early endocytic events require the
small GTPase RAB5 (179512) and its effector rabaptin-5 (RABEP1; 603616).
Wang et al. (2009) found that hypoxia, via the VHL-HIF2A (603349)
signaling pathway, downregulated rabaptin-5 expression, leading to
decelerated endocytosis and prolonged activation of ligand-bound EGFR
(131550). Primary kidney and breast tumors with strong hypoxic
signatures showed significantly lower expression of rabaptin-5 RNA and
protein. Wang et al. (2009) identified a conserved hypoxia-responsive
element (HRE) in the rabaptin-5 promoter that bound in vitro-translated
HIF1A and HIF2A, leading to displacement of RNA polymerase II and
attenuating rabaptin-5 transcription.

Mehta et al. (2009) reported that in C. elegans the loss of VHL1
significantly increased life span and enhanced resistance to
polyglutamine and beta-amyloid toxicity. Deletion of HIF1 (603348) was
epistatic to VHL1, indicating that HIF1 acts downstream of VHL1 to
modulate aging and proteotoxicity. VHL1 and HIF1 control longevity by a
mechanism distinct from both dietary restriction and insulin-like
signaling. Mehta et al. (2009) concluded that their findings define VHL1
and the hypoxic response as an alternative longevity and protein
homeostasis pathway.

Russell et al. (2011) demonstrated that VHL binds to SOCS1 (603597) and
promotes degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796) via
ubiquitin-mediated destruction.

- Role in Protein Assembly

Ohh et al. (1998) showed that fibronectin coimmunoprecipitated with
normal VHL protein but not tumor-derived VHL mutants. Immunofluorescence
and biochemical fractionation experiments showed that fibronectin
colocalized with a fraction of VHL associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum, and cold competition experiments suggested that complexes
between fibronectin and VHL protein exist in intact cells. Assembly of
an extracellular fibronectin matrix by VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells, as
determined by immunofluorescence and ELISA assays, was grossly defective
compared with VHL +/+ renal carcinoma cells. Reintroduction of wildtype,
but not mutant, VHL protein into VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells partially
corrected this defect. Extracellular fibronectin matrix assembly by VHL
-/- mouse embryos and mouse embryo fibroblasts, unlike their VHL +/+
counterparts, was grossly impaired. Ohh et al. (1998) concluded that VHL
protein is important in fibronectin matrix assembly.

Hergovich et al. (2003) found that VHL is a microtubule-associated
protein that can protect microtubules from depolymerization in several
cell lines. Both the microtubule binding and stabilization functions
depended on amino acids 95-123, a hotspot for mutations in VHL syndrome.
They found that the syndrome-associated mutations Y98H (608537.0009) and
Y112H (608537.0012) disrupted the microtubule-stabilizing function of
the protein.

- Role in Ciliary Maintenance

Using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy, Lolkema et al. (2008)
showed that Vhl localized to cilia extending from basal bodies stained
with gamma-tubulin (TUBG1; 191135) in primary mouse kidney cells. Cilia
were absent in renal cell carcinoma cells derived from a VHL patient,
but reintroduction of VHL into these cells resulted in rapid cilia
assembly. The cilia function of VHL required residues 1 to 53, which
constitute an acidic domain, and residues 95 to 123, which were
previously implicated in microtubule binding and tumor suppression.

- Role in Central Nervous System Development

Kanno et al. (2000) investigated the role of the VHL gene in CNS
development using rodent CNS progenitor cells. They showed that
expression of the VHL protein is correlated with neuronal
differentiation but not with glial differentiation in CNS progenitor
cells, and also that VHL gene transduction induces neuronal
differentiation. Furthermore, a VHL mRNA antisense oligonucleotide
inhibited differentiation of CNS progenitor cells and upregulated their
cell cycle.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

The ubiquitination of HIF by VHL plays a central role in the cellular
response to changes in oxygen availability. VHL protein binds to HIF
only when a conserved proline in HIF is hydroxylated, a modification
that is oxygen-dependent. Min et al. (2002) determined the 1.85-angstrom
structure of a 20-residue HIF1A-VHL protein-elongin B-elongin C complex
that shows that HIF1A binds to VHL protein in an extended beta
strand-like conformation. The hydroxyproline inserts into a gap in the
VHL hydrophobic core, at a site that is a hotspot for tumorigenic
mutations, with its 4-hydroxyl group recognized by buried serine and
histidine residues. Although the beta sheet-like interactions contribute
to the stability of the complex, the hydroxyproline contacts are central
to the strict specificity characteristic of signaling.

Hon et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure of a hydroxylated
HIF1A peptide bound to the VHL protein, elongin C, and elongin B and
performed solution binding assays, which revealed a single, conserved
hydroxyproline-binding pocket in the VHL protein. They found that
optimized hydrogen bonding to the buried hydroxyprolyl group confers
precise discrimination between hydroxylated and unmodified prolyl
residues. Hon et al. (2002) concluded that this mechanism provides a new
focus for development of therapeutic agents to modulate cellular
responses to hypoxia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nordstrom-O'Brien et al. (2010) provided a review of the molecular
genetics of the VHL gene, including the mutational spectrum and
associated phenotypes.

- Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome

Using restriction fragment analysis, Latif et al. (1993) identified
rearrangements of the VHL gene in 28 of 221 kindreds with von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). Eighteen of these rearrangements were
due to deletion in the candidate gene. Using pulsed field gel
electrophoresis and cosmid mapping, Latif et al. (1993) established a
physical map of the VHL gene region and identified 3 large
nonoverlapping constitutional deletions in 3 unrelated VHL patients; 1
of these was an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434,
predicted to remove ile146 in the gene product (608537.0001).

Using single-strand conformation polymorphism and heteroduplex analysis
to investigate 94 VHL patients without large deletions, Crossey et al.
(1994) identified 40 different mutations in the VHL gene in 55 unrelated
kindreds: 19 missense mutations, 6 nonsense mutations, 12 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 2 in-frame deletions, and 1 splice donor site
mutation. The 2 most frequent mutations were arg238-to-gln (608537.0005)
and arg238-to-trp (608537.0003), which were detected in 5 and 4
unrelated kindreds, respectively.

Olschwang et al. (1998) screened 92 unrelated patients with VHL syndrome
for point mutations and found 61 DNA variants. In addition, a search for
EcoRI rearrangements revealed germline anomalies in 5 patients. The 61
variants could be subdivided into 20 mutations predicted to alter the
open reading frame and 43 DNA sequence variants that on a priori grounds
were of unknown biologic consequence. The 3-prime end of the coding
sequence of the VHL gene, which encodes the elongin (see 600787)-binding
domain, was the site of 5 of 20 truncating mutations (25%) and 18 of 41
DNA variants (44%) of uncertain functional significance. A similar
screening in 18 patients with sporadic hemangioblastoma revealed 2
missense DNA variants.

Wait et al. (2004) performed genetic analysis of 5 CNS hemangioblastomas
excised from 3 related VHL patients with the same germline VHL gene
deletion. All of the tumors showed distinct 'second-hit' point mutations
on the wildtype allele, even those tumors originating in the same
patient. Moreover, the same types of tumors from the same locations also
showed different point mutations. Wait et al. (2004) concluded that the
somatic mutations were random, and that there is a unique mechanism
underlying tumorigenesis in patients with germline deletion mutations.

Using markers specific for chromosome 3, Glasker et al. (2006) mapped
the deletion size of the 'second-hit' in 16 tumor tissue specimens from
a single patient with VHL syndrome who had a germline heterozygous
partial deletion in the VHL gene. The tumors consisted of 3 central
nervous system hemangioblastomas, 7 renal cell carcinomas, 3 cystic
renal structures, 2 pancreatic tumors, and 1 pancreatic cyst. Deletion
size was highly variable, ranging from short deletions around the VHL
gene to complete deletion of chromosome 3. However, there was no
correlation between deletion size and site of the germline mutation,
affected organ, or type or biological behavior of the tumor. Glasker et
al. (2006) concluded that loss of VHL gene function alone is not
immediately causative for neoplastic growth and suggested that further
molecular events may be required for tumor formation.

(For genotype/phenotype correlations in VHL syndrome, see 193300.)

- Cancer

The Knudson model predicts that sporadic cancers should be associated
with mutations in the same locus affected in the corresponding
hereditary cancer. Using SSCP and RT-PCR techniques, Latif et al. (1993)
identified aberrant patterns in the VHL gene in 5 renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) lines. In 4 of them, the pattern was due to small, 1- to
10-nucleotide deletions that created frameshift mutations and,
presumably, truncated proteins. In the fifth RCC line, the change was a
nonsense mutation, resulting from a 761C-A transversion.

Eng et al. (1995) identified mutations in the VHL gene in 4 of 48
sporadic pheochromocytomas (171300). Two mutations were somatic and 2
were germline. In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma, Crossey et
al. (1995) identified a VHL mutation (R238W; 6085327.0003) mutation.
None of them had evidence of VHL syndrome.

In 30 (11%) of 271 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma,
Neumann et al. (2002) identified 22 different germline mutations in the
VHL gene (see, e.g., 608537.0014 and 608537.0026).

Zhuang et al. (1996) analyzed VHL gene alterations in sporadic human
colon carcinomas and adenomas using techniques that allowed for
procurement and analysis of selected subpopulations of cells from
paraffin embedded and frozen human tumor specimens. Allelic loss of the
VHL gene was detected in 7 of 11 (64%) of informative patients with
sporadic colon carcinoma. No allelic loss was shown in colon adenomas
from 8 informative patients. The authors suggested that VHL gene loss
may represent a relatively late event in colonic neoplasia progression.

Oberstrass et al. (1996) found abnormalities of the VHL gene in 10 of 20
capillary hemangioblastomas of the CNS. Seven tumors had a frameshift
mutation due either to deletion of 1 or more basepairs (6 cases) or to
insertion of 1 basepair (1 case). The remaining 3 tumors had either
point mutations with intron splice site sequences (2 cases) or a point
mutation resulting in an amino acid substitution (1 case). Evidence for
germline alterations of the VHL gene was found in 2 patients who showed
identical mutations in both tumors and corresponding leukocyte DNA.
Oberstrass et al. (1996) noted that it is significant that one of the 2
tumors with a germline mutation was in an 18-year-old male, and the
other in a 40-year-old female. The non-germline mutations included
tumors from individuals 70, 62, 60, 55, and 52 years old.

Kenck et al. (1996) investigated 91 different parenchymal tumors of the
kidney for mutation in the VHL gene by SSCP and/or heteroduplex
techniques. Evidence of mutation of the VHL gene was associated
exclusively with nonpapillary renal cell carcinoma.

Fearon (1997) reviewed more than 20 different hereditary cancer
syndromes that had been defined and attributed to specific germline
mutations in various inherited cancer genes. In a useful diagram, he
illustrated the roles of allelic variation ('1 gene - different
syndromes') and genetic heterogeneity ('different genes - 1 syndrome')
in inherited cancer syndromes. VHL mutations were used as an example of
the former: inactivating mutations, such as nonsense mutations or
deletions, predisposed to clear-cell renal carcinoma, retinal angioma,
and cerebellar and spinal hemangioblastoma; missense mutations, e.g., in
codon 167, predisposed to these tumors and pheochromocytoma in addition.

Van der Harst et al. (1998) screened the VHL gene for germline mutations
in 68 patients who were operated on for pheochromocytoma. This was
undertaken to follow up on the work of Neumann et al. (1993), who
reported that, according to clinical criteria, approximately 23% of the
apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may in fact be related to a
familial disorder; these disorders are, in addition to von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome, neurofibromatosis-1 (NF1; 162200) and multiple endocrine
neoplasia types IIA (MEN2A; 171400) and IIB (MEN2B; 162300). They found
mutations in the VHL gene in 8 patients; 2 patients were an uncle and
nephew who had the same missense mutation, R64P (608537.0015). In 4
other patients, missense mutations, P25L, L63P (608537.0016), G144Q, and
I147T, were identified. Three of these mutations (P25L, L63P, and R64P)
were located closer to the N terminus of the VHL protein than any
previously reported VHL mutation. In 2 other cases, the mutations were
located not in the coding region but in the intronic sequence (but not
within splice sites), adjacent to the exon, so that they were probably
not related to the syndrome. The results suggested that 8.8% of patients
(6 of 68) with apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may carry germline
mutations in the VHL gene. This is a relatively high proportion,
although not as high as the 23% reported earlier.

Gallou et al. (1999) investigated the nature of somatic VHL mutations in
173 primary sporadic human renal cell carcinomas using PCR and SSCP
analysis. They detected an abnormal SSCP pattern in 73 samples. After
sequencing, they identified microdeletions in 58% of cases,
microinsertions in 17%, nonsense mutations in 8%, and missense mutations
in 17%. VHL mutations were found only in the nonpapillary renal cell
carcinoma subtype, as previously reported. To compare somatic and
germline mutations, they used the VHL database, which included 507
mutations. The study of mutational events revealed a significant
difference between somatic and germline mutations. Mutations leading to
truncated proteins were observed in 78% of somatic mutations but in only
37% of germline mutations (P less than 0.001). The authors postulated
that a specific pattern of VHL mutations is associated with sporadic
RCC. This pattern corresponds to mutations leading to truncated
proteins, with few specific missense mutations.

Bender et al. (2000) studied 36 VHL-related pheochromocytomas for
somatic VHL and RET gene alterations and LOH of markers on chromosome
arms 1p, 3p, and 22q. For comparison, they performed the same analyses
in 17 sporadic pheochromocytomas. They found significantly different LOH
frequencies at 3 loci between sporadic and VHL tumors; the more than 91%
LOH of markers on 3p and the relatively low frequencies of LOH at 1p and
22q (15% and 21%, respectively) in VHL pheochromocytomas argue for the
importance of VHL gene dysregulation and dysfunction in the pathogenesis
of almost all VHL pheochromocytomas. In contrast, the relatively low
frequency of 3p LOH (24%) and the lack of intragenic VHL alterations
compared with the high frequency of 1p LOH (71%) and the moderate
frequency of 22q LOH (53%) in sporadic pheochromocytomas argue for genes
other than VHL, especially on 1p, that are significant for sporadic
tumorigenesis and suggest that the genetic pathways involved in sporadic
versus VHL pheochromocytoma genesis are distinct.

Renal cell carcinomas occur frequently in patients treated with
long-term dialysis, especially in cases of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD)/acquired cystic disease of the kidney (ACDK). In patients
receiving dialysis, Yoshida et al. (2002) examined 14 RCCs (7 clear-cell
and 7 papillary carcinomas) for somatic mutations of the VHL gene as
well as of the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene (164860) to
address the molecular pathogenesis of ESRD/ACDK-associated RCCs. They
found that 3 tumors had VHL frameshifts; 1 showed additional LOH at the
VHL gene locus. All 3 tumors were clear-cell RCCs occurring in ESRD with
55, 106, and 156 months of dialysis, respectively. No mutations were
found in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene, where mutations
had previously been found in cases of papillary RCCs.

Maranchie et al. (2004) observed a paradoxically lower prevalence of RCC
in patients with complete germline deletion of VHL. They retrospectively
evaluated 123 patients from 55 families with large germline VHL
deletions, including 42 intragenic partial deletions and 13 complete VHL
deletions. An age-adjusted comparison demonstrated a higher prevalence
of RCC in patients with partial germline VHL deletions relative to
complete deletions (48.9% vs 22.6%, p = 0.007). This striking phenotypic
dichotomy was not seen for cystic renal lesions or for CNS (p = 0.22),
pancreas (p = 0.72), or pheochromocytoma (p = 0.34). Deletion mapping
demonstrated that development of RCC had an even greater correlation
with retention of HSPC300 (C3ORF10; 611183), located within the 30-kb
region of 3p, immediately telomeric to VHL (52.3% vs 18.9%, p less than
0.001), suggesting the presence of a neighboring gene or genes critical
to the development and maintenance of RCC.

Gallou et al. (2004) studied the renal phenotype in 274 individuals from
126 unrelated VHL families in whom 92 different VHL mutations were
identified. The incidence of renal involvement was increased in families
with mutations leading to protein truncation or large rearrangement, as
compared to families with missense mutations (81% vs 63%, respectively;
p = 0.03). In the group with missense mutations, Gallou et al. (2004)
identified 2 mutation cluster regions (MCRs) associated with a high risk
of harboring renal lesions: MCR-1 (codons 74-90) and MCR-2 (codons
130-136). In addition, the incidence of RCCs was higher in families with
mutations leading to protein truncation than in families with missense
mutations (75% vs 57%, respectively; p = 0.04). Furthermore, missense
mutations within MCR-1, but not MCR-2, conferred genetic susceptibility
to RCC.

- Autosomal Recessive Familial Erythrocytosis 2

Inheritance of germline mutations in both VHL alleles was found by Ang
et al. (2002) and by others (Pastore et al., 2003; Percy et al., 2002)
as the cause of autosomal recessive familial erythrocytosis (ECYT2,
263400; see 608537.0019). The VHL protein plays an important role in
hypoxia sensing. It binds to hydroxylated HIF1-alpha and serves as a
recognition component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. In hypoxia or
secondary to a mutated VHL gene, the nondegraded HIF1-alpha forms a
heterodimer with HIF1-beta and leads to increased transcription of
hypoxia-inducible genes, including EPO. Pastore et al. (2003) reported 7
erythrocytosis patients with VHL mutations in both alleles
(608537.0021-608537.0024). Two Danish sibs and an American boy were
homozygous for the R200W mutation (608537.0019). Three unrelated white
Americans were compound heterozygous for R200W and another VHL mutation:
L188V (608537.0014) in 2 and P192A (608537.0023) in the third.
Additionally, a Croatian boy was homozygous for an H191D mutation
(608537.0024). Pastore et al. (2003) stated that they had not observed
VHL syndrome-associated tumors in subjects with erythrocytosis or their
heterozygous relatives. They found that up to half of the consecutive
patients with apparent congenital erythrocytosis and increased serum EPO
(133170) whom they had examined had mutations of both VHL alleles. They
concluded that VHL mutations are the most frequent cause of recessive
congenital erythrocytosis and define a class of disorders due to
augmented hypoxia sensing.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gemmill et al. (2002) isolated the Drosophila homolog of TRC8 (603046)
and studied its function by genetic manipulations and a yeast 2-hybrid
screen. Human and Drosophila TRC8 proteins localize to the endoplasmic
reticulum. Loss of either Drosophila Trc8 or Vhl resulted in an
identical ventral midline defect. Direct interaction between Trc8 and
Vhl in Drosophila was confirmed by GST-pull-down and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Gemmill et al. (2002) found that in
Drosophila, overexpression of Trc8 inhibited growth consistent with its
presumed role as a tumor suppressor gene. Human JAB1 (604850)
localization was dependent on VHL mutant status. Thus, the VHL, TRC8,
and JAB1 proteins appear to be linked both physically and functionally,
and all 3 may participate in the development of kidney cancer.

Ding et al. (2006) used the Cre-loxP system to delete the Vhl gene from
podocytes in the glomerular basement membrane of mice. At about 4 weeks
of age, the mice developed rapidly progressive renal disease with
hematuria, proteinuria, and renal failure with crescentic
glomerulonephritis with prominent segmental fibrin deposition and
fibrinoid necrosis. No immune deposits were present; the phenotype was
similar to human 'pauci-immune' rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
(RPGN). Gene expression profiling showed increased expression of the HIF
target gene Cxcr4 (162643) in glomeruli from both mice and humans with
RPGN. Treatment of the mice with a Cxcr4 antibody resulted in clinical
improvement, and isolated overexpression of Cxcr4 was sufficient to
cause glomerular disease. Ding et al. (2006) hypothesized that
upregulation of Cxcr4 allowed terminally differentiated podocytes to
reenter the cell cycle, proliferate, and form cellular crescents.

Hickey et al. (2007) found that mice homozygous for the Chuvash
polycythemia-associated VHL mutation (R200W; 608537.0019) developed
polycythemia similar to the human disease. Although bone marrow
cellularity and morphology was similar to controls, spleens from the
mutant mice showed increased numbers of erythroid progenitors and
megakaryocytes, as well as erythroid differentiation of splenic cells in
vitro. Further analysis showed upregulation of HIF2A (603349) and of key
target genes, including EPO, VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), and PAI1
(173360), that contribute to polycythemia.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Zehetner et al. (2008) found that
Vhl was expressed in mouse insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells.
Conditional inactivation of Vhl in beta cells promoted a diversion of
glucose away from mitochondria into lactate production, causing cells to
produce high levels of glycolytically derived ATP and to secrete
elevated levels of insulin at low glucose concentrations. Vhl-deficient
mice exhibited diminished glucose-stimulated changes in cytoplasmic
Ca(2+) concentration, electrical activity, and insulin secretion, which
culminated in impaired systemic glucose tolerance. Vhl deletion was
associated with upregulation of Hif1a and the glucose transporter Glut1,
an Hif1a target gene. Combined deletion of Vhl and Hif1a rescued the
defects due to Vhl deletion alone, implying that they resulted from
Hif1a activation.

Lee et al. (2009) generated transgenic mouse embryonic stem cells with
the homozygous VHL type 2B mutation R167Q (608537.0005). Mutant cells
had preserved regulation of both HIF-alpha factors with slightly greater
normotoxic dysregulation of HIF2-alpha. R167Q-derived teratomas had a
growth advantage and showed hemangioma formation. Homozygous mice were
embryonic lethal due to placental failure, and heterozygous mice
developed renal cysts and were predisposed to the carcinogen-promoted
renal carcinoma.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, 3-BP DEL, ILE75DEL

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ILE146DEL mutation has been renumbered as ILE75DEL.

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Latif et al.
(1993) identified an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434 of
the VHL gene, predicted to remove isoleucine-146 in the gene product.

.0002
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
VHL, SER183TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the SER254TER mutation has been renumbered as SER183TER (S183X).

In a cell line from a sporadic case of renal cell carcinoma (144700),
Latif et al. (1993) identified a 761C-A transversion in the VHL gene,
predicted to result in a ser254-to-ter (S254X) substitution.

.0003
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, ARG167TRP

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238TRP mutation has been renumbered as ARG167TRP (R167W).

In a study of 94 VHL (193300) patients without large deletions, Crossey
et al. (1994) found that the 2 most frequent mutations were missense
mutations at codon 238: 4 kindreds had a 712C-T transition, resulting in
an arg238-to-trp (R238W) change, and 5 kindreds had a 713G-A transition,
leading to an arg238-to-gln (R238Q; 608537.0005) substitution. Another
mutation 712C-G transversion, resulting in an arg238-to-gly (R238G)
substitution (608537.0004). All 3 mutations at codon 238 occurred at a
CpG dinucleotide. The authors noted that although pheochromocytoma
occurs in only about 7% of patients with VHL, a codon 238 mutation
carried a high risk (62%) of pheochromocytoma.

The R238W mutation was found by Garcia et al. (1997) in a Spanish family
in which VHL was manifested predominantly as familial pheochromocytoma
in 2 generations, consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C.

In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma (171300), consistent with
VHL syndrome type 2C, Crossey et al. (1995) identified the R238W
mutation.

Zbar et al. (1996) confirmed previous observations that germline codon
167 mutations of the VHL gene (R167W and R167Q; 608537.0005) convey a
high risk for the development of pheochromocytoma and renal cell
carcinoma. In 21 of 33 families with mutations at codon 167,
pheochromocytoma occurred, compared to 15 of 223 families without a
mutation at codon 167. The association between codon 167 mutations and
pheochromocytoma was detected in all nationalities tested. Two of 4
Japanese VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167; and 3
of 10 French VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167.

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167Q substitution in the germline
of a patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300).

In the germlines of 6 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167W substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0004
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLY

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLY mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLY (R167G).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0005
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLN

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLN mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLN (R167Q).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0006
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG161TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG232TER mutation has been renumbered as ARG161TER (R161X).

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Loeb et al.
(1994) identified a 694C-T transition in exon 3 of the VHL gene,
resulting in an amber stop codon arg232-to-ter (R232X).

Gilcrease et al. (1995) found the identical 694C-T transition as a
somatic mutation in a clear cell papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis
in a patient who showed no evidence of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and in
whom somatic cells did not contain this mutation.

.0007
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME, INCLUDED
VHL, TRP88SER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TRP159SER mutation has been renumbered as TRP88SER (W88S).

In 13 sporadic cases of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
sought somatic mutations in the VHL gene with single-strand conformation
polymorphism analyses of the tumor DNAs. An abnormal SSCP pattern was
detected in 7, and in 3 of these the mutation was successfully
characterized by direct sequencing. The somatic mutations were 2
missense mutations and 1 deletion of a single base. One of the missense
mutations was a 476G-C transversion, resulting in a trp-to-ser change.
The codon number was not noted.

In a Japanese patient with VHL (193300), the Clinical Research Group for
VHL in Japan (1995) identified the 476G-C transversion, which resulted
in a trp159-to-ser (W159S) substitution.

.0008
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VHL, LEU135PHE

In a sporadic case of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
identified a missense mutation in exon 2 of the VHL gene: a 618A-C
transversion, resulting in a leu135-to-phe substitution.

.0009
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR98HIS

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TYR169HIS mutation has been renumbered as TYR98HIS (Y98H), resulting
from a 292T-C transition.

In 14 apparently unrelated von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2A (193300)
families from the Black Forest region of Germany, Brauch et al. (1995)
found a 505T-C transition in the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr169-to-his
(Y169H) substitution. Brauch et al. (1995) suggested that more than 75
VHL germline mutations had been identified in VHL patients to that date.
The same mutation, associated with pheochromocytoma, had been identified
by Chen et al. (1995) in 2 VHL 2A families in Pennsylvania. All affected
individuals in the 16 families shared the same VHL haplotype, indicating
a founder effect. In at least one of the Pennsylvania families, the
Y169H mutation probably derived from their Pfalz ancestors, who were
among Germans who migrated to Pennsylvania.

In a patient with the Y169H mutation as the cause of VHL, Schimke et al.
(1998) found a functioning carotid paraganglioma.

Allen et al. (2001) performed a longitudinal clinical study and DNA
analysis of 24 family members, 16 of whom exhibited a 505T-C change in
exon 1 of the VHL gene. Two of the 16 were asymptomatic carriers of the
505T-C mutation. Twelve of 16 (75%) of the gene carriers had 1 or more
ocular angiomas. The mean number of ocular angiomas per gene carrier was
3.3. Six eyes had optic disc angiomas. Five gene carriers (31%) lost
vision because of ocular angiomatosis. Four patients (25%) had
cerebellar hemangioblastomas and 11 patients (69%) had
pheochromocytomas. No patient had renal cell carcinoma, consistent with
the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome type 2A. The authors stated that
recognition of the VHL syndrome 2A phenotype suggested the presence of a
specific mutation (505T-C) in the VHL gene. They suggested that
confirmation of this genotype would increase a clinician's ability to
provide favorable prognostic information to affected family members.

Bender et al. (2001) studied 125 individuals in southern Germany
carrying the 505T-C mutation. Forty-seven percent had pheochromocytoma;
36% had retinal angioma; 36%, hemangioblastoma of the spine; and 16% had
hemangioblastoma of the brain. Forty-seven percent of patients were
symptomatic; 30% were asymptomatic despite the presence of at least 1
VHL-related tumor; and 23% of the carriers had no detectable VHL lesion.
Of the 19 patients who died, 10 died of symptomatic VHL lesions. Overall
penetrance by cumulative incidence was estimated at 48% by 35 years and
88% by 70 years. Bender et al. (2001) suggested that the mortality rate
for those carrying this mutation was much lower than in unselected VHL
mutations and was comparable to that of the general population of
Germany.

.0010
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0011
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0012
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112HIS

In a large VHL (193300) family with pheochromocytoma without renal
carcinoma (VHL type 2A) studied by Tisherman et al. (1962, 1993), Zbar
et al. (1996) identified a tyr112-to-his (Y112H) mutation in the VHL
gene. Of 22 affected family members, 19 were affected with
pheochromocytoma; no affected family member had renal cell carcinoma. In
the original report (Tisherman et al., 1962), at least 7 persons had
pheochromocytoma. One or more cafe-au-lait spots (in 22 persons),
extensive hemangiomas (in 2 persons), and angiomatosis retinae (in 2
persons) were discovered in the family.

.0013
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL166PHE

In a family with VHL (193300), Gross et al. (1996) identified a
val166-to-phe (V166F) mutation in the VHL gene. Seven members had
pheochromocytoma, all without renal carcinoma.

.0014
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2, INCLUDED;;
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, LEU188VAL

In a family with VHL (193300), Neumann et al. (1995) identified a
leu188-to-val (L188V) mutation in the VHL gene. Nine patients had
pheochromocytoma without renal carcinoma (Zbar et al., 1996).

In 6 members of the same German family identified by Neumann et al.
(1995) with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C, Weirich et al. (2002)
found a P81S mutation in the VHL gene (608537.0020) which cosegregated
with the L188V mutation. Weirich et al. (2002) discussed the possible
impact of these mutations on protein function and phenotype.

In 2 unrelated white American children, a 15-year-old male and a
13-year-old female, who presented at 5 years of age with familial
erythrocytosis (ECYT2; 263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified a
562C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in the L188V mutation. In
both patients the mutation was in compound heterozygous state with the
common R200W mutation (608537.0019).

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the L188V mutation in the germline of a
patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300). The mutation was not
identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0015
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, ARG64PRO

In an uncle and his nephew with apparently isolated pheochromocytoma
(171300), van der Harst et al. (1998) found an arg64-to-pro (R64P)
mutation in the VHL gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations
identified by van der Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to
the N terminus of the VHL protein than any previously reported VHL
mutation (see also 608537.0016).

.0016
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, LEU63PRO

In a patient with apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300), van der
Harst et al. (1998) found a leu63-to-pro (L63P) mutation in the VHL
gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations identified by van der
Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to the N terminus of the
VHL protein than any previously reported VHL mutation (see also
608537.0015).

.0017
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112ASN

In a family with VHL (193300), Bradley et al. (1999) identified a 547T-A
transversion in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr112-to-asn
(Y112N) substitution. Of 13 affected individuals, 7 had renal cell
carcinoma and 1 had pheochromocytoma. The authors contrasted this family
to 2 families reported by Chen et al. (1996) that had a mutation at the
same position but causing a different amino acid change (tyr112 to his;
608537.0012). In these families, 19 of 22 affected individuals had
pheochromocytoma and none had renal cell carcinoma. Bradley et al.
(1999) concluded that different amino acid changes at the same position
can cause very distinct clinical phenotypes.

.0018
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA WITH PARANEOPLASTIC ERYTHROCYTOSIS
VHL, LEU163PRO

Wiesener et al. (2002) described a 50-year-old man, admitted to hospital
for acute myocardial infarction, who was found to have marked
erythrocytosis. Serum erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) was increased, and
ultrasonography demonstrated a mass at the upper pole of the left
kidney. Following nephrectomy, which confirmed the diagnosis of renal
cell carcinoma (144700), EPO serum concentration decreased within 7 days
and hemoglobin levels returned to normal. The patient was well 9 months
later with normal EPO serum concentration. In this patient, Wiesener et
al. (2002) reported that EPO mRNA was not detectable in normal kidney
tissue but markedly upregulated in the tumor. Hypoxia-inducible genes,
including VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), carbonic anhydrase-9 (603179),
lactate dehydrogenase-A (150000), and aldolase A (103850), were also
strongly induced in the tumor. Immunoblots showed significant
overexpression of the HIF1A (603348) and HIF2A (603349) subunits in the
tumor, and immunohistochemistry performed for HIF1A showed nuclear
accumulation of the transcription factor in virtually every tumor cell.
A mutation analysis of the VHL gene in tumor cells revealed a
leu163-to-pro (L163P) missense mutation due to a 701T-C transition in
exon 3. This mutation had previously been identified in another RCC. The
mutation was not present in other tissues of the patient. In this case,
there was a clear indication that the pronounced erythrocytosis was a
precipitating factor in the coronary thrombosis.

.0019
POLYCYTHEMIA, CHUVASH TYPE
VHL, ARG200TRP

Chuvash polycythemia, familial erythrocytosis-2 (263400) caused by this
specific mutation, is an autosomal recessive disorder of erythrocytosis
that is endemic to the mid-Volga River region. Ang et al. (2002) studied
5 multiplex Chuvash families and confirmed that polycythemia was
associated with significant elevations of serum erythropoietin (EPO;
133170) levels and ruled out a location of the gene on chromosome 11 as
had been reported previously by Vasserman et al. (1999). They also ruled
out mutation in the HIF1A gene (603348), which is located in 14q. Using
a genomewide screen, they identified a region on 3p with a lod score
greater than 2 and identified a 598C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in an arg200-to-trp (R200W) mutation in all cases. Ang et al.
(2002) concluded that the R200W substitution impairs the interaction of
VHL with HIF1-alpha, reducing the rate of degradation of HIF1-alpha and
resulting in increased expression of downstream target genes including
EPO, SLC2A1 (138140), transferrin (TF; 190000), transferrin receptor
(TFRC; 190010), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240).
Mutations in VHL had been associated with pheochromocytoma,
hemangioblastoma, and renal cell carcinoma, none of which were observed
in individuals with Chuvash polycythemia or obligate carriers of the
R200W mutation. Ang et al. (2002) stated that more than 700 mutations
had been reported in VHL (Beroud et al., 1998), but that no individual
had been found to be homozygous or compound heterozygous for germline
mutations.

Pastore et al. (2003) evaluated the role of the VHL gene in 8 children
with a history of polycythemia and an elevated serum EPO level and
identified 3 different germline VHL mutations in 4 of them. One child
was homozygous for the R200W mutation, and another was compound
heterozygous for the R200W mutation and a val130-to-leu mutation (V130L;
608537.0021). Of 2 sibs who were heterozygous for an asp126-to-tyr
mutation (D126Y; 608537.0022), 1 fulfilled some criteria of VHL syndrome
(193300); a pulmonary angioma was discovered at 10 years of age and
treated by coil embolization without effect on the polycythemia, and at
15 years of age nephrectomy was performed for a subcapsular hemangioma.

Percy et al. (2002) observed homozygosity for the R200W mutation in 3
Bangladeshi families with Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia living in
the United Kingdom.

By haplotype analysis of 101 ethnically diverse individuals with the
common R200W mutation, including 72 Chuvash individuals, Liu et al.
(2004) determined that the R200W mutation is due to a founder effect
that originated from 14,000 to 62,000 years ago.

In a matched cohort study, Gordeuk et al. (2004) found that homozygosity
for the 598C-T transition in the VHL gene was associated with vertebral
hemangiomas, varicose veins, lower blood pressures, and elevated serum
VEGF concentrations (p less than 0.0005), as well as premature mortality
related to cerebral vascular events and peripheral thrombosis.
Spinocerebellar hemangioblastomas, renal carcinomas, and
pheochromocytomas typical of classic VHL syndrome were not found,
suggesting that overexpression of HIF1-alpha and VEGF is not sufficient
for tumorigenesis. Although hemoglobin-adjusted serum erythropoietin
concentrations were approximately 10-fold higher in 598C-T homozygotes
than in controls, erythropoietin response to hypoxia was identical.
Gordeuk et al. (2004) concluded that Chuvash polycythemia is a distinct
VHL syndrome manifested by thrombosis, vascular abnormalities, and
intact hypoxic regulation despite increased basal expression of
hypoxia-regulated genes.

Cario et al. (2005) reported a Turkish patient who was homozygous for
the R200W mutation. Haplotype analysis showed a different haplotype than
that associated with the Chuvash population, indicating that the
mutation arose independently and is not geographically restricted.

Perrotta et al. (2006) found that the R200W missense mutation (598C-T)
causing Chuvash polycythemia is more frequent on the island of Ischia in
the Bay of Naples (0.070) than it is in Chuvashia (0.057). The haplotype
of all patients in Ischia matched that identified in the Chuvash
cluster, thus supporting the single founder hypothesis. Perrotta et al.
(2006) also found that unaffected heterozygotes had increased HIF1-alpha
activity, which might confer a biochemical advantage for mutation
maintenance. They suggested that this form of familial polycythemia may
be endemic in other regions of the world, a hypothesis supported by the
reports of Percy et al. (2002, 2003).

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the R200W and H191D (608537.0024) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the R200W mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0020
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, PRO81SER

In 6 members of a German family in which the L188V mutation in the VHL
gene (608537.0014) had previously been identified in association with
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C (193300), Weirich et al. (2002)
identified a 454C-T transition in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a
pro81-to-ser (P81S) mutation. The concurrent P81S mutation was
identified by novel screening approaches, including denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing. The 2
mutations cosegregated with the syndrome. Weirich et al. (2002)
discussed the possible impact of the mutations on protein function and
phenotype.

.0021
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, VAL130LEU

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0022
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, ASP126TYR

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0023
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, PRO192SER

In a 10-year-old white American boy who presented at age 9 years with
familial erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for a 574C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in a pro192-to-ser (P192S) change, and the common R200W
mutation (608537.0019).

.0024
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, HIS191ASP

In a 17-year-old Croatian boy who presented at age 1 year with familial
erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified homozygosity
for a 571C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in a his191-to-asp
(H191D) change.

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the H191D and R200W (608537.0019) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the H191D mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0025
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL84LEU

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the VAL155LEU (V155L) mutation has been renumbered as V84L.

In 2 sibs from Wales with bilateral pheochromocytoma without other
features of VHL syndrome, consistent with VHL type 2C (193300), Crossey
et al. (1995) identified a heterozygous 463G-T transversion in exon 1 of
the VHL gene, resulting in a val155-to-leu (V155L) substitution.

Abbott et al. (2006) identified the V84L substitution in affected
individuals from 3 unrelated families with early-onset isolated
pheochromocytoma consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C. Although no other
signs of VHL syndrome were present in 7 patients, 1 patient was
suspected to have a spinal hemangioblastoma based on imaging studies.

.0026
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, GLY93SER

In the germlines of 2 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified a 490G-A transition in exon 1
of the VHL gene, resulting in a gly93-to-ser (G93S) substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0027
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, GLN164ARG

In a 2.5-year-old girl who presented with a pheochromocytoma but no
other manifestations of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Sovinz et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 491A-G transition in exon 3 of the
VHL gene, resulting in an gln164-to-arg (Q164R) substitution in a
protein surface residue. Genotyping of the family indicated that she
inherited the mutation from her father, in whom it occurred de novo.
Although he was in good health and asymptomatic, detailed physical
examination found a retinal angioma, an adrenal adenoma, and bilateral
pheochromocytoma, consistent with VHL syndrome. Sovinz et al. (2010)
noted that Ong et al. (2007) had identified the Q164R mutation in a
family in which a patient developed pheochromocytoma at age 10 years and
retinal angioma at age 23 years, suggesting that this mutation may be
associated with early onset of symptoms.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Herman et al. (1994); Neumann and Wiestler (1991)
REFERENCE 1. Abbott, M.-A.; Nathanson, K. L.; Nightingale, S.; Maher, E. R.;
Greenstein, R. M.: The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) germline mutation
V84L manifests as early-onset bilateral pheochromocytoma. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 140A: 685-690, 2006.

2. Allen, R. C.; Webster, A. R.; Sui, R.; Brown, J.; Taylor, C. M.;
Stone, E. M.: Molecular characterization and ophthalmic investigation
of a large family with type 2A von Hippel-Lindau disease. Arch. Ophthal. 119:
1659-1665, 2001.

3. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Polyakova,
L. A.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Kralovics, R.; Stockton, D. W.; Prchal,
J. T.: Endemic polycythemia in Russia: mutation in the VHL gene. Blood
Cell Molec. Dis. 28: 57-62, 2002.

4. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Hirota, K.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Jelinek, J.;
Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Mole, D.;
Maxwell, P. H.; Stockton, D. W.; Semenza, G. L.; Prchal, J. T.: Disruption
of oxygen homeostasis underlies congenital Chuvash polycythemia. Nature
Genet. 32: 614-621, 2002.

5. Bender, B. U.; Eng, C.; Olschewski, M.; Berger, D. P.; Laubenberger,
J.; Altehofer, C.; Kirste, G.; Orszagh, M.; van Velthoven, V.; Miosczka,
H.; Schmidt, D.; Neumann, H. P. H.: VHL c.505 T-C mutation confers
a high age related penetrance but no increased overall mortality. J.
Med. Genet. 38: 508-514, 2001.

6. Bender, B. U.; Gutsche, M.; Glasker, S.; Muller, B.; Kirste, G.;
Eng, C.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Differential genetic alterations in von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated and sporadic pheochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4568-4574, 2000.

7. Beroud, C.; Joly, D.; Gallou, C.; Staroz, F.; Orfanelli, M. T.;
Junien, C.: Software and database for the analysis of mutations in
the VHL gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 256-258, 1998.

8. Bradley, J. F.; Collins, D. L.; Schimke, R. N.; Parrott, H. N.;
Rothberg, P. G.: Two distinct phenotypes caused by two different
missense mutations in the same codon of the VHL gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 87: 163-167, 1999.

9. Brauch, H.; Kishida, T.; Glavac, D.; Chen, F.; Pausch, F.; Hofler,
H.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) disease with pheochromocytoma in the Black Forest region of
Germany: evidence for a founder effect. Hum. Genet. 95: 551-556,
1995.

10. Cario, H.; Schwarz, K.; Jorch, N.; Kyank, U.; Petrides, P. E.;
Schneider, D. T.; Uhle, R.; Debatin, K.-M.; Kohne, E.: Mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene and VHL-haplotype
analysis in patients with presumable congenital erythrocytosis. Haematologica 90:
19-24, 2005.

11. Chen, F.; Kishida, T.; Yao, M.; Hustad, T.; Glavac, D.; Dean,
M.; Gnarra, J. R.; Orcutt, M. L.; Duh, F. M.; Glenn, G.; Green, J.;
Hsia, Y. E.; Lamiell, J.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Schmidt, L.; Tory, K.;
Kuzman, I.; Stackhouse, T.; Latif, F.; Linehan, W. M.; Lerman, M.;
Zbar, B.: Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor
suppressor gene: correlations with phenotype. Hum. Mutat. 5: 66-75,
1995.

12. Chen, F.; Slife, L.; Kishida, T.; Mulvihill, J.; Tisherman, S.
E.; Zbar, B.: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: identification of a mutation associated with VHL type 2A. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 716-717, 1996.

13. Clifford, S. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Smallwood, A. C.; Mole, D. R.;
Woodward, E. R.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Maher, E. R.:
Contrasting effects on HIF-1-alpha regulation by disease-causing pVHL
mutations correlate with patterns of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1029-1038, 2001.

14. Clinical Research Group for VHL in Japan: Germline mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in Japanese VHL. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 2233-2237, 1995.

15. Corn, P. G.; McDonald, E. R., III; Herman, J. G.; El-Deiry, W.
S.: Tat-binding protein-1, a component of the 26S proteasome, contributes
to the E3 ubiquitin ligase function of the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Nature
Genet. 35: 229-237, 2003.

16. Crossey, P. A.; Eng, C.; Ginalska-Malinowska, M.; Lennard, T.
W. J.; Wheeler, D. C.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau disease in familial phaeochromocytoma. J.
Med. Genet. 32: 885-886, 1995.

17. Crossey, P. A.; Foster, K.; Richards, F. M.; Phipps, M. E.; Latif,
F.; Tory, K.; Jones, M. H.; Bentley, E.; Kumar, R.; Lerman, M. I.;
Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic investigations of the mechanism of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: analysis of allele loss in VHL tumours. Hum. Genet. 93:
53-58, 1994.

18. Crossey, P. A.; Richards, F. M.; Foster, K.; Green, J. S.; Prowse,
A.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of intragenic mutations in the
von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene and correlation with
disease phenotype. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1303-1308, 1994.

19. Ding, M.; Cui, S.; Li, C.; Jothy, S.; Haase, V.; Steer, B. M.;
Marsden, P. A.; Pippin, J.; Shankland, S.; Rastaldi, M. P.; Cohen,
C. D.; Kretzler, M.; Quaggin, S. E.: Loss of the tumor suppressor
Vhlh leads to upregulation of Cxcr4 and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in mice. Nature Med. 12: 1081-1087, 2006.

20. Duan, D. R.; Humphrey, J. S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Weng, Y.; Sukegawa,
J.; Lee, S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Characterization
of the VHL tumor suppressor gene product: localization, complex formation,
and the effect of natural inactivating mutations. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 6459-6463, 1995.

21. Duan, D. R.; Pause, A.; Burgess, W. H.; Aso, T.; Chen, D. Y. T.;
Garrett, K. P.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner,
R. D.: Inhibition of transcription elongation by the VHL tumor suppressor
protein. Science 269: 1402-1406, 1995.

22. Eng, C.; Crossey, P. A.; Mulligan, L. M.; Healey, C. S.; Houghton,
C.; Prowse, A.; Chew, S. L.; Dahia, P. L. M.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.;
Toledo, S. P. A.; Smith, D. P.; Maher, E. R.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Mutations
in the RET proto-oncogene and the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour
suppressor gene in sporadic and syndromic phaeochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Genet. 32: 934-937, 1995.

23. Epstein, A. C. R.; Gleadle, J. M.; McNeill, L. A.; Hewitson, K.
S.; O'Rourke, J.; Mole, D. R.; Mukherji, M.; Metzen, E.; Wilson, M.
I.; Dhanda, A.; Tian, Y.-M.; Masson, N.; Hamilton, D. L.; Jaakkola,
P.; Barstead, R.; Hodgkin, J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: C. elegans EGL-9 and mammalian homologs
define a family of dioxygenases that regulate HIF by prolyl hydroxylation. Cell
107: 43-54, 2001.

24. Fearon, E. R.: Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and
nature of cancer. Science 278: 1043-1050, 1997.

25. Feldman, D. E.; Thulasiraman, V.; Ferreyra, R. G.; Frydman, J.
: Formation of the VHL-elongin BC tumor suppressor complex is mediated
by the chaperonin TRiC. Molec. Cell 1051-1061, 1999.

26. Gallou, C.; Chauveau, D.; Richard, S.; Joly, D.; Giraud, S.; Olschwang,
S.; Martin, N.; Saquet, C.; Chretien, Y.; Mejean, A.; Correas, J.-M.;
Benoit, G.; Colombeau, P.; Grunfeld, J.-P.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.
: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau families with
renal lesions. Hum. Mutat. 24: 215-224, 2004. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Mutat. 24: 435-436, 2004.

27. Gallou, C.; Joly, D.; Mejean, A.; Staroz, F.; Martin, N.; Tarlet,
G.; Orfanelli, M. T.; Bouvier, R.; Droz, D.; Chretien, Y.; Marechal,
J. M.; Richard, S.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.: Mutations of the VHL
gene in sporadic renal cell carcinoma: definition of a risk factor
for VHL patients to develop an RCC. Hum. Mutat. 13: 464-475, 1999.

28. Garcia, A.; Matias-Guiu, X.; Cabezas, R.; Chico, A.; Prat, J.;
Baiget, M.; De Leiva, A.: Molecular diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau
disease in a kindred with a predominance of familial phaeochromocytoma. Clin.
Endocr. 46: 359-363, 1997.

29. Gemmill, R. M.; Bemis, L. T.; Lee, J. P.; Sozen, M. A.; Baron,
A.; Zeng, C.; Erickson, P. F.; Hooper, J. E.; Drabkin, H. A.: The
TRC8 hereditary kidney cancer gene suppresses growth and functions
with VHL in a common pathway. Oncogene 21: 3507-3516, 2002.

30. Gilcrease, M. Z.; Schmidt, L.; Zbar, B.; Truong, L.; Rutledge,
M.; Wheeler, T. M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau mutation in clear cell
papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis. Hum. Path. 26: 1341-1346,
1995.

31. Glasker, S.; Sohn, T.-S.; Okamoto, H.; Li, J.; Lonser, R. R.;
Oldfield, E. H.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Zhuang, Z.: Second hit deletion
size in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Ann. Neurol. 59: 105-110, 2006.

32. Gnarra, J. R.; Ward, J. M.; Porter, F. D.; Wagner, J. R.; Devor,
D. E.; Grinberg, A.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Westphal, H.; Klausner, R.
D.; Marston Linehan, W.: Defective placental vasculogenesis causes
embryonic lethality in VHL-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
9102-9107, 1997.

33. Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Okhotin,
D.; Voloshin, Y.; Choyke, P. L.; Butman, J. A.; Jedlickova, K.; Prchal,
J. T.; Polyakova, L. A.: Congenital disorder of oxygen sensing: association
of the homozygous Chuvash polycythemia VHL mutation with thrombosis
and vascular abnormalities but not tumors. Blood 103: 3924-3932,
2004.

34. Gross, D. J.; Avishai, N.; Meiner, V.; Filon, D.; Zbar, B.; Abeliovich,
D.: Familial pheochromocytoma associated with a novel mutation in
the von Hippel-Lindau gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 81: 147-149,
1996.

35. Haase, V. H.; Glickman, J. N.; Socolovsky, M.; Jaenisch, R.:
Vascular tumors in livers with targeted inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 1583-1588, 2001.

36. Hergovich, A.; Lisztwan, J.; Barry, R.; Ballschmieter, P.; Krek,
W.: Regulation of microtubule stability by the von Hippel-Lindau
tumour suppressor protein pVHL. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 64-70, 2003.

37. Herman, J. G.; Latif, F.; Weng, Y.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Liu,
S.; Samid, D.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Guarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Baylin,
S. B.: Silencing of the VHL tumor-suppressor gene by DNA methylation
in renal carcinomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9700-9704, 1994.

38. Hickey, M. M.; Lam, J. C.; Bezman, N. A.; Rathmell, W. K.; Simon,
M. C.: von Hippel-Lindau mutation in mice recapitulates Chuvash polycythemia
via hypoxia-inducible factor-2-alpha signaling and splenic erythropoiesis. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 3879-3889, 2007.

39. Hoffman, M. A.; Ohh, M.; Yang, H.; Kico, J. M.; Ivan, M.; Kaelin,
W. G., Jr.: von Hippel-Lindau, protein mutants linked to type 2C
VHL disease preserve the ability to downregulated HIF. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 1019-1027, 2001.

40. Hon, W.-C.; Wilson, M. I.; Harlos, K.; Claridge, T. D. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Pugh, C. W.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Stuart, D. I.;
Jones, E. Y.: Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline
in HIF-1-alpha by pVHL. Nature 417: 975-978, 2002.

41. Iliopoulos, O.; Kibel, A.; Gray, S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: Tumour
suppression by the human von Hippel-Lindau gene product. Nature Med. 1:
822-826, 1995.

42. Iliopoulos, O.; Levy, A. P.; Jiang, C.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Goldberg,
M. A.: Negative regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by the von
Hippel-Lindau protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10595-10599, 1996.

43. Iliopoulos, O.; Ohh, M.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: pVHL(19) is a biologically
active product of the von Hippel-Lindau gene arising from internal
translation initiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 11661-11666, 1998.

44. Ivan, M.; Kondo, K.; Yang, H.; Kim, W.; Valiando, J.; Ohh, M.;
Salic, A.; Asara, J. M.; Lane, W. S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: HIF-alpha
targeted for VHL-mediated destruction by proline hydroxylation: implications
for O(2) sensing. Science 292: 464-468, 2001.

45. Ivanov, S. V.; Kuzmin, I.; Wei, M.-H.; Pack, S.; Geil, L.; Johnson,
B. E.; Stanbridge, E. J.; Lerman, M. I.: Down-regulation of transmembrane
carbonic anhydrases in renal cell carcinoma cell lines by wild-type
von Hippel-Lindau transgenes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 12596-12601,
1998.

46. Jaakkola, P.; Mole, D. R.; Tian, Y.-M.; Wilson, M. I.; Gielbert,
J.; Gaskell, S. J.; von Kriegsheim, A.; Hebestreit, H. F.; Mukherji,
M.; Schofield, C. J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Ratcliffe, P. J.
: Targeting of HIF-alpha to the von Hippel-Lindau ubiquitylation complex
by O(2)-regulated prolyl hydroxylation. Science 292: 468-472, 2001.

47. Kanno, H.; Kondo, K.; Ito, S.; Yamamoto, I.; Fujii, S.; Torigoe,
S.; Sakai, N.; Hosaka, M.; Shuin, T.; Yao, M.: Somatic mutations
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in sporadic central
nervous system hemangioblastomas. Cancer Res. 54: 4845-4847, 1994.

48. Kanno, H.; Saljooque, F.; Yamamoto, I.; Hattori, S.; Yao, M.;
Shuin, T.; U, H.-S.: Role of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
protein during neuronal differentiation. Cancer Res. 60: 2820-2824,
2000.

49. Kenck, C.; Wilhelm, M.; Bugert, P.; Staehler, G.; Kovacs, G.:
Mutation of the VHL gene is associated exclusively with the development
of non-papillary renal cell carcinomas. J. Path. 179: 157-161, 1996.

50. Kibel, A.; Iliopoulos, O.; DeCaprio, J. A.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.
: Binding of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein to elongin
B and C. Science 269: 1444-1446, 1995.

51. Kuzmin, I.; Duh, F.-M.; Latif, F.; Geil, L.; Zbar, B.; Lerman,
M. I.: Identification of the promoter of the human von Hippel-Landau
disease tumor suppressor gene. Oncogene 10: 2185-2194, 1995.

52. Latif, F.; Tory, K.; Gnarra, J.; Yao, M.; Duh, F.-M.; Orcutt,
M. L.; Stackhouse, T.; Kuzmin, I.; Modi, W.; Geil, L.; Schmidt, L.;
Zhou, F.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Chen, F.; Glenn, G.; Choyke, P.; Walther,
M. M.; Weng, Y.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Dean, M.; Glavac, D.; Richards, F.
M.; Crossey, P. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Le Paslier, D.; Chumakov,
I.; Cohen, D.; Chinault, A. C.; Maher, E. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Zbar,
B.; Lerman, M. I.: Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease
tumor suppressor gene. Science 260: 1317-1320, 1993.

53. Lee, C. M.; Hickey, M. M.; Sanford, C. A.; McGuire, C. G.; Cowey,
C. L.; Simon, M. C.; Rathmell, W. K.: VHL type 2B gene mutation moderates
HIF dosage in vitro and in vivo. Oncogene 28: 1694-1705, 2009.

54. Lee, S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Humphrey, J. S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan,
W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product is determined by cell
density. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1770-1775, 1996.

55. Liu, E.; Percy, M. J.; Amos, C. I.; Guan, Y.; Shete, S.; Stockton,
D. W.; McMullin, M. F.; Polyakova, L. A.; Ang, S. O.; Pastore, Y.
D.; Jedlickova, K.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Gordeuk, V.; Prchal, J. T.:
The worldwide distribution of the VHL 598C-T mutation indicates a
single founder effect. Blood 103: 1937-1940, 2004.

56. Loeb, D. B.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Stajich, J. M.; Vance, J. M.
: A novel mutation in the von Hippel-Lindau gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1423-1424, 1994.

57. Lolkema, M. P.; Mans, D. A.; Ulfman, L. H.; Volpi, S.; Voest,
E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Allele-specific regulation of primary cilia
function by the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 16: 73-78, 2008.

58. Maher, E. R.; Yates, J. R. W.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Statistical
analysis of the two stage mutation model in von Hippel-Lindau disease,
and in sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma and renal cell carcinoma. J.
Med. Genet. 27: 311-314, 1990.

59. Mahon, P. C.; Hirota, K.; Semenza, G. L.: FIH-1: a novel protein
that interacts with HIF-1-alpha and VHL to mediate repression of HIF-1
transcriptional activity. Genes Dev. 15: 2675-2686, 2001.

60. Maranchie, J. K.; Afonso, A.; Albert, P. S.; Kalyandrug, S.; Phillips,
J. L.; Zhou, S.; Peterson, J.; Ghadimi, B. M.; Hurley, K.; Riss, J.;
Vasselli, J. R.; Ried, T.; Zbar, B.; Choyke, P.; Walther, M. M.; Klausner,
R. D.; Linehan, W. M.: Solid renal tumor severity in von Hippel Lindau
disease is related to germline deletion length and location. Hum.
Mutat. 23: 40-46, 2004.

61. Maxwell, P. H.; Wiesener, M. S.; Chang, G.-W.; Clifford, S. C.;
Vaux, E. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Wykoff, C. C.; Pugh, C. W.; Maher, E.
R.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: The tumour suppressor protein VHL targets hypoxia-inducible
factors for oxygen-dependent proteolysis. Nature 399: 271-275, 1999.

62. Mehta, R.; Steinkraus, K. A.; Sutphin, G. L.; Ramos, F. J.; Shamieh,
L. S.; Huh, A.; Davis, C.; Chandler-Brown, D.; Kaeberlein, M.: Proteasomal
regulation of the hypoxic response modulates aging in C. elegans. Science 324:
1196-1198, 2009.

63. Min, J.-H.; Yang, H.; Ivan, M.; Gertler, F.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.;
Pavletich, N. P.: Structure of an HIF-1-alpha-pVHL complex: hydroxyproline
recognition in signaling. Science 296: 1886-1889, 2002.

64. Mukhopadhyay, D.; Knebelmann, B.; Cohen, H. T.; Ananth, S.; Sukhatme,
V. P.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product interacts
with Sp1 to repress vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity. Molec
. Cell. Biol. 17: 5629-5639, 1997.

65. Neumann, H. P. H.; Bausch, B.; McWhinney, S. R.; Bender, B. U.;
Gimm, O.; Franke, G.; Schipper, J.; Klisch, J.; Altehoefer, C.; Zerres,
K.; Januszewicz, A.; Eng, C.: Germ-line mutations in nonsyndromic
pheochromocytoma. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1459-1466, 2002.

66. Neumann, H. P. H.; Berger, D. P.; Sigmund, G.; Blum, U.; Schmidt,
D.; Parmer, R. J.; Volk, B.; Kirste, G.: Pheochromocytomas, multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2, and von Hippel-Lindau disease. New Eng.
J. Med. 329: 1531-1538, 1993. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 331:
1535 only, 1994.

67. Neumann, H. P. H.; Eng, C.; Mulligan, L. M.; Glavac, D.; Zauner,
I.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Crossey, P. A.; Maher, E. R.; Brauch, H.: Consequences
of direct genetic testing for germline mutations in the clinical management
of families with multiple endocrine neoplasia, type II. JAMA 274:
1149-1151, 1995.

68. Neumann, H. P. H.; Wiestler, O. D.: Clustering of features of
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome: evidence for a complex genetic locus. Lancet 337:
1052-1054, 1991.

69. Nordstrom-O'Brien, M.; van der Luijt, R. B.; van Rooijen, E.;
van den Ouweland, A. M.; Majoor-Krakauer, D. F.; Lolkema, M. P.; van
Brussel, A.; Voest, E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Genetic analysis of von
Hippel-Lindau disease. Hum. Mutat. 31: 521-537, 2010.

70. Oberstrass, J.; Reifenberger, G.; Reifenberger, J.; Wechsler,
W.; Collins, V. P.: Mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor
gene in capillary haemangioblastomas of the central nervous system. J.
Path. 179: 151-156, 1996.

71. Ohh, M.; Yauch, R. L.; Lonergan, K. M.; Whaley, J. M.; Stemmer-Rachamimov,
A. O.; Louis, D. N.; Gavin, B. J.; Kley, N.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Iliopoulos,
O.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein is required for
proper assembly of an extracellular fibronectin matrix. Molec. Cell 1:
959-968, 1998.

72. Olschwang, S.; Richard, S.; Boisson, C.; Giraud, S.; Laurent-Puig,
P.; Resche, F.; Thomas, G.: Germline mutation profile of the VHL
gene in von Hippel-Lindau disease and in sporadic hemangioblastoma. Hum.
Mutat. 12: 424-430, 1998.

73. Ong, K. R.; Woodward, E. R.; Killick, P.; Lim, C.; Macdonald,
F.; Maher, E. R.: Genotype-phenotype correlations in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Mutat. 28: 143-149, 2007.

74. Pastore, Y.; Jedlickova, K.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Fahner, J.; Hasle,
H.; Prchal, J. F.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations of von Hippel-Lindau
tumor-suppressor gene and congenital polycythemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
412-419, 2003. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 598 only, 2004.

75. Pastore, Y. D.; Jelinek, J.; Ang, S.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Jedlickova,
K.; Krishnamurti, L.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations in the VHL gene in
sporadic apparently congenital polycythemia. Blood 101: 1591-1595,
2003.

76. Pause, A.; Lee, S.; Lonergan, K. M.; Klausner, R. D.: The von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene is required for cell cycle exit
upon serum withdrawal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 993-998, 1998.

77. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Jowitt, S. N.; Potter, M.; Treacy,
M.; Watson, W. H.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia
in 4 families of Asian and Western European ancestry. Blood 102:
1097-1099, 2003.

78. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Treacy, M.; Potter, M.; Watson,
W. H.; Jowitt, S. N.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Identification of the Chuvash-type
congenital polycythemia in patients of Asian and Western European
ancestry. Blood 100: 660 only, 2002.

79. Perrotta, S.; Nobili, B.; Ferraro, M.; Migliaccio, C.; Borriello,
A.; Cucciolla, V.; Martinelli, V.; Rossi, F.; Punzo, F.; Cirillo,
P.; Parisi, G.; Zappia, V.; Rotoli, B.; Ragione, F. D.: Von Hippel-Lindau-dependent
polycythemia is endemic on the island of Ischia: identification of
a novel cluster. Blood 107: 514-519, 2006.

80. Richard, S.; Croisille, L.; Yvart, J.; Casadeval, N.; Eschwege,
P.; Aghakhani, N.; David, P.; Gaudric, A.; Scigalla, P.; Hermine,
O.: Paradoxical secondary polycythemia in von Hippel-Lindau patients
treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor therapy. Blood 99:
3851-3853, 2002.

81. Richards, F. M.; Schofield, P. N.; Fleming, S.; Maher, E. R.:
Expression of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene
during human embryogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 639-644, 1996.

82. Roe, J.-S.; Kim, H.; Lee, S.-M.; Kim, S.-T.; Cho, E.-J.; Youn,
H.-D.: p53 stabilization and transactivation by a von Hippel-Lindau
protein. Molec. Cell 22: 395-405, 2006.

83. Rubenstein, J. L.; Yaari, H.: von Hippel-Lindau and the genetics
of astrocytoma. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 86: 142-143, 1994.

84. Russell, R. C.; Sufan, R. I.; Zhou, B.; Heir, P.; Bunda, S.; Sybingco,
S. S.; Greer, S. N.; Roche, O.; Heathcote, S. A.; Chow, V. W. K.;
Boba, L. M.; Richmond, T. D.; Hickey, M. M.; Barber, D. L.; Cheresh,
D. A.; Simon, M. C.; Irwin, M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Ohh, M.: Loss of JAK2
regulation via a heterodimeric VHL-SOCS1 E3 ubiquitin ligase underlies
Chuvash polycythemia. Nature Med. 17: 845-853, 2011.

85. Schimke, R. N.; Collins, D. L.; Rothberg, P. G.: Functioning
carotid paraganglioma in the von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 80: 533-534, 1998.

86. Schoenfeld, A.; Davidowitz, E. J.; Burk, R. D.: A second major
native von Hippel-Lindau gene product, initiated from an internal
translation start site, functions as a tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 95: 8817-8822, 1998.

87. Sovinz, P.; Urban, C.; Uhrig, S.; Stepan, V.; Lackner, H.; Schwinger,
W.; Benesch, M.; Moser, A.; Spuller, E.; Speicher, M. R.: Pheochromocytoma
in a 2.75-year-old-girl with a germline von Hippel-Lindau mutation
Q164R. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 1752-1755, 2010.

88. Staller, P.; Sulitkova, J.; Lisztwan, J.; Moch, H.; Oakeley, E.
J.; Krek, W.: Chemokine receptor CXCR4 downregulated by von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor pVHL. Nature 425: 307-311, 2003.

89. Tisherman, S. E.; Gregg, F. J.; Danowski, T. S.: Familial pheochromocytoma. JAMA 182:
152-156, 1962.

90. Tisherman, S. E.; Tisherman, B. G.; Tisherman, S. A.; Dunmire,
S.; Levey, G. S.; Mulvihill, J. J.: Three-decade investigation of
familial pheochromocytoma: an allele of von Hippel-Lindau disease? Arch.
Int. Med. 153: 2550-2556, 1993.

91. Tyers, M.; Willems, A. R.: One ring to rule a superfamily of
E3 ubiquitin ligases. Science 284: 602-604, 1999.

92. van der Harst, E.; de Krijger, R. R.; Dinjens, W. N. M.; Weeks,
L. E.; Bonjer, H. J.; Bruining, H. A.; Lamberts, S. W. J.; Koper,
J. W.: Germline mutations in the vhl gene in patients presenting
with phaeochromocytomas. Int. J. Cancer. 77: 337-340, 1998.

93. Vasserman, N. N.; Karzakova, L. M.; Tverskaya, S. M.; Saperov,
V. N.; Muchukova, O. M.; Pavlova, G. P.; Efimova, N. K.; Vankina,
N. N.; Evgrafov, O. V.: Localization of the gene responsible for
familial benign polycythemia to chromosome 11q23. Hum. Hered. 49:
129-132, 1999.

94. Vogelstein, B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/6/1995.

95. Wait, S. D.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Lonser, R. R.; Chang, D. T.; Finn,
M. A.; Bhowmick, D. A.; Pack, S. D.; Oldfield, E. H.; Zhuang, Z.:
Somatic mutations in VHL germline deletion kindred correlate with
mild phenotype. Ann. Neurol. 55: 236-240, 2004.

96. Wang, Y.; Roche, O.; Yan, M. S.; Finak, G.; Evans, A. J.; Metcalf,
J. L.; Hast, B. E.; Hanna, S. C.; Wondergem, B.; Furge, K. A.; Irwin,
M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Teh, B. T.; Grinstein, S.; Park, M.; Marsden, P.
A.; Ohh, M.: Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen-sensing pathway. Nature
Med. 15: 319-324, 2009.

97. Wang, Y.; Wan, C.; Deng, L.; Liu, X.; Cao, X.; Gilbert, S. R.;
Bouxsein, M. L.; Faugere, M.-C.; Guldberg, R. E.; Gerstenfeld, L.
C.; Haase, V. H.; Johnson, R. S.; Schipani, E.; Clemens, T. L.: The
hypoxia-inducible factor alpha pathway couples angiogenesis to osteogenesis
during skeletal development. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 1616-1626, 2007.

98. Weirich, G.; Klein, B.; Wohl, T.; Engelhardt, D.; Brauch, H.:
VHL2C phenotype in a German von Hippel-Lindau family with concurrent
VHL germline mutations P81S and L188V. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87:
5241-5246, 2002.

99. Wiesener, M. S.; Seyfarth, M.; Warnecke, C.; Jurgensen, J. S.;
Rosenberger, C.; Morgan, N. V.; Maher, E. R.; Frei, U.; Eckardt, K.-U.
: Paraneoplastic erythrocytosis associated with an inactivating point
mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau gene in a renal cell carcinoma. Blood 99:
3562-3565, 2002.

100. Yang, H.; Minamishima, Y. A.; Yan, Q.; Schlisio, S.; Ebert, B.
L.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, L.; Kim, W. Y.; Olumi, A. F.; Kaelin, W. G.,
Jr.: pVHL acts as an adaptor to promote the inhibitory phosphorylation
of the NF-kappa-B agonist Card9 by CK2. Molec. Cell 28: 15-27, 2007.

101. Yoshida, M.; Yao, M.; Ishikawa, I.; Kishida, T.; Nagashima, Y.;
Kondo, K.; Nakaigawa, N.; Hosaka, M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene mutation in clear-cell renal carcinomas associated with end-stage
renal disease/acquired cystic disease of the kidney. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 35: 359-364, 2002.

102. Zatyka, M.; da Silva, N. F.; Clifford, S. C.; Morris, M. R.;
Wiesener, M. S.; Eckardt, K.-U.; Houlston, R. S.; Richards, F. M.;
Latif, F.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of cyclin D1 and other novel
targets for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene by expression
array analysis and investigation of cyclin D1 genotype as a modifier
in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Cancer Res. 62: 3803-3811, 2002.

103. Zatyka, M.; Morrissey, C.; Kuzmin, I.; Lerman, M. I.; Latif,
F.; Richards, F. M.; Maher, E. R.: Genetic and functional analysis
of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene promoter. J.
Med. Genet. 39: 463-472, 2002.

104. Zbar, B.; Kishida, T.; Chen, F.; Schmidt, L.; Maher, E. R.; Richards,
F. M.; Crossey, P. A.; Webster, A. R.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Brauch, H.; Glavac, D.; and 14 others: Germline mutations
in the Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in families from North
America, Europe, and Japan. Hum. Mutat. 8: 348-357, 1996.

105. Zehetner, J.; Danzer, C.; Collins, S.; Eckhardt, K.; Gerber,
P. A.; Ballschmieter, P.; Galvanovskis, J.; Shimomura, K.; Ashcroft,
F. M.; Thorens, B.; Rorsman, P.; Krek, W.: pVHL is a regulator of
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion in pancreatic beta cells. Genes
Dev. 22: 3135-3146, 2008.

106. Zhuang, Z.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Roth, M. J.; Gnarra, J.; Linehan,
W. M.; Liotta, L. A.; Lubensky, I. A.: Von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene deletion detected in microdissected sporadic human colon carcinoma
specimens. Hum. Path. 27: 152-156, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/30/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/1/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/28/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/2/2004

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/17/2004

EDITED carol: 04/22/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 8/5/2011
wwang: 8/5/2011
ckniffin: 8/3/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 11/10/2010
ckniffin: 10/28/2010
wwang: 9/3/2010
ckniffin: 8/30/2010
alopez: 4/14/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 9/29/2009
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
wwang: 6/11/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/1/2009
carol: 9/23/2008
terry: 9/10/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
wwang: 5/16/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 2/28/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
wwang: 8/13/2007
terry: 8/9/2007
terry: 8/1/2007
wwang: 7/12/2007
wwang: 11/13/2006
terry: 11/3/2006
ckniffin: 11/1/2006
wwang: 8/21/2006
wwang: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/14/2006
mgross: 6/14/2006
terry: 6/13/2006
carol: 5/24/2006
ckniffin: 5/23/2006
wwang: 4/24/2006
ckniffin: 4/17/2006
alopez: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
carol: 1/12/2006
ckniffin: 1/6/2006
tkritzer: 10/6/2004
terry: 9/30/2004
tkritzer: 9/2/2004
terry: 8/24/2004
tkritzer: 6/3/2004
ckniffin: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/19/2004

608277	TITLE *608277 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 15; CHST15
;;B-CELL RAG-ASSOCIATED GENE; BRAG;;
N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE 4-SULFATE 6-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE;;
GalNAc4S-6ST;;
KIAA0598
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned KIAA0598. The 3-prime untranslated
region of the transcript contains an Alu repeat. The deduced 561-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 72 kD. RT-PCR
detected high expression in all tissues examined.

By differential display of genes coexpressed with RAG1 (179615),
followed by screening a pre-B-cell cDNA library, Verkoczy et al. (1998)
cloned BRAG. The deduced protein contains 503 amino acids and has a
calculated molecular mass of 55 kD. In vitro translation resulted in a
doublet that migrated between 69 and 49 kD by SDS-PAGE. BRAG is a type
II transmembrane glycoprotein with an 81-amino acid cytoplasmic N
terminus, followed by a transmembrane domain, and a 405-amino acid
extracellular C terminus. The N terminus contains a putative
palmitoylation site and several phosphorylation sites, and the C
terminus contains 4 putative N-glycosylation sites. Verkoczy et al.
(1998) also identified a putative splice variant that contains an
in-frame 12-bp deletion. Northern blot analysis detected a 5.0-kb BRAG
transcript expressed in all B-cell lines that also expressed RAG1.
Little or no expression was detected in several nonlymphoid cell lines,
and no expression was detected in T-cell lines, irrespective of RAG1
expression. Northern blot analysis of whole tissues detected expression
in bone marrow and tonsil, but not in heart, thymus, or placenta. RNA
dot blot analysis detected high levels in fetal and adult spleen,
peripheral blood leukocytes, and lymph node, moderate levels in heart,
ovary, stomach, and brain putamen, and low levels in bone marrow and
several other tissues. Zoo blot analysis performed under low stringency
conditions indicated that the BRAG gene is conserved across eukaryotes.
High stringency conditions revealed predominant bands only in human and
baboon DNA.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) determined that BRAG is a membrane-integrated
glycoprotein that is expressed as a disulfide-linked dimer in B cells.
They found glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of BRAG, with apparent
molecular masses of about 63 and 52 kD, respectively, in the
intracellular fraction of tonsillar B cells and in transfected
erythroleukemia cells; only the glycosylated product associated with the
cell surface.

Ohtake et al. (2001) determined that the KIAA0589 protein (Nagase et
al., 1998) shares significant similarity with GalNAc4S-6ST purified from
squid cartilage. They also noted that the nucleotide sequence of
KIAA0598 is nearly identical to that of BRAG (Verkoczy et al., 1998),
but the deduced proteins are significantly different. However, the
KIAA0598 and BRAG proteins are both type II transmembrane proteins, and
both contain a 3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate
(PAPS)-binding domain characteristic of most sulfotransferases.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yuki et al. (2000) determined that the BRAG gene contains 7 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Verkoczy et al. (1998) showed that BRAG induced RAG1 expression
following transfection into a B-cell line, but not following
transfection into a nonlymphoid cell line.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) found that BRAG associated with phosphorylated
proteins in unstimulated mature B cells, but not in B cells activated
through B-cell receptor cross-linking. They presented evidence that BRAG
functions as a cell surface receptor capable of cell signaling.

Ohtake et al. (2001) characterized the enzymatic activity of KIAA0598,
which they designated GalNAc4S-6ST, following transfection into COS-7
cells and confirmed that it displays sulfotransferase activity. They
found that GalNAc4S-6ST catalyzed the transfer of sulfate from PAPS to
position 6 of the nonreducing terminal and internal N-acetylgalatosamine
4-sulfate residues in chondroitin sulfate A and dermatan sulfate. Only
nonreducing terminal N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate residues were
sulfated when a trisaccharide and a pentasaccharide with sulfated groups
at position 4 of N-acetylgalactosamine residues were used as acceptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0598
gene to chromosome 10.

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Verkoczy et al. (1998) mapped
the CHST15 gene to chromosome 10q26. Using Southern blot analysis, they
determined that CHST15 is a single-copy gene that is not likely to be a
member of a multigene family.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

2. Ohtake, S.; Ito, Y.; Fukuta, M.; Habuchi, O.: Human N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase cDNA is related to human B cell recombination
activating gene-associated gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43894-43900,
2001.

3. Verkoczy, L. K.; Guinn, B.; Berinstein, N. L.: Characterization
of the human B cell RAG-associated gene, hBRAG, as a B cell receptor
signal-enhancing glycoprotein dimer that associates with phosphorylated
proteins in resting B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20967-20979, 2000.

4. Verkoczy, L. K.; Marsden, P. A.; Berinstein, N. L.: hBRAG, a novel
B cell lineage cDNA encoding a type II transmembrane glycoprotein
potentially involved in the regulation of recombination activating
gene 1 (RAG1). Europ. J. Immun. 28: 2839-2853, 1998.

5. Yuki, M.; Yoshinaga, K.; Yamakawa, H.; Sakurada, K.; Sato, S.;
Yajima, A.; Horii, A.: Structure, expression and mutational analysis
of the hBRAG gene on 10q in the frequently deleted region in human
endometrial cancer. Oncol. Rep. 7: 1339-1342, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2010
mgross: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
mgross: 11/21/2003

612333	TITLE *612333 PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH 11; PDCD11
;;APOPTOSIS-LINKED GENE 4; ALG4;;
NF-KAPPA-B-BINDING PROTEIN; NFBP;;
KIAA0185
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDCD11 is a NF-kappa-B (NFKB1; 164011)-binding protein that colocalizes
with U3 RNA (180710) in the nucleolus and is required for rRNA
maturation and generation of 18S rRNA (Sweet et al., 2003; Sweet et al.,
2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated myeloid leukemia
cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned PDCD11, which they
designated KIAA0185. The deduced protein contains 1,884 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis detected moderate expression in testis and low
expression in placenta, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, spleen,
thymus, ovary, small intestine, colon, and peripheral blood leukocytes.
Expression was weak in heart, brain, and pancreas, and no expression was
detected in prostate.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human astrocytoma cell line cDNA
library using NFKB1 as bait, Sweet et al. (2003) cloned PDCD11, which
they called NFBP. They identified 2 isoforms, which encode a deduced
1,871-amino acid protein and a deduced 131-amino acid NFBP fragment
(NFBPF) corresponding to the NFBP C-terminal region, respectively.
PDCD11 protein contains 7 S1 RNA-binding domains and a histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) repeat and shares 82% and 26% identities with
the mouse Pdcd11 and S. cerevisiae Rrp5 orthologs, respectively.
Northern blot analysis detected a 5.5-kb PDCD11 transcript in several
cell lines and tissues. Immunofluorescence studies localized PDCD11 to
granular aggregates in the nucleus and was confirmed to be nucleolar by
mass spectrometry of proteins isolated from HeLa cell nucleoli.

Lacana and D'Adamio (1999) cloned mouse Pdcd11, which they called Alg4,
using a strategy to identify genes involved in programmed cell death.

GENE FUNCTION

Lacana and D'Adamio (1999) demonstrated that mouse Pcdc11 induced
transcription of Fas ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) leading to apoptosis.

Sweet et al. (2008) showed that PDCD11 colocalized with and
coprecipitated U3 RNA in the nucleolus. Using siRNA knockdown of PDCD11
mRNA, they demonstrated that PDCD11 was required for cleavage and
maturation of rRNA precursor and generation of the 18S rRNA species.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sweet et al. (2003) determined that the PDCD11 gene contains over 35
exons.

MAPPING

By FISH analysis, Sweet et al. (2003) mapped the PDCD11 gene to
chromosome 10q24.2-q25.1.

REFERENCE 1. Lacana, E.; D'Adamio, L.: Regulation of Fas ligand expression
and cell death by apoptosis-linked gene 4. Nature Med. 5: 542-547,
1999.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tanaka, A.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. V. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0161-KIAA0200) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 3: 17-24, 1996.

3. Sweet, T.; Khalili, K.; Sawaya, B. E.; Amini, S.: Identification
of a novel protein from glial cells based on its ability to interact
with NF-kappa-B subunits. J. Cell. Biochem. 90: 884-891, 2003.

4. Sweet, T.; Yen, W.; Khalili, K.; Amini, S.: Evidence for involvement
of NFBP in processing or ribosomal RNA. J. Cell. Physiol. 214: 381-388,
2008.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/29/2008

EDITED wwang: 09/30/2008
wwang: 9/30/2008

608210	TITLE *608210 EXOSTOSIN GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2; EXT2
;;EXOSTOSIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hecht et al. (1995) identified the candidate region for the gene
responsible for hereditary multiple exostoses linked to chromosome 11
(133701) in an affected patient who also had a chondrosarcoma. By
positional cloning and use of a chromosome 11-specific fetal brain cDNA
library, Stickens et al. (1996) identified the putative EXT2 gene, which
was predicted to encode a 718-amino acid protein with a molecular mass
of 82 kD. Both protein and DNA sequence-based algorithms detected
significant similarity with the product of the EXT1 gene (608177),
suggesting that the 2 genes are evolutionarily and functionally related.
Northern blot analysis detected a major 3.5-kb mRNA transcript and a
minor band of 3.7 to 4.0 kb in most tissues. Stickens et al. (1996)
suggested that the EXT2 gene may be expressed as a complex set of
alternatively spliced forms.

Wuyts et al. (1996) constructed a contig of YAC and P1 clones covering
the EXT2 candidate region on chromosome 11p12-p11. The EXT2 region had
been defined in large families with multiple exostoses by linkage
analysis. They also defined the candidate region through deletion
analysis in families with the Potoki-Shaffer syndrome (601224). From the
EXT2 candidate region, Wuyts et al. (1996) isolated a transcribed
sequence with homology to EXT1. Alignment of the EXT1 and EXT2 genes at
the amino acid level revealed an overall sequence identity of 30.9%. The
amino acid homology is 18% in the 5-prime region and 48% in the 3-prime
region.

Stickens and Evans (1997) isolated and characterized the mouse EXT2
gene. They found that the mouse EXT2 cDNA contains an open reading frame
encoding a predicted protein of 718 amino acids. The mouse amino acid
sequence is 95% identical to the human EXT2 protein. Northern blot
analysis showed that the gene is expressed in early stages of embryonic
development, and in situ hybridization suggested that EXT2 plays a role
in limb development.

Clines et al. (1997) noted that at least 2 homologs of the human and
mouse EXT2 genes were found in Caenorhabditis elegans, suggesting to the
authors that the genes do not function exclusively as regulators of bone
growth.

GENE STRUCTURE

Clines et al. (1997) found that the EXT2 gene consists of 14 exons, plus
2 alternative exons.

MAPPING

By positional cloning, Stickens et al. (1996) identified the EXT2 gene
in the multiple exostoses type II critical region on chromosome
11p12-p11. Clines et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Ext2 gene to chromosome
2. Information on the mapping of the EXT2 locus to 11p12-p11 was
provided by Wu et al. (1994), Hecht et al. (1995), Wuyts et al. (1995),
and Blanton et al. (1996), using linkage methods.

GENE FUNCTION

Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) presented evidence
suggesting that the EXT1 gene on chromosome 8 and the EXT2 gene on
chromosome 11 have a tumor suppressor function. They found loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) for markers linked to these 2 genes in
chondrosarcomas originating in individuals with multiple exostoses as
well as in sporadic chondrosarcomas. To explain the fact that normal
bone growth occurs concurrently with abnormal exostosis tumor growth,
Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) proposed a 2-hit tumor
formation model according to the Knudson hypothesis (Knudson, 1971). In
this model, a single germline mutation results in the predisposition for
disease and a second somatic mutational hit, usually LOH, allows for
aberrant growth.

In addition to their presumed role as tumor suppressor genes, EXT1 and
EXT2 may have roles in modulation of the hedgehog signaling pathway (see
600725) and glycosaminoglycan synthesis. Bellaiche et al. (1998)
determined that the Drosophila homolog of EXT1, dubbed 'tout-velu,' is
required for diffusion of the signaling protein hedgehog. Lind et al.
(1998) concluded that EXT1 and EXT2 are glycosyltransferases, based on
copurification of EXT2 in a bovine serum extract exhibiting this
enzymatic activity as well as increased glycosyltransferase activity in
cells overexpressing EXT2 in vitro. Simmons et al. (1999) used a yeast
2-hybrid system to document a protein interaction between the EXT2 gene
product and a novel UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase. This interaction was abrogated by a
disease-causing EXT mutation. The authors contended that the data
described the first direct physical link between EXT proteins and
components of glycosaminoglycan synthesis.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Simmons et al. (1999) found that a
conserved C-terminal region of EXT2 interacted with TRAP1 (606219) and
the glycosyltransferase GALNT5 (615129). Deletion of a conserved
histidine in EXT2 (his601) weakened its interaction with GALNT5 and
abrogated its interaction with TRAP1.

McCormick et al. (2000) noted that the proteins encoded by the EXT1 and
EXT2 genes are endoplasmic reticulum-localized type II transmembrane
glycoproteins that possess or are tightly associated with
glycosyltransferase activities involved in the polymerization of heparan
sulfate. By testing a cell line with a specific defect in EXT1 in in
vivo and in vitro assays, McCormick et al. (2000) showed that EXT2 does
not harbor significant glycosyltransferase activity in the absence of
EXT1. Instead, it appears that EXT1 and EXT2 form a heterooligomeric
complex in vivo that leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the
Golgi apparatus. Remarkably, the Golgi-localized EXT1/EXT2 complex
possesses substantially higher glycosyltransferase activity than EXT1 or
EXT2 alone, suggesting that the complex represents the biologically
relevant form of the enzyme(s). These findings provided a rationale for
the causation of hereditary multiple exostoses by loss of activity in
either of the 2 EXT genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a family with multiple exostoses (133701), Stickens et al. (1996)
identified a 4-bp deletion in the EXT2 gene (608210.0001), resulting in
a premature stop codon and truncated gene product. Stickens et al.
(1996) speculated that a second mutation event was necessary for the
development of exostoses, thus accounting for the asymmetry of exostoses
observed in the long bones.

In 2 families with multiple exostoses, Wuyts et al. (1996) identified 2
different mutations in the EXT2 gene: a nonsense mutation (608210.0002)
and a splice site mutation (608210.0003). In 5 of 17 (29%) families with
hereditary multiple exostoses, Philippe et al. (1997) identified 4
mutations in the EXT2 gene, including a missense mutation (608210.0004)
and 3 alterations that resulted in premature stop codons. Seven (41%) of
the families had mutations in the EXT1 gene.

Wuyts et al. (1998) analyzed the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in 26 EXT families
originating from 9 countries. Of the 26 families, 10 had an EXT1
mutation and 10 had an EXT2 mutation. Twelve of these mutations had not
previously been described. From a review of these and previously
reported mutations, Wuyts et al. (1998) concluded that mutations in
either the EXT1 or the EXT2 gene are responsible for most cases of
multiple exostoses. Most of the mutations in these 2 genes cause
premature termination of the EXT proteins, whereas missense mutations
are rare. The authors concluded that the development of exostoses is
mainly due to loss of function of EXT genes, consistent with the
hypothesis that the EXT genes have a tumor suppressor function.

Analyzing for EXT1 and EXT2 mutations in 34 sporadic and hereditary
osteochondromas and secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas, Bovee et al.
(1999) found mutations in the EXT1 gene, but none in the EXT2 gene.

Wuyts and Van Hul (2000) stated that 49 different EXT1 and 25 different
EXT2 mutations had been identified in patients with multiple exostoses
and that mutations in these 2 genes were responsible for over 70% of the
EXT cases. Most of the mutations caused loss of function, which is
consistent with the presumed tumor suppressor function of the EXT genes.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ligon et al. (1998) showed that
the EXT2 gene is deleted in patients with the del(11)(p11.2p12)
syndrome. Since patients with mutations in EXT2 have only multiple
exostoses, deletions affecting only the EXT2 locus cannot explain the
craniofacial anomalies, biparietal foramina, mental retardation, or
genitourinary anomalies observed in patients with proximal 11p
deletions. Therefore, deletion of other neighboring genes must be
responsible for the additional anomalies, and this chromosomal
aberration represents a true contiguous gene deletion syndrome.

Heinritz et al. (2009) identified 9 different mutations in the EXT2 gene
in 11 of 23 German patients with multiple exostoses. Eleven other
patients had mutations in the EXT1 gene; 1 patient had no detectable
mutations. Among the EXT2 mutations, there were 3 recurrent mutations,
Q172X (608210.0002), D227N (608210.0004), and Q258X (608210.0006), and 6
novel mutations (see, e.g., 608210.0007).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, 4-BP DEL

In a family with multiple exostoses type II (133701), Stickens et al.
(1996) identified a 4-bp deletion (784-787) in the EXT2 gene, resulting
in a frameshift and premature termination of translation, generating a
truncated EXT2 gene product.

.0002
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, GLN172TER

In a large EXT2 (133701) family, Wuyts et al. (1996) identified a 514C-T
transition in the EXT2 gene, resulting in a gln172-to-ter (Q172X)
substitution. The mutation was detected by SSCP analysis.

Heinritz et al. (2009) identified the Q172X mutation in a German patient
with EXT2.

.0003
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, IVSDS, G-A, +1

In a large Belgian EXT2 (133701) family, Wuyts et al. (1996) described a
G-A transition within a 5-prime donor splice site of EXT2, resulting in
aberrant splicing, exon skipping, and loss of 94 nucleotides of the
transcript (nucleotides 1080-1173) corresponding to amino acid residues
alanine-361 through glutamine-391. The deletion also produced a
frameshift and generated a stop signal at codon 404.

.0004
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, ASP227ASN

In 2 families with multiple exostoses type II (133701), Philippe et al.
(1997) found that the probands had a G-A transition in exon 4 of the
EXT2 gene, resulting in an asp227-to-asn (D227N) substitution.

Heinritz et al. (2009) identified the D227N mutation in 3 unrelated
German patients with multiple exostoses. One patient developed a pelvic
chondrosarcoma at age 40 years: tumor DNA showed loss of heterozygosity
at the EXT1 and EXT2 loci.

.0005
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, TYR222TER

In a family with multiple exostoses type II (133701), Philippe et al.
(1997) found a C-G transversion in exon 4 of the EXT2 gene, resulting in
a stop codon (Y222X).

.0006
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, GLN258TER

In a German patient with multiple exostoses type II (113701), Heinritz
et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 772C-T transition in the EXT2
gene, resulting in a gln258-to-ter (Q258X) substitution.

.0007
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, IVS4AS, A-C, -2

In a German patient with multiple exotoses type II (113701), Heinritz et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous A-to-C transversion (744-2A-C) in a
highly conserved nucleotide in intron 4 of the EXT2 gene. RT-PCR
analysis identified 2 different splice variants skipping either only
exon 5 or both exons 5 and 6. Loss of exon 5 results in a frameshift and
premature termination, whereas loss of exons 5 and 6 leads to an
in-frame deletion of 112 residues important for catalytic activity of
the protein.

REFERENCE 1. Bellaiche, Y.; The, I.; Perrimon, N.: Tout-velu is a Drosophila
homologue of the putative tumour suppressor EXT-1 and is needed for
Hh diffusion. Nature 394: 85-88, 1998.

2. Blanton, S. H.; Hogue, D.; Wagner, M.; Wells, D.; Young, I. D.;
Hecht, J. T.: Hereditary multiple exostoses: confirmation of linkage
to chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Med. Genet. 62: 150-159, 1996.

3. Bovee, J. V. M. G.; Cleton-Jansen, A.-M.; Wuyts, W.; Caethoven,
G.; Taminiau, A. H. M.; Bakker, E.; Van Hul, W.; Cornelisse, C. J.;
Hogendoorn, P. C. W.: EXT-mutation analysis and loss of heterozygosity
in sporadic and hereditary osteochondromas and secondary chondrosarcomas. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 689-698, 1999.

4. Clines, G. A.; Ashley, J. A.; Shah, S.; Lovett, M.: The structure
of the human multiple exostoses 2 gene and characterization of homologs
in mouse and Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Res. 7: 359-367, 1997.

5. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Strong, L. C.; Hansen, M. F.; Blanton,
S. H.; Wagner, M.: Hereditary multiple exostosis and chondrosarcoma:
linkage to chromosome 11 and loss of heterozygosity for EXT-linked
markers on chromosomes 11 and 8. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 1125-1131,
1995.

6. Heinritz, W.; Huffmeier, U.; Strenge, S.; Miterski, B.; Zweier,
C.; Leinung, S.; Bohring, A.; Mitulla, B.; Peters, U.; Froster, U.
G.: New mutations of EXT1 and EXT2 genes in German patients with
multiple osteochondromas. Ann. Hum. Genet. 73: 283-291, 2009.

7. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

8. Ligon, A. H.; Potocki, L.; Shaffer, L. G.; Stickens, D.; Evans,
G. A.: Gene for multiple exostoses (EXT2) maps to 11(p11.2p12) and
is deleted in patients with a contiguous gene syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 75: 538-540, 1998.

9. Lind, T.; Tufaro, F.; McCormick, C.; Lindahl, U.; Lidholt, K.:
The putative tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 are glycosyltransferases
required for the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
26265-26268, 1998.

10. McCormick, C.; Duncan, G.; Goutsos, K. T.; Tufaro, F.: The putative
tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 form a stable complex that accumulates
in the Golgi apparatus and catalyzes the synthesis of heparan sulfate. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 668-673, 2000.

11. Philippe, C.; Porter, D. E.; Emerton, M. E.; Wells, D. E.; Simpson,
A. H. R. W.; Monaco, A. P.: Mutation screening of the EXT1 and EXT2
genes in patients with hereditary multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 520-528, 1997.

12. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U.; Chansky, H.; Matsushita, M.: Loss
of heterozygosity in chondrosarcomas for markers linked to hereditary
multiple exostoses loci on chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
1132-1139, 1995.

13. Simmons, A. D.; Musy, M. M.; Lopes, C. S.; Hwang, L.-Y.; Yang,
Y.-P.; Lovett, M.: A direct interaction between EXT proteins and
glycosyltransferases is defective in hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 2155-2164, 1999.

14. Simmons, A. D.; Musy, M. M.; Lopes, C. S.; Hwang, L.-Y.; Yang,
Y.-P.; Lovett, M.: A direct interaction between EXT proteins and
glycosyltransferases is defective in hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 2155-2164, 1999.

15. Stickens, D.; Clines, G.; Burbee, D.; Ramos, P.; Thomas, S.; Hogue,
D.; Hecht, J. T.; Lovett, M.; Evans, G. A.: The EXT2 multiple exostoses
gene defines a family of putative tumour suppressor genes. Nature
Genet. 14: 25-32, 1996.

16. Stickens, D.; Evans, G. A.: Isolation and characterization of
the murine homolog of the human EXT2 multiple exostoses gene. Biochem.
Molec. Med. 61: 16-21, 1997.

17. Wu, Y.-Q.; Heutink, P.; de Vries, B. B. A.; Sandkuijl, L. A.;
van den Ouweland, A. M. W.; Niermeijer, M. F.; Galjaard, H.; Reyniers,
E.; Willems, P. J.; Halley, D. J. J.: Assignment of a second locus
for multiple exostoses to the pericentromeric region of chromosome
11. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 167-171, 1994.

18. Wuyts, W.; Ramlakhan, S.; Van Hul, W.; Hecht, J. T.; van den Ouweland,
A. M. W.; Raskind, W. H.; Hofstede, F. C.; Reyniers, E.; Wells, D.
E.; de Vries, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Hill, A.; Zalatayev, D.; Weissenbach,
J.; Wagner, M. J.; Bakker, E.; Halley, D. J. J.; Willems, P. J.:
Refinement of the multiple exostoses locus (EXT2) to a 3-cM interval
on chromosome 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 382-387, 1995.

19. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.: Molecular basis of multiple exostoses:
mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes. Hum. Mutat. 15: 220-227, 2000.

20. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; De Boulle, K.; Hendrickx, J.; Bakker,
E.; Vanhoenacker, F.; Mollica, F.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Sayli, B. S.; Pazzaglia,
U. E.; Mortier, G.; Hamel, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Matsushita, M.; Raskind,
W. H.; Willems, P. J.: Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 346-354, 1998.

21. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; Wauters, J.; Nemtsova, M.; Reyniers, E.;
Van Hul, E.; De Boulle, K.; de Vries, B. B. A.; Hendrickx, J.; Herrygers,
I.; Bossuyt, P.; Balemans, W.; Fransen, E.; Vits, L.; Coucke, P.;
Nowak, N. J.; Shows, T. B.; Mallet, L.; van den Ouweland, A. M. W.;
McGaughran, J.; Halley, D. J. J.; Willems, P. J.: Positional cloning
of a gene involved in hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 5: 1547-1557, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2004

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/28/2003

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
carol: 9/19/2013
mgross: 3/22/2013
terry: 2/28/2013
wwang: 3/3/2010
wwang: 12/8/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
terry: 1/14/2004
carol: 10/30/2003
ckniffin: 10/29/2003

107269	TITLE *107269 CD44 ANTIGEN; CD44
;;HERMES ANTIGEN;;
Pgp1;;
MDU3;;
INLU-RELATED p80 GLYCOPROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD44 is an integral cell membrane glycoprotein with a postulated role in
matrix adhesion lymphocyte activation and lymph node homing (Aruffo et
al., 1990).

CLONING

Telen et al. (1983) used a murine monoclonal antibody (A3D8) to identify
an erythrocyte antigen inhibited by the In(Lu) gene. Telen et al. (1984)
showed that the A3D8 antigenic property resides on an 80-kD red cell
membrane protein which is present in only trace amounts in In(Lu)
Lu(a-b-) red cells (INLU; 111150). Haynes (1986) had evidence that the
A1G3 and A3D8 monoclonal antibodies bind to different epitopes on the
same 80-kD molecule. The monoclonal antibody A3D8 recognized an antigen
officially called MDU3, for 'monoclonal Duke University, 3,' or CD44.
Telen (1992) knew of no evidence that the INLU and CD44 (MDU3) genes are
the same.

By screening cDNA libraries prepared from hemopoietic cell lines,
Stamenkovic et al. (1989) isolated CD44 clones. Immunoprecipitation of
CD44 from transfected COS cells and cultured cell lines detected
cell-specific expression of an 80- to 90-kD protein and a 160-kD
protein. Several minor forms of 52 to 200 kD were variably present in
different cell types. RNA blot analysis revealed transcripts of 1.6,
2.2, and 5.0 kb in hemopoietic cell lines. RNA blot analysis of
carcinoma cell lines revealed 3 patterns of expression: the first,
exemplified by melanoma cell lines, was identical to the hemopoietic
cell pattern associated with the 80- to 90-kD isoform; the second,
exemplified by a colon carcinoma cell line, showed transcripts of 2.0,
2.6, and 5.6 kb associated with the 160-kD isoform; and the third,
exemplified by another colon carcinoma cell line, was a composite of the
first 2 patterns. All primary carcinoma specimens examined showed
prevalent CD44 transcripts of either hemopoietic or composite type. The
CD44 cDNA encodes a 361-amino acid protein with a 20-residue secretory
signal peptide, a 248-residue extracellular N-terminal domain with
multiple N- and O-linked glycosylation sites, a 21-amino acid
transmembrane domain, and a 72-residue hydrophilic cytoplasmic domain.
The mature protein has a calculated molecular mass of 37 kD. Sequence
analysis suggested homology with chicken and rat cartilage link proteins
(HAPLN1; 115435).

Stefanova et al. (1989) demonstrated that the lymphocyte homing receptor
is identical to the human leukocyte surface glycoprotein called CDw44,
on the basis of studies at the Third International Workshop on Human
Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens. It also appears to be identical to
the Pgp-1 glycoprotein of Omary et al. (1988).

GENE FAMILY

A table of all the CD antigens was provided by Schlossman et al. (1994)
with a list of the common names, the size in kilodaltons, and the nature
of the protein (adhesion, myeloid, platelet, and B cell, T cell, etc.).

GENE STRUCTURE

Screaton et al. (1992) found that the CD44 gene contains 19 exons
spanning 50 kb of genomic DNA. They identified 10 alternatively spliced
exons within the extracellular domain, including 1 exon that had not
previously been reported. In addition to the inclusion or exclusion of
whole exons, additional diversity was generated through the utilization
of internal splice donor and acceptor sites within 2 of the exons. A
variation in the cytoplasmic domain was shown to result from the
alternative splicing of 2 exons. Thus the genomic structure of CD44 is
remarkably complex, and alternative splicing is the basis of its
structural and functional diversity.

Nedvetzki et al. (2003) noted that human CD44 isoforms are generated
from 9 variant exons (v2 to v10) inserted in different combinations
between 2 constant regions consisting of 5 exons at the N terminus and 4
exons at the C terminus (constant exon 19 is noncoding). Direct splicing
of constant exon 5 to constant exon 16, thereby skipping the variant
exons, generates the standard CD44 isoform.

GENE FUNCTION

Aruffo et al. (1990) demonstrated that CD44 is the main cell surface
receptor for hyaluronate. Mature lymphocytes in the circulation migrate
selectively from the bloodstream to different lymphatic tissues through
specialized high endothelial venules (HEV). Molecules on the surface of
lymphocytes called homing receptors interact specifically with HEV and
play a central role in the migration.

Splice variants of the glycoprotein CD44 may be associated with
metastases and therefore may be useful in the early detection of
metastatic potential in surgical biopsy specimens, as well as in the
early diagnosis of cancer in screening programs, assessment of remaining
disease, and early detection of recurrence (Matsumura and Tarin, 1992).
Mayer et al. (1993) found that expression of CD44, which is not found in
normal gastric mucosa and is found in only 49% of primary tumors, was
associated with distant metastases at time of diagnosis and with tumor
recurrence and increased mortality from gastric cancer.

Weber et al. (1996) noted that the CD44 gene encodes a transmembrane
protein that is expressed as a family of molecular isoforms generated
from alternative RNA splicing and posttranslational modifications.
Certain CD44 isoforms that regulate activation and migration of
lymphocytes and macrophages may also enhance local growth and metastatic
spread of tumor cells. One ligand of CD44 is hyaluronic acid, binding of
which to the NH2-terminal domain of CD44 enhances cellular aggregation
and tumor cell growth. (Krainer et al. (1991) referred to CD44 as a
'hyaladherin' -- see 601269.) Weber et al. (1996) demonstrated that
another ligand is osteopontin (166490). Osteopontin induces cellular
chemotaxis but not homotypic aggregation of cells, whereas the inverse
is true for the interaction between CD44 and hyaluronate. The
alternative responses to CD44 ligation may be exploited by tumor cells
to allow OPN-mediated metastatic spread and hyaluronate-dependent growth
in newly colonized tissues in the process of tumor metastasis.

Sherman et al. (1998) investigated the role of CD44 proteins in early
limb development. Members of this family of transmembrane glycoproteins
are expressed by cells of the limb bud, including those of the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER). Distinct CD44 variants are generated from a
single gene by alternative RNA splicing of up to 10 variant exons and by
extensive posttranslational modifications. The amino acid sequences
encoded by these variant exons are located in the extracellular portion
of the protein near the transmembrane domain. A standard form of CD44
lacking these variant sequences is expressed by numerous cell types and
is the smallest CD44 protein. It carries no variant exon sequences.
Splice variants are expressed in only a limited number of tissues and in
certain tumors. Signals from the AER of the developing vertebrate limb,
including fibroblast growth factor-8 (600483), can maintain limb
mesenchymal cells in proliferative state. Sherman et al. (1998) reported
that a specific CD44 splice variant is crucial for the proliferation of
these mesenchymal cells. Epitopes carried by this variant colocalize
temporally and spatially with FGF8 in the AER throughout early limb
development. A splice variant containing the same sequence expressed on
model cells binds both FGF4 (164980) and FGF8 and stimulates mesenchymal
cells in vitro. Sherman et al. (1998) found that when applied to the
AER, an antibody against a specific CD44 epitope blocked FGF
presentation and inhibited limb outgrowth. Therefore, CD44 is necessary
for limb development and functions in a novel growth factor presentation
mechanism likely relevant to other physiologic and pathologic situations
in which a cell surface protein presents a signaling molecule to a
neighboring cell.

Cywes and Wessels (2001) demonstrated that CD44-dependent group A
Streptococcus binding to polarized monolayers of human keratinocytes
induced marked cytoskeletal rearrangements manifested by membrane
ruffling and disruption of intercellular junctions. Transduction of the
signal induced by group A Streptococcus binding to CD44 on the
keratinocyte surface involved Rac1 (602048) and the cytoskeleton linker
protein ezrin (123900), as well as tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular
proteins. Studies of bacterial translocation in 2 models of human skin
indicated that cell signaling triggered by interaction of the group A
Streptococcus capsule with CD44 opened intercellular junctions and
promoted tissue penetration by group A Streptococcus through a
paracellular route. Cywes and Wessels (2001) concluded that their
results support a model of host cytoskeleton manipulation and tissue
invasion by an extracellular bacterial pathogen.

Nedvetzki et al. (2003) identified a CD44 variant, designated CD44vRA,
in synovial fluid aspirated from 23 of 30 patients with rheumatoid
arthritis (RA; 180300). Sequence analysis showed that the CD44vRA
isoform contains an intron-derived CAG trinucleotide inclusion 5-prime
to constant exon 5 within the CD44v3-v10 isoform. Functional expression
studies in human cells showed that the CD44vRA variant interacted with
FGF2 (134920) via the heparan sulfate on exon v3 in a way that enhanced
binding and activation of soluble FGFR1 (136350) to a greater extent
than CD44v3-v10. Synovial fluid cells from RA patients bound soluble
FGFR1 more intensively than control cells. Nedvetzki et al. (2003)
postulated that activation of FGFR1 may play a role in the RA
inflammatory process.

In a mouse hindlimb model of arteriogenesis, van Royen et al. (2004)
found that Cd44 expression increased strongly during collateral vessel
growth in wildtype mice and that arteriogenesis was severely impaired in
Cd44 -/- mice. The defective arteriogenesis was accompanied by reduced
leukocyte trafficking to sites of collateral artery growth and reduced
expression of FGF2 and platelet-derived growth factor-B protein (PDGFB;
190040). In 14 consecutive patients with single-vessel coronary artery
disease, van Royen et al. (2004) found that the maximal expression of
CD44 on activated monocytes was reduced in patients with poor
collateralization compared to patients with good collateralization. Van
Royen et al. (2004) concluded that CD44 plays a pivotal role in
arteriogenesis.

By analyzing a human breast cancer cell line transduced with a micro RNA
(miRNA) expression library, Huang et al. (2008) found that human miR373
(611954) and miR520C stimulated cell migration and invasion in vitro and
in vivo. Using expression array analysis, they found that the migration
phenotype of miR373- and miR520C-expressing cells depended on
suppression of CD44. Upregulation of miR373 correlated inversely with
CD44 expression in breast cancer metastasis samples. The authors noted
that increased expression of the most common CD44 isoform correlates
with overall survival of breast cancer patients.

Godar et al. (2008) found that p53 (TP53; 191170) negatively regulated
CD44 expression in normal human mammary epithelial cells by binding to a
noncanonical p53-binding sequence in the CD44 promoter. Inhibition of
CD44 enabled the cells to respond to stress-induced, p53-dependent
cytostatic and apoptotic signals that would have otherwise been blocked
by CD44. In the absence of p53, CD44 promoted growth in a highly
tumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line. In both normal and tumorigenic
cell lines, p63 (TP63; 603273) positively regulated CD44 expression.

MAPPING

Francke et al. (1983) showed that the antigens defined by monoclonal
antibodies A3D8 and A1G3 are determined by genes on 11p.

The mouse monoclonal antibody Hermes-3 recognizes the 85- to 95-kD human
lymphocyte homing receptor. Using mouse-human T-lymphocyte hybrids and
hybrids of Chinese hamster ovary cells with human amniotic fibroblasts,
Ala-Kapee et al. (1989) found that Hermes-3 expression, as demonstrated
by indirect immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation, was determined
by 11pter-p13. Forsberg et al. (1989) refined the assignment of the
lymphocyte homing receptor gene to 11pter-p13 by study of Chinese
hamster-human cell hybrids in which the human parent cells had various
deletions of human chromosome 11. Although CD44 may have function as a
lymphocyte homing receptor, the gene that maps to chromosome 11 is
distinct from the lymph node homing receptor located on chromosome 1
(153240) (Seldin, 1990). In the mouse, the corresponding gene has been
referred to as Ly-24.

Cianfriglia et al. (1992) mapped a drug-sensitivity marker, MC56, to
11pter-p13. Identity of the protein to the CD44 antigen, suggested on
other grounds, was supported by the map location.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The Indian blood group (609027) comprises 2 antigens, In(a) and In(b),
which reside on CD44. By RT-PCR analysis of cDNA extracted from
In(a+b-)-transformed B lymphocytes, Telen et al. (1996) identified the
CD44 polymorphism that causes the In(b-) phenotype. The polymorphism
results in an arg46-to-pro change (R46P; 107269.0001), removing the
basically charged amino acid at the C terminus of the hyaluronan
(HA)-binding motif of CD44. In previous studies using chimeric proteins,
arg46 was shown to be crucial for HA binding by CD44 (Yang et al.,
1994). However, Telen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the R46P change
does not reduce HA binding to CD44.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schmits et al. (1997) generated mice deficient in all known isoforms of
Cd44 by targeting exons encoding the invariant N-terminal region of the
molecule. Mice were born in mendelian ratio without any obvious
developmental or neurologic deficits. Hematologic impairment was
evidenced by altered tissue distribution of myeloid progenitors with
increased levels of colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage in bone
marrow and reduced numbers in spleen. Fetal liver colony-forming
unit-spleen and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilization
assays, together with reduced colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage
in peripheral blood, suggested that progenitor egress from the bone
marrow was defective. Mice also developed exaggerated granuloma
responses to Cryotosporidium parvum infection. Tumor studies showed that
SV40-transformed Cd44-deficient fibroblasts were highly tumorigenic in
nude mice, whereas reintroduction of Cd44 expression into these
fibroblasts resulted in a dramatic inhibition of tumor growth.

Teder et al. (2002) studied the role of Cd44 in lung inflammation by
using the Cd44-deficient mice generated by Schmits et al. (1997). After
intratracheal administration of bleomycin, 75% of Cd44-deficient mice
died by day 14. They developed unremitting inflammation, characterized
by impaired clearance of apoptotic neutrophils, persistent accumulation
of hyaluronan fragments at the site of the tissue injury, and impaired
activation of transforming growth factor beta-1 (190180). This phenotype
was partially reversed by reconstitution with Cd44+ cells, thus
demonstrating a critical role for this receptor in resolving lung
inflammation.

Using immunohistochemistry, Leemans et al. (2003) confirmed that
Cd44-high cells accumulated in mouse lungs following intranasal
infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Cd44 -/- mice, however, had a
50% reduction in pulmonary macrophages 2 weeks after infection, although
the absolute numbers of leukocytes were unchanged. By 5 weeks after
infection, a significant reduction in Cd4 (186940)-positive lymphocyte
numbers was observed in mutant mice. At both time points, the
Cd44-deficient mice displayed disorganized granulomas containing
predominantly polymorphonuclear neutrophils rather than well-demarcated
granulomas consisting of lymphocytes and macrophages. Splenocytes were
more numerous in mice lacking Cd44, and they secreted significantly more
Ifng (147570) in response to antigen-specific stimulation than
splenocytes of wildtype mice. Flow cytometric analysis showed that human
CD44 bound to M. tuberculosis, and Cd44 -/- mouse macrophages contained
fewer bacteria than wildtype macrophages. The mutant mice allowed
greater replication of M. tuberculosis in lung and liver and had reduced
survival compared with wildtype mice. Leemans et al. (2003) proposed
that CD44 mediates resistance to mycobacterial infection by promoting
binding and phagocytosis by macrophages and by recruiting these cells to
the site of infection.

TNF (191160) is a major inducer of chronic inflammation, and its
overexpression leads to chronic inflammatory arthritis. Hayer et al.
(2005) crossed Cd44 -/- mice with mice transgenic for human TNF and
found that destruction of joints and progressive crippling was far more
severe in Cd44 -/- transgenic mice than in transgenic mice expressing
Cd44. Cd44 -/- transgenic mice exhibited increased systemic bone
resorption due to an increase in the number, size, and activity of
osteoclasts. Bone formation and osteoblast differentiation were not
affected. Cd44 -/- osteoclasts had an enhanced response to TNF that was
associated with increased activation of p38 (MAPK14; 600289). Hayer et
al. (2005) concluded that CD44 is a critical inhibitor of TNF-induced
joint destruction and inflammatory bone loss.

Krause et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Cd44 were as susceptible as
wildtype mice to murine chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) after
challenge with BCR-ABL virus. However, bone marrow cells from Cd44 -/-
mice transduced with the virus showed defective homing to recipient bone
marrow, resulting in decreased engraftment and reduced CML-like disease.
In contrast, Cd44 was dispensable for induction of B-lymphoblastic
leukemia-like disease. Krause et al. (2006) concluded that CD44 is
required for leukemic stem cells that initiate CML.

Jin et al. (2006) found that treatment with activating monoclonal
antibodies to CD44 markedly reduced leukemic repopulation in nonobese
diabetic (NOD)/severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice challenged
with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626) cells. Absence of
leukemia following serial tumor transplantation experiments in mice
demonstrated direct targeting of AML leukemic stem cells (LSCs).
Treatment of engrafted mice with anti-CD44 reduced the number of Cd34
(142230)-positive/Cd38 (107270)-negative primitive stem cells and
increased the number of Cd14 (158120)-positive monocytic cells.
Anti-CD44 treatment also diminished the homing capacity of SCID
leukemia-initiating cells to bone marrow and spleen. Jin et al. (2006)
concluded that CD44 is a key regulator of AML LSCs, which require a
niche to maintain their stem cell properties. They suggested that CD44
targeting may help eliminate quiescent AML LSCs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INDIAN BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM POLYMORPHISM
CD44, ARG46PRO

The Indian blood group (609027) comprises 2 antigens, In(a) and In(b),
which reside on CD44. By RT-PCR analysis of cDNA extracted from
In(a+b-)-transformed B lymphocytes, Telen et al. (1996) identified the
CD44 polymorphism that causes the In(b-) phenotype. The G-to-C change at
nucleotide 252 results in an arg46-to-pro change (R46P), removing the
basically charged amino acid at the C terminus of the hyaluronan
(HA)-binding motif of CD44. In previous studies using chimeric proteins,
arg46 was shown to be crucial for HA binding by CD44 (Yang et al.,
1994). However, Telen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the R46P change
does not reduce HA binding to CD44.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Forsberg et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Ala-Kapee, M.; Forsberg, U. H.; Jalkanen, S.; Schroder, J.: Mapping
of gene for human lymphocyte homing receptor to the short arm of chromosome
11. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 948-949, 1989.

2. Aruffo, A.; Stamenkovic, I.; Melnick, M.; Underhill, C. B.; Seed,
B.: CD44 is the principal cell surface receptor for hyaluronate. Cell 61:
1303-1313, 1990.

3. Cianfriglia, M.; Viora, M.; Tombesi, M.; Merendino, N.; Esposito,
G.; Samoggia, P.; Forsberg, U. H.; Schroder, J.: The gene encoding
for MC56 determinant (drug-sensitivity marker) is located on the short
arm of human chromosome 11. Int. J. Cancer 52: 585-587, 1992.

4. Cywes, C.; Wessels, M. R.: Group A Streptococcus tissue invasion
by CD44-mediated cell signalling. Nature 414: 648-652, 2001.

5. Forsberg, U. H.; Ala-Kapee, M. M.; Jalkanen, S.; Andersson, L.
C.; Schroder, J.: The gene for human lymphocyte homing receptor is
located on chromosome 11. Europ. J. Immun. 19: 409-412, 1989.

6. Forsberg, U. H.; Jalkanen, S.; Schroder, J.: Assignment of the
human lymphocyte homing receptor gene to the short arm of chromosome
11. Immunogenetics 29: 405-407, 1989.

7. Francke, U.; Foellmer, B. E.; Haynes, B. F.: Chromosome mapping
of human cell surface molecules: monoclonal anti-human lymphocyte
antibodies 4F2, A3D8, and A1G3 define antigens controlled by different
regions of chromosome 11. Somat. Cell Genet. 9: 333-344, 1983.

8. Godar, S.; Ince, T. A.; Bell, G. W.; Feldser, D.; Donaher, J. L.;
Bergh, J.; Liu, A.; Miu, K.; Watnick, R. S.; Reinhardt, F.; McAllister,
S. S.; Jacks, T.; Weinberg, R. A.: Growth-inhibitory and tumor-suppressive
functions of p53 depend on its repression of CD44 expression. Cell 134:
62-73, 2008.

9. Hayer, S.; Steiner, G.; Gortz, B.; Reiter, E.; Tohidast-Akrad,
M.; Amling, M.; Hoffmann, O.; Redlich, K.; Zwerina, J.; Skriner, K.;
Hilberg, F.; Wagner, E. F.; Smolen, J. S.; Schett, G.: CD44 is a
determinant of inflammatory bone loss. J. Exp. Med. 201: 903-914,
2005.

10. Haynes, B. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  2/28/1986.

11. Huang, Q.; Gumireddy, K.; Schrier, M.; le Sage, C.; Nagel, R.;
Nair, S.; Egan, D. A.; Li, A.; Huang, G.; Klein-Szanto, A. J.; Gimotty,
P. A.; Katsaros, D.; Coukos, G.; Zhang, L.; Pure, E.; Agami, R.:
The microRNAs miR-373 and miR-520c promote tumour invasion and metastasis. Nature
Cell Biol. 10: 202-210, 2008.

12. Jin, L.; Hope, K. J.; Zhai, Q.; Smadja-Joffe, F.; Dick, J. E.
: Targeting of CD44 eradicates human acute myeloid leukemic stem cells. Nature
Med. 12: 1167-1174, 2006.

13. Krainer, A. R.; Mayeda, A.; Kozak, D.; Binns, G.: Functional
expression of cloned human splicing factor SF2: homology to RNA-binding
proteins, U1 70K, and Drosophila splicing regulators. Cell 66: 383-394,
1991.

14. Krause, D. S.; Lazarides, K.; von Andrian, U. H.; Van Etten, R.
A.: Requirement for CD44 in homing and engraftment of BCR-ABL-expressing
leukemic stem cells. Nature Med. 12: 1175-1180, 2006.

15. Leemans, J. C.; Florquin, S.; Heikens, M.; Pals, S. T.; van der
Neut, R.; van der Poll, T.: CD44 is a macrophage binding site for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis that mediates macrophage recruitment and
protective immunity against tuberculosis. J. Clin. Invest. 111:
681-689, 2003.

16. Matsumura, Y.; Tarin, D.: Significance of CD44 gene products
for cancer diagnosis and disease evaluation. Lancet 340: 1053-1058,
1992.

17. Mayer, B.; Jauch, K. W.; Gunthert, U.; Figdor, C. G.; Schildberg,
F. W.; Funke, I.; Johnson, J. P.: De-novo expression of CD44 and
survival in gastric cancer. Lancet 342: 1019-1022, 1993.

18. Nedvetzki, S.; Golan, I.; Assayag, N.; Gonen, E.; Caspi, D.; Gladnikoff,
M.; Yayon, A.; Naor, D.: A mutation in a CD44 variant of inflammatory
cells enhances the mitogenic interaction of FGF with its receptor. J.
Clin. Invest. 111: 1211-1220, 2003.

19. Omary, M. B.; Trowbridge, I. S.; Letarte, M.; Kagnoff, M. F.;
Isacke, C. M.: Structural heterogeneity of human Pgp-1 and its relationship
with p85. Immunogenetics 27: 460-464, 1988.

20. Schlossman, S. F.; Boumsell, L.; Gilks, W.; Harlan, J. M.; Kishimoto,
T.; Morimoto, C.; Ritz, J.; Shaw, S.; Silverstein, R. L.; Springer,
T. A.; Tedder, T. F.; Todd, R. F.: CD antigens 1993. Immun. Today 15:
98-99, 1994.

21. Schmits, R.; Filmus, J.; Gerwin, N.; Senaldi, G.; Kiefer, F.;
Kundig, T.; Wakeham, A.; Shahinian, A.; Catzavelos, C.; Rak, J.; Furlonger,
C.; Zakarian, A.; Simard, J. J.; Ohashi, P. S.; Paige, C. J.; Gutierrez-Romas,
J. C.; Mak, T. W.: CD44 regulates hematopoietic progenitor distribution,
granuloma formation, and tumorigenicity. Blood 90: 2217-2233, 1997.

22. Screaton, G. R.; Bell, M. V.; Jackson, D. G.; Cornelis, F. B.;
Gerth, U.; Bell, J. I.: Genomic structure of DNA encoding the lymphocyte
homing receptor CD44 reveals at least 12 alternatively spliced exons. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 12160-12164, 1992.

23. Seldin, M. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  9/19/1990.

24. Sherman, L.; Wainwright, D.; Ponta, H.; Herrlich, P.: A splice
variant of CD44 expressed in the apical ectodermal ridge presents
fibroblast growth factors to limb mesenchyme and is required for limb
outgrowth. Genes Dev. 12: 1058-1071, 1998.

25. Stamenkovic, I.; Amiot, M.; Pesando, J. M.; Seed, B.: A lymphocyte
molecule implicated in lymph node homing is a member of the cartilage
link protein family. Cell 56: 1057-1062, 1989.

26. Stefanova, I.; Hilgert, I.; Bazil, V.; Kristofova, H.; Horejsi,
V.: Human leucocyte surface glycoprotein CDw44 and lymphocyte homing
receptor are identical molecules. Immunogenetics 29: 402-404, 1989.

27. Teder, P.; Vandivier, R. W.; Jiang, D.; Liang, J.; Cohn, L.; Pure,
E.; Henson, P. M.; Noble, P. W.: Resolution of lung inflammation
by CD44. Science 296: 155-158, 2002.

28. Telen, M. J.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  12/30/1992.

29. Telen, M. J.; Eisenbarth, G. S.; Haynes, B. F.: Human erythrocyte
antigens: regulation of expression of a novel erythrocyte surface
antigen by the inhibitor Lutheran In(Lu) gene. J. Clin. Invest. 71:
1878-1886, 1983.

30. Telen, M. J.; Palker, T. J.; Haynes, B. F.: Human erythrocyte
antigens: II. The In(Lu) gene regulates expression of an antigen on
an 80-kilodalton protein of human erythrocytes. Blood 64: 599-606,
1984.

31. Telen, M. J.; Udani, M.; Washington, M. K.; Levesque, M. C.; Lloyd,
E.; Rao, N.: A blood group-related polymorphism of CD44 abolishes
a hyaluronan-binding consensus sequence without preventing hyaluronan
binding. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 7147-7153, 1996.

32. van Royen, N.; Voskuil, M.; Hoefer, I.; Jost, M.; de Graaf, S.;
Hedwig, F.; Andert, J.-P.; Wormhoudt, T. A. M.; Hua, J.; Hartmann,
S.; Bode, C.; Buschmann, I.; Schaper, W.; van der Neut, R.; Piek,
J. J.; Pals, S. T.: CD44 regulates arteriogenesis in mice and is
differentially expressed in patients with poor and good collateralization. Circulation 109:
1647-1652, 2004.

33. Weber, G. F.; Ashkar, S.; Glimcher, M. J.; Cantor, H.: Receptor-ligand
interaction between CD44 and osteopontin (Eta-1). Science 271: 509-512,
1996.

34. Yang, B.; Yang, B. L.; Savani, R. C.; Turley, E. A.: Identification
of a common hyaluronan binding motif in the hyaluronan binding proteins
RHAMM, CD44 and link protein. EMBO J. 13: 286-296, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/26/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/31/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/25/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/15/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/9/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/21/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/1990

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2013
wwang: 8/17/2011
mgross: 11/7/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
mgross: 10/30/2008
terry: 10/28/2008
wwang: 12/28/2007
ckniffin: 11/26/2007
mgross: 1/29/2007
mgross: 11/17/2006
terry: 10/27/2006
mgross: 10/26/2006
wwang: 2/3/2006
terry: 1/31/2006
terry: 12/21/2005
mgross: 2/25/2005
mgross: 11/15/2004
joanna: 11/15/2004
cwells: 4/11/2002
cwells: 4/10/2002
terry: 4/9/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/9/2002
dkim: 7/24/1998
carol: 4/25/1998
terry: 4/25/1998
mark: 5/21/1996
terry: 5/21/1996
mark: 5/20/1996
mark: 2/10/1996
terry: 2/7/1996
terry: 7/29/1994
carol: 4/11/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
carol: 9/8/1993
carol: 1/14/1993
carol: 1/13/1993

602587	TITLE *602587 ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE 7; ACOT7
;;ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE, LONG-CHAIN, CYTOSOLIC;;
CTE-II;;
ACYL-CoA THIOESTER HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, 2;;
ACYL-CoA HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, BRAIN; BACH;;
ACYL-CoA HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, LIVER; LACH;;
ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE 2, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterases (EC 3.1.2.2), such as ACOT7, are found
in all organisms and cleave fatty acyl-CoAs into free fatty acids and
CoA.

CLONING

Engberg et al. (1997) purified a liver cytosolic isoform of long-chain
acyl-CoA thioesterase from peroxisome proliferator-treated rats and
named it CTE-II for 'cytosolic long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase.'
Antibodies against CTE-II were used to screen an expression library of
peroxisome proliferator-induced rat liver cDNA. The predicted 338-amino
acid protein migrated at 40 kD on SDS-PAGE. Engberg et al. (1997)
observed many evenly distributed nucleotide differences and pronounced
differences in the C-terminal regions between CTE-II and the closely
related ACT (602586) and suggested that the 2 enzymes are encoded by
different genes. Engberg et al. (1997) noted that there are human ESTs
homologous to CTE-II.

Yamada et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding long-chain acyl-CoA
hydrolases from rat brain and liver cDNA libraries and designated the
clones Bach and Lach, respectively. Since the nucleotide sequences of
the N-terminal regions were entirely different but the downstream
sequences were virtually identical, Yamada et al. (1997) suggested that
Bach and Lach are derived from the same gene by alternative splicing.

Using a rat Bach cDNA to screen a human brain cDNA library, Yamada et
al. (1999) cloned BACH. The deduced protein contains 338 amino acids and
shares 95% identity with rat Bach. Northern blot analysis detected a
1.9-kb BACH transcript in human brain RNA. Biochemical analysis of human
brain homogenates showed that BACH is a cytosolic enzyme. SDS-PAGE
detected BACH at 43 kD, but gel filtration detected BACH at about 100
kD, indicating that the protein forms multimers.

By 5-prime RACE and RT-PCR of human brain total RNA, Yamada et al.
(2002) identified 6 BACH splice variants. Four variants, designated
BACHa to BACHd, differ in their use of 1 of 4 alternate first exons
(exons 1a through 1d, respectively) and encode proteins of 329 to 380
amino acids. All 4 of these proteins contain the hydrolase domain and a
bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) in their C-terminal halves,
and BACHb and BACHc have N-terminal mitochondrial localization signals.
The 2 remaining variants contain exon X, an alternatively spliced exon
between exons 7 and 8 that causes a frameshift and introduces a
premature stop codon. These C-terminally truncated proteins of 246 and
283 amino acids lack the hydrolase domain and NLS. The BACH proteins
containing the mitochondrial localization signal were detected in
mitochondria of transfected mouse neuroblastoma cells, but those
containing only the NLS did not localize to nuclei, even though the
isolated NLS was functional when fused to a test protein.
Immunohistochemical analysis of human brain detected BACHa in the
cytosol of neurons such as pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex and
Purkinje cells in the cerebellum. In mouse brain, Bacha was also
detected in nuclei as well as cytosol of certain large neurons in the
cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. Yamada et al. (2002)
suggested that the NLS of BACH may be masked by the full-length protein
as a regulatory mechanism.

GENE FUNCTION

Yamada et al. (1997) found that bacterial extracts of E. coli expressing
either rat Bach or Lach cDNAs had 100-fold higher acyl-CoA hydrolase
activity, demonstrating that both cDNAs encode long-chain acyl-CoA
hydrolases.

By analyzing the activity of purified BACH against several fatty
acyl-CoAs, Yamada et al. (1999) found that BACH showed a relatively
broad specificity, with acyl-CoAs with carbon chains of C8 to C18 being
good substrates. BACH activity was inhibited by a sulfhydryl blocking
agent. Recombinant BACH was also active against palmitoyl-CoA.

Yang et al. (2004) found significantly decreased levels of acyl-CoA
hydrolase in hippocampal tissue from 5 patients with mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy (608096) compared to controls.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (2002) determined that the ACOT7 gene contains 13 exons,
including 4 alternative first exons (exons 1a through 1d) and exon X, an
alternatively spliced exon between exons 7 and 8. The gene spans 129 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Yamada et al. (1999) mapped the ACOT7 gene
to chromosome 1p36.2. Hunt et al. (2005) stated that the human ACOT7
gene maps to chromosome 1p36.31-p36.11 and the mouse Acot7 gene maps to
chromosome 4E2.

NOMENCLATURE

Hunt et al. (2005) noted that acyl-CoA thioesterases are referred to in
the literature as acyl-CoA hydrolases, but the reaction catalyzed is the
cleavage of a thioester bond. They presented a revised nomenclature for
these enzymes using the name acyl-CoA thioesterase and the root gene
symbol ACOT.

REFERENCE 1. Engberg, S. T.; Aoyama, T.; Alexson, S. E. H.; Hashimoto, T.; Svensson,
L. T.: Peroxisome proliferator-induced acyl-CoA thioesterase from
rat liver cytosol: molecular cloning and functional expression in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biochem. J. 323: 525-531, 1997.

2. Hunt, M. C.; Yamada, J.; Maltais, L. J.; Wright, M. W.; Podesta,
E. J.; Alexson, S. E. H.: A revised nomenclature for mammalian acyl-CoA
thioesterases/hydrolases. J. Lipid Res. 46: 2029-2032, 2005.

3. Yamada, J.; Furihata, T.; Iida, N.; Watanabe, T.; Hosokawa, M.;
Satoh, T.; Someya, A.; Nagaoka, I.; Suga, T.: Molecular cloning and
expression of cDNAs encoding rat brain and liver cytosolic long-chain
acyl-CoA hydrolases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 232: 198-203,
1997.

4. Yamada, J.; Kuramochi, Y.; Takagi, M.; Watanabe, T.; Suga, T.:
Human brain acyl-CoA hydrolase isoforms encoded by a single gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 299: 49-56, 2002.

5. Yamada, J.; Kurata, A.; Hirata, M.; Taniguchi, T.; Takama, H.;
Furihata, T.; Shiratori, K.; Iida, N.; Takagi-Sakuma, M.; Watanabe,
T.; Kurosaki, K.; Endo, T.; Suga, T.: Purification, molecular cloning,
and genomic organization of human brain long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase. J.
Biochem. 126: 1013-1019, 1999.

6. Yang, J. W.; Czech, T.; Yamada, J.; Csaszar, E.; Baumgartner, C.;
Slavc, I.; Lubec, G.: Aberrant cytosolic acyl-CoA thioester hydrolase
in hippocampus of patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Amino
Acids 27: 269-275, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2006

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/1/1998

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2006
ckniffin: 6/6/2006
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 4/21/2006
carol: 3/17/2006
alopez: 5/1/1998

164780	TITLE *164780 V-SKI AVIAN SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; SKI
;;ONCOGENE SK, CHICKEN VIRAL;;
SK ONCOGENE; SKI
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nomura et al. (1989) isolated human cDNA clones of SKI and a SKI-related
gene, SNO (165340).

Doyle et al. (2012) performed a developmental survey of SKI expression
in wildtype mice and observed that at embryonic day 13.5, SKI protein
was robustly expressed throughout the vessel wall in the proximal
ascending aorta with less expression in the descending segment and was
localized to both the cytoplasm and nucleus. At birth, aortic expression
was somewhat reduced, and SKI was predominantly localized to the
cytoplasm. In adult mice (postnatal day 90), SKI expression was further
reduced in the medial layer of the aortic root, with exclusive
cytoplasmic localization; in the more distal ascending aorta, SKI
expression was largely absent from the central zone of the aortic media,
despite some residual expression in the intimal and adventitial layers.
Doyle et al. (2012) suggested that SKI might be predominantly required
in the very proximal aorta at early stages of development for the proper
regulation of TGF-beta signaling within the arterial media.

MAPPING

Shinagawa et al. (2001) mapped the SKI gene to chromosome 1p36.3.
Colmenares et al. (2002) confirmed the location of the gene in distal
1p36.3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wu et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure of the SMAD4
(600993)-binding domain of SKI in complex with the MH2 domain of SMAD4
at 2.85-angstrom resolution. The structure revealed specific recognition
of the SMAD4 L3 loop region by a highly conserved interaction loop (I
loop) from SKI. The SKI-binding surface on SMAD4 was found to
significantly overlap with that required for binding of the
receptor-mediated SMADs (R-SMADs). Indeed, SKI disrupted the formation
of a functional complex between the comediator SMADs (Co-SMADs) and
R-SMADs, explaining how it could lead to repression of TGF-beta, activin
(see 147390), and bone morphogenetic protein (see 112264) responses. The
structure of the SKI fragment, stabilized by a bound zinc atom,
resembled the SAND domain found in transcription factors and other
nuclear proteins, in which the corresponding I loop is responsible for
DNA binding.

GENE FUNCTION

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB1; 190180) treatment of cells
induces a variety of physiologic responses, including growth inhibition,
differentiation, and induction of apoptosis. TGFB1 induces
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of SMAD3 (603109). Sun et al.
(1999) described the association of SMAD3 with the nuclear protooncogene
protein SKI in response to the activation of TGFB1 signaling.
Association with SKI repressed transcriptional activation by SMAD3, and
overexpression of SKI rendered cells resistant to the growth-inhibitory
effects of TGFB1. The transcriptional repression as well as the growth
resistance to TGFB1 by overexpression of SKI could be overcome by
overexpression of SMAD3. These results demonstrated that SKI is a novel
component of the TGFB1 signaling pathway and shed light on the mechanism
of action of the SKI oncoprotein.

Experiments involving overexpression of Ski suggest that this gene is
involved in neural tube development and muscle differentiation (Sutrave
et al., 1990; Amaravadi et al., 1997; Kaufman et al., 2000). Ski -/-
mice display a cranial neural tube defect that results in exencephaly
and a marked reduction in skeletal muscle mass (Berk et al., 1997).
Colmenares et al. (2002) showed that the penetrance and expressivity of
the Ski -/- phenotype changes when the null mutation is backcrossed into
the C57BL6/J background, with the principal change involving a switch
from a neural tube defect to midline facial clefting. Other defects,
including depressed nasal bridge, eye abnormalities, skeletal muscle
defects, and digit abnormalities, show increased penetrance in the
C57BL6/J background. Of note, these phenotypes resemble some of the
features observed in individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome (607872)
(Shapira et al., 1997; Slavotinek et al., 1999). These similarities
prompted Colmenares et al. (2002) to examine the chromosomal location of
human SKI and to determine whether SKI is included in the deletions of
1p36. They found that human SKI indeed is located at distal 1p36.3 and
was deleted in all of the individuals tested to that time who had the
1p36 deletion syndrome. Thus, SKI may contribute to some of the
phenotypes common in 1p36 deletion syndrome, and particularly to facial
clefting.

Shinagawa et al. (2001) also mapped the SKI gene to 1p36.3 and
determined its relationship to the p73 tumor suppressor gene (TP73;
601990) which also maps to 1p36. They showed that loss of 1 copy of
c-ski increases susceptibility to tumorigenesis in mice. When challenged
with a chemical carcinogen, c-ski heterozygous mice showed an increased
level of tumor formation relative to wildtype mice. In addition,
c-ski-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts had increased proliferative
capacity, whereas overexpression of c-ski suppressed the proliferation.

Okamoto et al. (2002) found that the SKI gene was deleted in a Japanese
girl with the 1p36 deletion syndrome with manifestations of congenital
fiber-type disproportion myopathy (CFTD; 255310) and dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Atanasoski et al. (2004) found that overexpression of human SKI in
cultured rodent Schwann cells inhibited TGFB1-mediated proliferation and
prevented growth-arrested cells from reentering the cell cycle. Ski was
upregulated in myelinating Schwann cells cocultured with dorsal root
ganglion neurons, in myelinating mouse Schwann cells in vivo, and during
remyelination after injury. Myelination was blocked in myelin-competent
cultures derived from Ski-deficient mice, and genes encoding myelin
components were downregulated in Ski-deficient nerves. Conversely,
overexpression of Ski in Schwann cells caused an upregulation of
myelin-related genes. Ski and Oct6 (602479), a transcription factor
involved in myelination, appeared to mutually regulate each other.
Atanasoski et al. (2004) concluded that expression of SKI is regulated
by axon-Schwann cell interactions and that SKI is a crucial signal in
Schwann cell development and myelination.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 10 of 12 sporadic patients with Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS;
182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified de novo heterozygous mutations
in the SKI gene, including 8 missense mutations and one 9-bp deletion
(see, e.g., 164780.0001-164780.0005). Cultured dermal fibroblasts from
affected individuals showed enhanced activation of TGF-beta signaling
cascades and higher expression of TGF-beta-responsive genes relative to
control cells.

In 18 of 19 patients from 13 families with characteristic features of
SGS, including 5 affected individuals over 3 generations in 1 family and
another family in which 3 sibs were affected, Carmignac et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for 2 different in-frame deletions and 10
missense mutations in the SKI gene (see, e.g., 164780.0002, 164780.0004,
164780.0005, and 164780.0007-164780.0010). All of the mutations were
located in exon 1 of the SKI gene, within the R-SMAD-binding domain. No
SKI mutations were found in a cohort of 11 patients with other marfanoid
craniosynostosis syndromes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Doyle et al. (2012) generated zebrafish with morpholino-based knockdown
of the 2 paralogs of mammalian SKI (skia and skib), and observed mutant
embryos with marked craniofacial cartilage deficits, including shortened
and flat Meckel cartilage, irregular lengths of palatoquadrates,
shortened ceratohyales, and depleted ceratobranchial arches. These
deficits manifested in larval fish as maxillary hypoplasia, malformed
ethmoid plate, micrognathia, and microcephaly, and were frequently
accompanied by ocular hypertelorism and spinal malformation. In
addition, the skia- and skib-morphant embryos showed severe cardiac
anomalies, characterized by partial to complete failure in cardiac
looping and malformations of the outflow tract. Doyle et al. (2012)
noted that in comparison to Ski-null mice, the zebrafish morphants more
closely recapitulated the human craniofacial phenotype of
Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome.

HISTORY

Balazs et al. (1984) mapped the SK (for Sloan-Kettering) chicken viral
oncogene to 1q12-qter. By in situ hybridization, Chaganti et al. (1986)
regionalized the SKI gene to 1q22-q24.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY116GLU

In a 43-year-old woman with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis
syndrome (SGS; 182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 347G-A transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in
a gly116-to-glu (G116E) substitution at a highly conserved residue in an
exposed beta hairpin loop in the DHD domain. The mutation was not found
in her unaffected parents or in SNP databases.

.0002
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, LEU32VAL

In a 12-year-old boy and an unrelated 22-year-old woman with
Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome (182212), Doyle et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a 94C-G transversion in exon 1 of
the SKI gene, resulting in a leu32-to-val (L32V) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the SMAD2 (601366)/3 (603109)-binding
domain. The mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the 1000 Genomes Project
database, or more than 10,000 exomes reported on the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

In 3 unrelated patients with SGS, Carmignac et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for the L32V mutation in the SKI gene. One of the
patients, a 32-year-old man, had aortic root dilation, mitral valve
prolapse, and mitral insufficiency.

.0003
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34ASP

In a 16-year-old boy with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 101G-A
transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-asp (G34D)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the SMAD2 (601366)/3
(603109)-binding domain. The mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the
1000 Genomes Project database, or more than 10,000 exomes reported on
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

.0004
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34SER

In a 21-year-old man with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 100G-A
transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-ser (G34S)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the SMAD2 (601366)/3
(603109)-binding domain. The mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the
1000 Genomes Project database, or more than 10,000 exomes reported on
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

In an 11-year-old girl with SGS, whose features included aortic root
dilation and mitral valve prolapse, Carmignac et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for the G34S mutation in the SKI gene.

.0005
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34CYS

In a 2-year-old girl with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 100G-T
transversion in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-cys
(G34C) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the SMAD2
(601366)/3 (603109)-binding domain. The mutation was not found in
dbSNP134, the 1000 Genomes Project database, or in more than 10,000
exomes reported on the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome
Variant Server.

In a 21-year-old woman with SGS, Carmignac et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for the G34C mutation in the SKI gene.

.0006
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, 9-BP DEL, NT283

In a 5-year-old boy with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 9-bp
deletion in exon 1 of the SKI gene (283_291del9), resulting in removal
of 3 highly conserved residues (asp95-ser97del) in the DHD domain. The
mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the 1000 Genomes Project database,
or more than 10,000 exomes reported on the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

.0007
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34VAL

In 22-year-old female twins and their 20-year-old sister who had
Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome (182212), Carmignac et al.
(2012) identified a heterozygous 101G-T transversion in exon 1 of the
SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-val (G34V) substitution at a conserved
residue within the R-SMAD-binding domain. The mother had the mutation in
somatic mosaic state. The mutation was not found in the dbSNP or Exome
Variant Server databases.

.0008
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, 12-BP DEL, NT280

In 5 affected individuals over 3 generations of a family with
Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome (182212), Carmignac et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a 12-bp deletion
(280_291delTCCGACCGCTCC) in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in an
in-frame deletion within the R-SMAD-binding domain. The mutation was not
found in the dbSNP or Exome Variant Server databases.

.0009
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, PRO35GLN

In an 18-year-old man with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Carmignac et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 104C-A
transversion in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a pro35-to-gln
(P35Q) substitution at a conserved residue within the R-SMAD-binding
domain. The patient had dilation of the aortic root requiring surgery at
16 years of age, and also had vertebrobasilar and internal carotid
tortuosity, mitral valve prolapse, and a dilated pulmonary artery root.
The mutation was not found in the dbSNP or Exome Variant Server
databases.

.0010
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, PRO35SER

In a 21-year-old woman with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis
syndrome (182212), Carmignac et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for
a 103C-T transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a
pro35-to-gln (P35Q) substitution at a conserved residue within the
R-SMAD-binding domain. No aortic root dilation or valvular anomalies
were reported in this patient. The mutation was not found in the dbSNP
or Exome Variant Server databases.

REFERENCE 1. Amaravadi, L. S.; Neff, A. W.; Sleeman, J. P.; Smith, R. C.: Autonomous
neural axis formation by ectopic expression of the protooncogene c-ski. Dev.
Biol. 192: 392-404, 1997.

2. Atanasoski, S.; Notterpek, L.; Lee, H.-Y.; Castagner, F.; Young,
P.; Ehrengruber, M. U.; Meijer, D.; Sommer, L.; Stavnezer, E.; Colmenares,
C.; Suter, U.: The protooncogene Ski controls Schwann cell proliferation
and myelination. Neuron 43: 499-511, 2004.

3. Balazs, I.; Grzeschik, K. H.; Stavnezer, E.: Assignment of the
human homologue of a chicken oncogene to chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 410-411, 1984.

4. Berk, M.; Desai, S. Y.; Heyman, H. C.; Colmenares, C.: Mice lacking
the ski proto-oncogene have defects in neurulation, craniofacial,
patterning, and skeletal muscle development. Genes Dev. 11: 2029-2039,
1997.

5. Carmignac, V.; Thevenon, J.; Ades, L.; Callewaert, B.; Julia, S.;
Thauvin-Robinet, C.; Gueneau, L.; Courcet, J.-B.; Lopez, E.; Holman,
K.; Renard, M.; Plauchu, H.; and 26 others: In-frame mutations
in exon 1 of SKI cause dominant Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 950-957, 2012.

6. Chaganti, R. S. K.; Balazs, I.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Murty, V. V. V.
S.; Koduru, P. R. K.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Stavnezer, E.: The cellular
homologue of the transforming gene of SKV avian retrovirus maps to
human chromosome region 1q22-q24. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 43: 181-186,
1986.

7. Colmenares, C.; Heilstedt, H. A.; Shaffer, L. G.; Schwartz, S.;
Berk, M.; Murray, J. C.; Stavnezer, E.: Loss of the SKI proto-oncogene
in individuals affected with 1p36 deletion syndrome is predicted by
strain-dependent defects in Ski -/- mice. Nature Genet. 30: 106-109,
2002.

8. Doyle, A. J.; Doyle, J. J.; Bessling, S. L.; Maragh, S.; Lindsay,
M. E.; Schepers, D.; Gillis, E.; Mortier, G.; Homfray, T.; Sauls,
K.; Norris, R. A.; and 22 others: Mutations in the TGF-beta repressor
SKI cause Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome with aortic aneurysm. Nature
Genet. 44: 1249-1254, 2012.

9. Kaufman, C. D.; Martinez-Rodriguez, G.; Hackett, P. B., Jr.: Ectopic
expression of c-ski disrupts gastrulation and neural patterning in
zebrafish. Mech. Dev. 95: 147-162, 2000.

10. Nomura, N.; Sasamoto, S.; Ishii, S.; Date, T.; Matsui, M.; Ishizaki,
R.: Isolation of human cDNA clones of SKI and the SKI-related gene,
SNO. Nucleic Acids Res. 17: 5489-5500, 1989.

11. Okamoto, N.; Toribe, Y.; Nakajima, T.; Okinaga, T.; Kurosawa,
K.; Nonaka, I.; Shimokawa, O.; Matsumoto, N.: A girl with 1p36 deletion
syndrome and congenital fiber type disproportion myopathy. J. Hum.
Genet. 47: 556-559, 2002.

12. Shapira, S. K.; McCaskill, C.; Northrup, H.; Spikes, A. S.; Elder,
F. F. B.; Sutton, V. R.; Korenberg, J. R.; Greenberg, F.; Shaffer,
L. G.: Chromosome 1p36 deletions: the clinical phenotype and molecular
characterization of a common newly delineated syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 642-650, 1997.

13. Shinagawa, T.; Nomura, T.; Colmenares, C.; Ohira, M.; Nakagawara,
A.; Ishii, S.: Increased susceptibility to tumorigenesis of ski-deficient
heterozygous mice. Oncogene 20: 8100-8108, 2001.

14. Slavotinek, A.; Shaffer, L. G.; Shapira, S. K.: Monosomy 1p36. J.
Med. Genet. 36: 657-663, 1999.

15. Sun, Y.; Liu, X.; Eaton, E. N.; Lane, W. S.; Lodish, H. F.; Weinberg,
R. A.: Interaction of the Ski oncoprotein with Smad3 regulates TGF-beta
signaling. Molec. Cell 4: 499-509, 1999.

16. Sutrave, P.; Kelly, A. M.; Hughes, S. H.: ski can cause selective
growth of skeletal muscle in transgenic mice. Genes Dev. 4: 1462-1472,
1990.

17. Wu, J.-W.; Krawitz, A. R.; Chai, J.; Li, W.; Zhang, F.; Luo, K.;
Shi, Y.: Structural mechanism of Smad4 recognition by the nuclear
oncoprotein Ski: insights on Ski-mediated repression of TFG-beta signaling. Cell 111:
357-367, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/10/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/5/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/26/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1986

EDITED carol: 03/18/2013
carol: 12/10/2012
alopez: 11/13/2012
carol: 10/5/2012
terry: 10/5/2012
carol: 7/13/2005
ckniffin: 7/1/2005
wwang: 5/20/2005
wwang: 5/16/2005
terry: 5/12/2005
tkritzer: 1/5/2004
cwells: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 1/7/2003
mgross: 11/26/2002
terry: 3/11/2002
carol: 1/24/2002
terry: 1/24/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
mgross: 11/19/1999
alopez: 5/12/1999
mark: 6/9/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 10/9/1989
root: 3/6/1989
marie: 3/25/1988

614463	TITLE *614463 NMYC DOWNSTREAM-REGULATED GENE 4; NDRG4
;;SMOOTH MUSCLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 8; SMAP8;;
KIAA1180
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned NDRG4. The deduced protein
contains 273 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression in
adult and fetal brain and adult heart, followed by lung and testis.
Lower expression was detected in other adult tissues examined, but
little to no expression was detected in fetal liver. High NDRG4
expression was detected in all specific adult brain regions examined,
with highest expression in amygdala, cerebellum, and thalamus.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NDRG1 (605262),
followed by 3-prime and 5-prime RACE of human brain and heart cDNA
libraries and cap-site hunting, Zhou et al. (2001) cloned 3 splice
variants of NDRG4. The variants NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var, which were
obtained from the brain library, encode deduced proteins of 339 and 352
amino acids with calculated molecular masses of 37.1 and 38.5 kD,
respectively. Compared with NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var has a 14-amino acid
insertion near the C terminus. The variant NDRG4H, which was obtained
from the heart library, encodes a deduced 371-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 40.6 kD. NDRG4H differs from NDRG4B and
NDRG4B-var at its N-terminal end, and it lacks the 14-amino acid
insertion. Northern blot analysis detected NDRG4 transcripts of about
3.2 kb in brain and heart only. Variant-specific probes showed NDRG4B
expression in brain only, whereas NDRG4H was expressed in both brain and
heart, with higher expression in heart. RT-PCR confirmed expression of
all 3 variants in brain and of NDRG4H in heart. RNA dot-blot analysis
revealed NDRG4 expression in spinal cord, all specific brain regions
examined, and all specific heart regions examined except aorta.
Expression was also detected in spleen, lymph node, testis, adrenal
gland, and fetal brain and heart, but not in other tissues examined. In
situ hybridization of normal adult brain detected NDRG4 mRNA in
cytoplasm of neurons in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, mesencephalon,
pons, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. No signal was detected in
peripheral nerves or other cell types, such as glial cells. Western blot
analysis of endogenous or exogenously expressed proteins showed that
NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H had apparent molecular masses of 37, 39,
and 41 kD, respectively.

Using expression profiling to identify genes expressed in aortic smooth
muscle, followed by screening a heart cDNA library, Nishimoto et al.
(2003) cloned NDRG4, which they called SMAP8. The deduced 371-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 40.7 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected high expression of an approximately 3.3-kb transcript
in heart and brain, with little to no expression in other tissues
examined. PCR analysis showed moderate expression in aorta and vascular
smooth muscle cells. Western blot analysis of heart and brain detected
SMAP8 at an apparent molecular mass of about 45 kD. SMAP8 localized to
the cytoplasmic fraction of transfected A10 embryonic rat aortic smooth
muscle cells.

By in situ hybridization of adult mouse brain, Yamamoto et al. (2011)
detected wide distribution of Ndrg4 in neurons, but not in astrocytes.
Western blot analysis of adult mouse brain detected 3 Ndrg4 isoforms
representing orthologs of human NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishimoto et al. (2003) showed that homocysteine upregulated SMAP8
expression in primary human aortic smooth muscle cells and rat A10
cells, but not in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Proliferation
and migration of A10 cells significantly decreased following expression
of human SMAP8. SMAP8 was phosphorylated by a serine/threonine kinase
via activation of a PDGF (see 173430) signaling pathway. In addition,
ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) and MEK1 (MAP2K1; 176872)/MEK2
(MAP2K2; 601263) were activated in SMAP8-transfected A10 cells.

Hongo et al. (2006) found that overexpression of 1 of the 6 isoforms of
rat Ndrg4, Ndrg4c2, in PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells reduced NGF (see
162030)-induced phosphorylation of Elk1 (311040), a nuclear target of
Erk. Reporter gene assays revealed that Ndrg4c2 suppressed Elk1-mediated
activation of a serum response element.

By RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Schilling et al. (2009)
found that NDRG4 expression was increased in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM; see 137800) compared with normal human astrocytes. Knockdown of
NDRG4 via short hairpin RNA reduced the viability of GBM cells via G1
cell cycle arrest and subsequent apoptosis. Knockdown of NDRG4 also
reduced the viability of several GBM cell lines and primary astrocytes.
Knockdown of NDRG4 in GBM tumor xenografts reduced tumor growth
following intracranial injection in immunocompromised mice.
Overexpression of NDRG4B or NDRG4H did not affect cell viability.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhou et al. (2001) determined that the NDRG4 gene contains 17 exons and
spans 26 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are specific for NDRG4H, exon 3 is specific
for NDRG4B and NDGR4B-var, and exon 16 is specific for NDRG4B-var. The
region upstream of exon 1 contains a GGCG sequence that may represent a
TATA-less promoter for NDRG4H expression. The region upstream of exon 3
contains a consensus TATA box and 2 CCAAT sequences and may represent
the promoter for NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhou et al. (2001) mapped the NDRG4 gene
to chromosome 16q21-q22.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yamamoto et al. (2011) found that Ndrg4 -/- mice were born at the
expected mendelian ratio, appeared normal, and were fertile. However,
Ndrg4 -/- mice showed deficits in spatial learning and memory, and they
exhibited increased sensitivity to ischemic stress following middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Consistent with these findings, Ndrg4 -/-
mice had reduced expression of the neuroprotective factor Bdnf (113505).

REFERENCE 1. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

2. Hongo, S.; Watanabe, T.; Takahashi, K.; Miyazaki, A.: Ndrg4 enhances
NGF-induced ERK activation uncoupled with Elk-1 activation. J. Cell.
Biochem. 98: 185-193, 2006.

3. Nishimoto, S.; Tawara, J.; Toyoda, H.; Kitamura, K.; Komurasaki,
T.: A novel homocysteine-responsive gene, smap8, modulates mitogenesis
in rat vascular smooth muscle cells. Europ. J. Biochem. 270: 2521-2531,
2003.

4. Schilling, S. H.; Hjelmeland, A. B.; Radiloff, D. R.; Liu, I. M.;
Wakeman, T. P.; Fielhauer, J. R.; Foster, E. H.; Lathia, J. D.; Rich,
J. N.; Wang, X.-F.; Datto, M. B.: NDRG4 is required for cell cycle
progression and survival in glioblastoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 284:
25160-25169, 2009.

5. Yamamoto, H.; Kokame, K.; Okuda, T.; Nakajo, Y.; Yanamoto, H.;
Miyata, T.: NDRG4 protein-deficient mice exhibit spatial learning
deficits and vulnerabilities to cerebral ischemia. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
26158-26165, 2011.

6. Zhou, R.-H.; Kokame, K.; Tsukamoto, Y.; Yutani, C.; Kato, H.; Miyata,
T.: Characterization of the human NDRG gene family: a newly identified
member, NDRG4, is specifically expressed in brain and heart. Genomics 73:
86-97, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2012

EDITED terry: 02/01/2012
mgross: 1/31/2012

600140	TITLE *600140 CREB-BINDING PROTEIN; CREBBP
;;CBP
CBP/MOZ FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

When cellular levels of cAMP increase, a cascade of events leads to the
induction of genes that contain cis-regulatory elements called
cAMP-response elements (CREs). Elevated cAMP levels cause stimulation
and nuclear translocation of protein kinase A (PKA; see 176911), which
activates the transcription factor CREB (CRE-binding protein; see
123810) by phosphorylating it at a single residue, serine-133 (Gonzalez
and Montminy, 1989).

Chrivia et al. (1993) reported the discovery of a nuclear
transcriptional coactivator protein, CREB-binding protein (CBP), that
binds specifically to the PKA-phosphorylated form of the CREB protein.
CBP is a large protein with a molecular mass of about 250 kD which
contains a bromodomain, i.e., a conserved structural unit important for
protein-protein interactions. In Drosophila and yeast, this domain is
found in coactivator proteins involved in signal-dependent, but not
basal, transcription (Nordheim, 1994).

To isolate the gene responsible for Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS1;
180849), which is associated with breakpoints in and microdeletions of
chromosome 16p13.3, Petrij et al. (1995) used FISH to situate all RSTS
breakpoints in an area of 150 kb, thus defining a candidate region.
Complementary DNAs from this area showed very high sequence homology
with mouse CBP. Further studies indicated that the human CBP gene spans
at least the 150-kb genomic area containing the RSTS breakpoints. Giles
et al. (1997) reported the cloning and sequencing of human CREBBP, which
encodes a deduced 2,442-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 265
kD with 95% homology to the mouse protein.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Liu et al. (2008) described a high resolution x-ray crystal structure of
a semisynthetic heterodimeric p300 (602700) HAT domain in complex with a
bisubstrate inhibitor, Lys-CoA. This structure showed that p300/CBP is a
distant cousin of other structurally characterized HATs, but revealed
several novel features that explain the broad substrate specificity and
preference for nearby basic residues. Based on this structure and
accompanying biochemical data, Liu et al. (2008) proposed that p300/CBP
uses an unusual hit-and-run (Theorell-Chance) catalytic mechanism that
is distinct from other characterized HATs. Several disease-associated
mutations could also be readily accounted for by the p300 HAT structure.

MAPPING

Petrij et al. (1995) used FISH to show that mouse CBP hybridized to
human 16p13.3. Chen and Korenberg (1995) also mapped CREBBP to 16p13.3
using a cDNA probe for the mouse gene in fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Using a human genomic clone for FISH, Wydner et al.
(1995) mapped CREBBP to 16p13.3-p13.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Kwok et al. (1994) used fluorescence anisotropy measurements to define
the equilibrium binding parameters of the phosphoCREB:CBP interaction
and reported that CBP can activate transcription through a region in its
C terminus. The activation domain of CBP interacts directly with the
basal transcription factor TFIIB (189963). As TFIIB interacts with the
TATA-box-binding protein TBP1 (186852), a continuous chain of physical
contacts is established linking the stimulus-activated phosphoCREB,
bound distal to the promoter, with the polymerase II complex that
initiates transcription (Nordheim, 1994). Acting as a coactivator, CBP
augments the activity of phosphorylated CREB to activate transcription
of cAMP-responsive genes.

Arias et al. (1994) microinjected an anti-CBP antiserum into fibroblasts
and determined that transcription from a cAMP promoter can be inhibited.
Arias et al. (1994) also reported that CBP cooperates with upstream
activators, such as JUN (165160), that are involved in
mitogen-responsive transcription. Studies indicated that when JUN was
phosphorylated at the transcriptionally stimulatory sites ser73 and
ser63, it bound CBP with comparable affinity to CREB. They proposed that
CBP is recruited to the promoter through interaction with certain
phosphorylated factors and that CBP may thus play a critical role in the
transmission of inductive signals from cell surface receptors to the
transcriptional apparatus.

Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs; e.g., 184756)
activate transcription of genes whose products are involved in the
cellular uptake and synthesis of cholesterol. Oliner et al. (1996)
showed that the putative activation domain of SREBP binds specifically
to the N-terminal domains of recombinant CBP and p300 (EP300; 602700), a
CREBBP-related protein. Transfection studies demonstrated that CBP
enhances the ability of SREBP to activate transcription of reporter
genes in HeLa cells, thus suggesting that CBP may serve as a coactivator
for SREBP.

Weaver et al. (1998) identified CREBBP/EP300 and IRF3 (603734) as
components of DRAF1 (double-stranded RNA-activated factor-1), a positive
regulator of interferon-stimulated gene transcription that functions as
a direct response to viral infection.

Lin et al. (2001) identified a compactly folded 46-residue domain in CBP
and p300, the IRF3-binding domain (IBID), and determined its structure
by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. IBID has a helical framework
containing an apparently flexible polyglutamine loop that participates
in ligand binding. Spectroscopic data indicated that induced folding
accompanies association of IBID with its partners, which exhibit no
evident sequence similarities. IBID is an important contributor to
signal integration by CBP and p300.

CBP binds to the ser133 phosphorylated region of CREB via a domain
called KIX (Parker et al., 1996). The phosphorylated domain of CREB was
termed KID for kinase-inducible domain. Radhakrishnan et al. (1997) used
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to study the molecular
interactions of the KIX:KID domains of CBP and CREB, respectively. The
KIX domain of CBP comprises amino acid residues 586 to 666. The KID
domain of CREB comprises amino acid residues 101 to 160. The KID
undergoes a coil-to-helix folding transition upon binding to KIX,
forming 2 alpha helices. The amphipathic helix alpha-B of KID interacts
with a hydrophobic groove defined by helices alpha-1 and alpha-3 of KIX.
The other KID helix, alpha-A, contacts a different face of the alpha-3
helix. The phosphate group of the critical phosphoserine residue of KID
forms a hydrogen bond to the side chain of tyr658 of KIX. The structure
provides a model for interactions between other transactivation domains
and their targets.

Growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530) and insulin
(176730) regulate development and metabolism via genes containing both
POU homeodomain (PIT1; 173110) and phorbol ester (AP1, or JNK) response
elements. Although CBP functions as a coactivator on these elements, the
mechanism of transactivation was unclear. Zanger et al. (2001)
demonstrated that CBP is recruited to these elements only after it is
phosphorylated at ser436 by growth factor-dependent signaling pathways.
In contrast, p300, a protein closely related to CBP that lacks this
phosphorylation site, binds only weakly to the transcription complex and
in a growth factor-independent manner. A small region of CBP (amino
acids 312 to 440), which the authors termed the GF box, contains a
potent transactivation domain and mediates this effect. Direct
phosphorylation represents a novel mechanism controlling coactivator
recruitment to the transcription complex.

To determine the physiologic significance of the phosphorylation site at
ser436 of the CREBBP protein, Zhou et al. (2004) generated knockin mice
containing a ser436-to-ala mutation. They demonstrated both in vitro and
in vivo that the mutant CREBBP was aberrantly recruited to CREB protein,
resulting in inappropriate activation of gluconeogenesis in the fed
state and glucose intolerance resulting from increased hepatic glucose
production. Zhou et al. (2004) proposed that insulin signaling may
directly regulate many cAMP signaling pathways at the transcriptional
level by controlling CREBBP recruitment.

To elucidate the molecular basis of assembling the multiprotein
activation complex, Demarest et al. (2002) undertook a structural and
thermodynamic analysis of the interaction domains of CBP and the
activator for thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors (TRAM1; 601937).
Demarest et al. (2002) demonstrated that although the isolated domains
are intrinsically disordered, they combine with high affinity to form a
cooperatively folded helical heterodimer. The authors concluded that
their study uncovers a unique mechanism, which they termed 'synergistic
folding,' through which p160 coactivators recruit CBP to allow
transmission of the hormone signal to the transcriptional machinery.

Zhong et al. (2002) demonstrated that transcriptionally inactive nuclear
NFKB in resting cells consists of homodimers of either p65 (164014) or
p50 (164011) complexed with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 (601241). Only
the p50-HDAC1 complexes bound to DNA and suppressed NFKB-dependent gene
expression in unstimulated cells. Appropriate stimulation caused nuclear
localization of NFKB complexes containing phosphorylated p65 that
associated with CBP and displaced the p50-HDAC1 complexes. These results
demonstrated that phosphorylation of p65 determines whether it
associates with either CBP or HDAC1, ensuring that only p65 entering the
nucleus from cytoplasmic NFKB-IKB (164008) complexes can activate
transcription.

TDG (601423) initiates repair of G/T and G/U mismatches, commonly
associated with CpG islands, by removing thymine and uracil moieties.
Tini et al. (2002) reported that TDG associates with transcriptional
coactivators CBP and p300 (602700) and that the resulting complexes are
competent for both the excision step of repair and histone acetylation.
TDG stimulated CBP transcriptional activity in transfected cells and
reciprocally served as a substrate for CBP/p300 acetylation. This
acetylation triggered release of CBP from DNA ternary complexes and also
regulated recruitment of repair endonuclease APE (107748). These
observations revealed a potential regulatory role for protein
acetylation in base mismatch repair and a role for CBP/p300 in
maintaining genomic stability.

Huntington disease (HD; 143100) belongs to the CAG repeat family of
neurodegenerative diseases and is characterized by the presence of an
expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) repeat in the huntingtin gene (HTT;
613004). PolyQ-expanded htt accumulates within large aggregates that are
found in various subcellular compartments, but are more often localized
within the nucleus. It has been suggested that the sequestration of
proteins essential to cell viability may be 1 mechanism that accounts
for toxicity generated by polyQ-expanded proteins. Nuclear inclusions
containing polyQ-expanded htt have been shown to recruit CREBBP. In a
hippocampal cell line, Jiang et al. (2003) found that toxicity within
individual cells induced by polyQ-expanded htt (as revealed by a TUNEL
assay) was associated with the localization of the mutant htt within
either nuclear or perinuclear aggregates. However, in addition to CREBBP
recruitment, CREBBP ubiquitylation and degradation were selectively
enhanced by polyQ-expanded htt. Jiang et al. (2003) concluded that
selected substrates may be directed to the
ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent protein degradation pathway in response
to polyQ-expanded htt within the nucleus.

Tsuda et al. (2003) found that SOX9 (608160) used CBP and p300 as
transcriptional coactivators. SOX9 bound CBP and p300 in vitro and in
vivo, and both coactivators enhanced SOX9-dependent COL2A1 (120140)
promoter activity. Disruption of the CBP-SOX9 complex inhibited COL2A1
mRNA expression and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells into
chondrocytes.

Blobel et al. (1998) found that in mouse nonhematopoietic cells, Cbp
stimulated Gata1 (305371) transcriptional activity. Cbp and Gata1 also
coimmunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts of mouse erythroid cells.
Interaction mapping pinpointed the contact sites to the zinc finger
region of Gata1 and to the E1A-binding region of Cbp. Expression of
adenovirus E1A revealed that the interaction of Cbp with Gata1 in
erythroid cells affected differentiation and expression of endogenous
Gata1 target genes.

Turnell et al. (2005) showed that 2 anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome
(APC/C) components, APC5 (606948) and APC7 (606949), interact directly
with the coactivators CBP and p300 through protein-protein interaction
domains that are evolutionarily conserved in adenovirus E1A. This
interaction stimulates intrinsic CBP/p300 acetyltransferase activity and
potentiates CBP/p300-dependent transcription. Turnell et al. (2005) also
showed that APC5 and APC7 suppress E1A-mediated transformation in a
CBP/p300-dependent manner, indicating that these components of the APC/C
may be targeted during cellular transformation. Furthermore, Turnell et
al. (2005) established that CBP is required for APC/C function;
specifically, gene ablation of CBP by RNA-mediated interference markedly
reduces the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of the APC/C and the
progression of cells through mitosis. Taken together, Turnell et al.
(2005) concluded that their results define discrete roles for the
APC/C-CBP/p300 complexes in growth regulation.

Wang et al. (2008) showed that an RNA-binding protein, TLS (137070),
serves as a key transcriptional regulatory sensor of DNA damage signals
that, on the basis of its allosteric modulation by RNA, specifically
binds to and inhibits CBP and p300 histone acetyltransferase activities
on a repressed gene target, cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461), in human cell
lines. Recruitment of TLS to the CCND1 promoter to cause gene-specific
repression is directed by single-stranded, low copy-number noncoding RNA
(ncRNA) transcripts tethered to the 5-prime regulatory regions of CCND1
that are induced in response to DNA damage signals. Wang et al. (2008)
suggested that signal-induced noncoding RNAs localized to regulatory
regions of transcription units can act cooperatively as selective
ligands, recruiting and modulating the activities of distinct classes of
RNA-binding coregulators in response to specific signals, providing an
unexpected noncoding RNA/RNA-binding protein-based strategy to integrate
transcriptional programs.

Das et al. (2009) demonstrated that the histone acetyltransferase CBP in
flies, and CBP and p300 in humans, acetylate histone H3 on lys56
(H3K56), whereas Drosophila sir2 and human SIRT1 (604479) and SIRT2
(604480) deacetylate H3K56 acetylation. The histone chaperones ASF1A
(609189) in humans and Asf1 in Drosophila are required for acetylation
of H3K56 in vivo, whereas the histone chaperone CAF1 (see 601245) in
humans and Caf1 in Drosophila are required for the incorporation of
histones bearing this mark into chromatin. Das et al. (2009) showed
that, in response to DNA damage, histones bearing acetylated K56 are
assembled into chromatin in Drosophila and human cells, forming foci
that colocalize with sites of DNA repair. Furthermore, acetylation of
H3K56 is increased in multiple types of cancer, correlating with
increased levels of ASF1A in these tumors. Das et al. (2009) concluded
that their identification of multiple proteins regulating the levels of
H3K56 acetylation in metazoans will allow future studies of this
critical and unique histone modification that couples chromatin assembly
to DNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and cancer.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Acute Myelogenous Leukemia

Petrij et al. (1995) noted a case of acute myeloid leukemia (601626)
type M5b reported by Wessels et al. (1991) that was associated with a
translocation t(8;16) whose breakpoint was located in the same region as
the breakpoints in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849) (see
below). Petrij et al. (1995) proposed that the translocation may have
joined CBP to an unknown gene on chromosome 8, leading to the
malignancy.

By positional cloning on chromosome 16, Borrow et al. (1996) implicated
the CREB-binding protein in the M4/M5 subtype of acute myeloid leukemia.
Borrow et al. (1996) also used positional cloning to identify a novel
gene at the chromosome 8 breakpoint, which they termed MOZ (601408) for
monocytic leukemia zinc finger protein.

Sobulo et al. (1997) stated that the recurring translocation
t(11;16)(q23;p13.3) has been observed only in cases of acute leukemia or
myelodysplasia secondary to therapy with drugs targeting DNA
topoisomerase II (126430). Sobulo et al. (1997) showed that in 2
patients the MLL gene was fused in-frame to a different exon of the
CREBBP gene, producing chimeric proteins containing the AT-hooks,
methyltransferase homology domain, and transcriptional repression domain
of MLL fused to the CREB-binding domain or to the bromodomain of CREBBP.
Both fusion products retained the histone acetyltransferase domain of
CREBBP and may lead to leukemia by promoting histone acetylation of
genomic regions targeted by the MLL AT-hooks, leading to transcriptional
deregulation via aberrant chromatin organization.

Panagopoulos et al. (2001) reported a novel t(10;16)(q22;p13)
chromosomal translocation in a childhood acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML-M5a) leading to a MORF (605880)-CBP chimera. RT-PCR experiments
yielded in-frame MORF-CBP and CBP-MORF fusion transcripts. Genomic
analyses revealed that the breaks were close to Alu elements in intron
16 of MORF and intron 2 of CBP and that duplications had occurred near
the breakpoints. The MORF-CBP protein retained the zinc fingers, 2
nuclear localization signals, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
domain, a portion of the acidic domain of MORF, and the CBP protein
downstream of codon 29. The part of CBP encoding the RARA-binding
domain, the CREB-binding domain, the 3 cys/his-rich regions, the
bromodomain, the HAT domain, and the glu-rich domains was present. In
the reciprocal CBP-MORF, part of the acidic domain and the C-terminal
ser- and met-rich regions of MORF may be driven by the CBP promoter.

The t(8;16)(p11;p13) translocation, which is strongly associated with
AML displaying monocytic differentiation, erythrophagocytosis by the
leukemic cells, and a poor response to chemotherapy, fuses the CBP gene
on chromosome 16p13 with the MOZ gene on chromosome 8p11. Panagopoulos
et al. (2003) sequenced the breakpoints in 4 t(8;16)-positive AML cases.
The breaks clustered in both CBP intron 2 and MOZ intron 16, and were
close to repetitive elements; in 1 case, an Alu-Alu junction for the
CBP/MOZ hybrid was identified. All 4 cases showed additional genomic
events (i.e., deletions, duplications, and insertions) in the breakpoint
regions in both the MOZ and CBP genes. Thus, the translocation did not
originate through a simple end-to-end fusion. The findings of multiple
breaks and rearrangements suggested the involvement of a damage repair
mechanism in the origin of this translocation.

- Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome 1

Petrij et al. (1995) found that all the breakpoints and microdeletions
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome are located in 16p13.3, in a region
containing the CREBBP gene. They showed, furthermore, that RSTS results
not only from gross chromosomal rearrangements of 16p but also from
heterozygous point mutations in the CBP gene itself (see, e.g.,
600140.0001), suggesting that the loss of one functional copy of the CBP
gene underlies the developmental abnormalities in RSTS, and possibly the
propensity for malignancy and keloid formation. To search for mutations
in RSTS patients without rearrangements, Petrij et al. (1995) used the
protein truncation test. In 2 of 16 patients, a truncated protein
product was found; both patients, who had classic RSTS phenotype, had a
change of a glutamine codon to a stop codon (see 600140.0001 and
600140.0002).

Taine et al. (1998) found microdeletion of the RT1 probe (D16S237) in 3
of 30 French patients with RSTS. By pooling data from their study and
previous series, they found the cumulative frequency of the 16p13.3
microdeletion to be 11.9% (19 in 159). Most reported microdeletions of
the CREBBP gene in RSTS had been detected by FISH with a single cosmid
probe specific to the 3-prime region of the gene. To explore the
possibility that the rate of microdeletion-positive cases would be
greater if the entire gene were evaluated, Blough et al. (2000)
performed FISH on 66 patients with an established diagnosis of RSTS,
using a panel of 5 cosmids spanning the CREBBP gene. Five of the 66
patients had deletions by FISH (9%), consistent with those rates
reported in various series that ranged between 3% and 25%. The findings
of a partial 5-prime deletion and of interstitial deletions of the gene
added to the known spectrum of mutations and demonstrated the need for
evaluation of the entire CREBBP gene in RSTS patients. No phenotypic
differences between partial deletion, complete deletion, and nondeletion
patients were observed, supporting a haploinsufficiency model for this
disorder.

Petrij et al. (2000) reported diagnostic analysis of 194 patients with
RSTS. Of these, 86 had previously been reported. A total of 157
individuals were tested by FISH, 23 by protein truncation test, and 14
by both methods for microdeletions and truncating mutations in CBP.
Fourteen of 171 (8.2%) patients had microdeletions. Eighty-nine of the
171 were tested using 5 cosmid probes: RT1, RT100, RT102, RT191, RT203
and RT166. Eight microdeletions were found in this group, of which 4
were not deleted for RT1/RT100. Petrij et al. (2000) concluded that the
use of all 5 probes is essential to detect all microdeletions in
patients with clinical features of RSTS. The protein truncation test
revealed truncating mutations in 4 of 37 (10.8%) cases. Petrij et al.
(2000) concluded that microdeletions and truncating mutations in CBP
account for approximately 20% of mutations in individuals with the RSTS
phenotype.

Petrij et al. (2000) stated that the breakpoints of 6 translocations and
inversions described in RSTS patients clustered in a 13-kb intronic
region at the 5-prime end of the CBP gene and could theoretically result
only in proteins containing the extreme N-terminal region of
CREB-binding protein. Microdeletions had occurred more frequently, in
approximately 10% of cases. In contrast to the previous findings, Petrij
et al. (2000) showed that in one patient with a translocation
t(2;16)(q36.3;p13.3), the chromosome 16 breakpoint was located about 100
kb downstream of the previously identified breakpoint cluster. Fiber
FISH and Southern blot analysis were used in this determination. Western
blot analysis of extracts prepared from lymphoblasts showed both a
normal and an abnormal shorter protein lacking the C-terminal domain,
indicating expression of both the normal and the mutant allele. The
results suggested that the loss of C-terminal domains of the protein
product is sufficient to cause RSTS. Furthermore, the data indicated the
potential utility of Western blot analysis as an inexpensive and fast
approach for screening RSTS mutations.

Murata et al. (2001) analyzed the CBP gene in 16 RSTS patients. A
microdeletion was identified in 1 patient by FISH analysis;
heteroallelic mutations were identified in 5 patients. These included a
2-bp and an 11-bp deletion, a 14-bp insertion, and a missense mutation
resulting in an arg1378-to-pro substitution (600140.0003). This missense
mutation was introduced into the recombinant mouse CBP, where it
abolished the HAT activity of CBP and the ability of CBP to
transactivate CREB. The authors hypothesized that loss of HAT activity
of CBP may cause RSTS. They further speculated that treatment of RSTS
patients with histone deacetylase inhibitors might have beneficial
effects.

Among 63 patients with RSTS, Coupry et al. (2002) used several molecular
techniques, including cDNA probes to search for gross gene
rearrangements, intragenic microsatellite markers, and PCR with direct
sequencing, to identify 22 novel point mutations in the CBP gene. In 33
patients, no abnormality in the CBP gene was detected.

Kalkhoven et al. (2003) performed mutational analysis in 39 RSTS
patients and identified 8 heterozygous mutations in the HAT domain of
CBP, one of which altered a conserved plant homeodomain (PHD) zinc
finger amino acid (E1278K; 600140.0006), while a second deleted exon 22
(600140.0007), which encodes the central region of the PHD finger.
Functional analysis revealed that these PHD finger mutants lacked in
vitro acetyltransferase activity towards histones and CBP itself and
displayed reduced coactivator function for the transcription factor
CREB. In EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cells from the exon 22 deletion
patient, there was 50% less endogenous CBP HAT activity. The authors
stressed the functional importance of the PHD finger in vivo, and
implied that reduction of CBP HAT activity, as exemplified by disruption
of the PHD finger, may be sufficient to cause RSTS.

In 6 (28.6%) of 21 RSTS patients in whom no point mutations had been
identified, Stef et al. (2007) used comparative genomic hybridization on
microarrays and quantitative multiplex fluorescent-PCR to identify
deletions involving the CREBBP gene. The deletions ranged in size from
3.3 kb to 6.5 Mb; 1 patient had a deleterious duplication containing
exon 16. No phenotypic differences were observed, except for 1 patient
with a 6.5-Mb deletion, who had a severe phenotype and died at 34 days
of life. Stef et al. (2007) concluded that CREBBP dosage anomalies
constitute a common cause of the disorder and recommended
high-resolution gene dosage studies of the CREBBP gene in candidate
patients.

Gervasini et al. (2007) used FISH and microsatellite analysis to screen
42 Italian RSTS patients and identified deletions involving the CREBBP
gene that ranged in size from 150 kb to 2.6 Mb in 6 patients. Three of
the patients were low-level mosaics, with the deletion present in less
than 30% of lymphoctyes and in less than 20% of epithelial cells
analyzed. The authors noted that, despite the small number of deleted
cells in the investigated tissues, the clinical phenotype of the mosaic
patients was quite typical, thus emphasizing the dose sensitivity of
CREBBP.

- Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA; 313200) is an inherited
neurodegenerative disease caused by CAG repeat expansion within the gene
encoding the androgen receptor (AR; 313700). The expansion results in an
expanded polyglutamine tract, which likely confers a novel, toxic
function to the affected protein. Cell culture and transgenic mouse
studies have implicated the nucleus as a site for pathogenesis,
suggesting that a critical nuclear factor or process may be disrupted by
the polyglutamine expansion. McCampbell et al. (2000) demonstrated that
CREB-binding protein is incorporated into nuclear inclusions formed by
polyglutamine-containing proteins in cultured cells, transgenic mice,
and tissue from patients with SBMA. Soluble levels of CREB-binding
protein were reduced in cells expressing expanded polyglutamine despite
increased levels of CBP mRNA. Overexpression of CREBBP rescued cells
from polyglutamine-mediated toxicity in neuronal cell culture. The
authors proposed a CREBBP-sequestration model of polyglutamine expansion
disease.

- Chromosome 16p13.3 Duplication Syndrome

Thienpont et al. (2010) reported 12 unrelated patients with mild to
moderate mental retardation and mild skeletal anomalies associated with
interstitial duplication of chromosome 16p13.3 (613458). Ten of the 12
duplications occurred de novo, and 2 were inherited from unaffected
parents. The duplications ranged in size, but the smallest region of
overlap was 186 to 260 kb in size and included the CREBBP gene. None of
the breakpoints were recurrent, arguing against nonallelic homologous
recombination as a mechanism. The findings indicated that CREBBP is
dosage-sensitive. Thienpont et al. (2010) estimated the frequency of
CREBBP duplication to be 1 in 97,000 to 146,000 live births.

- Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma

Pasqualucci et al. (2011) reported that the 2 most common types of B
cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (605027), follicular lymphoma and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, harbor frequent structural alterations
inactivating CREBBP and, more rarely, EP300 (602700), 2 highly related
histone and nonhistone acetyltransferases (HATs) that act as
transcriptional coactivators in multiple signaling pathways. Overall,
about 39% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 41% of follicular
lymphoma cases display genomic deletions and/or somatic mutations that
remove or inactivate the HAT coding domain of these 2 genes. These
lesions usually affect 1 allele, suggesting that reduction in HAT dosage
is important for lymphomagenesis. Pasqualucci et al. (2011) demonstrated
specific defects in acetylation-mediated inactivation of the BCL6
oncoprotein (109565) and activation of the p53 tumor suppressor
(191170).

- Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia

Mullighan et al. (2011) found that 18.3% of relapse cases of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia had sequence or deletion mutations in CREBBP and
that these frequently occurred in the histone acetyltransferase domain.

EVOLUTION

While mapping and cloning the human CREBBP gene on 16p13.3, Giles et al.
(1997) noticed an emerging pattern of relationship between this
chromosome band and a region of chromosome 22q. CBP exhibits extensive
homology to the adenovirus E1A-associated protein p300, whose gene
(EP300; 602700) maps to 22q13 (Eckner et al., 1994; Lundblad et al.,
1995). They noted that the heme oxygenase-1 gene (HMOX1; 141250) maps to
22q12 and the heme oxygenase-2 gene (HMOX2; 141251) to 16p13.3
Furthermore, the gene for phosphomannomutase-2 (PMM2; 601785) is on
16p13 and that for phosphomannomutase-1 (PMM1; 601786) is on 22q13.
Sequence comparison at the amino acid level revealed that homology
between these paralogous proteins is high: 63% between CBP and p300, 66%
between PMM1 and PMM2, and 74% between HMOX1 and HMOX2. By examination
of genome databases, e.g., OMIM, Giles et al. (1998) found 6 additional
sets of paralogs mapping to 16p13 and 22q11-q13, although the extent of
homology between these paralogous sets was not known. These pairs were
SSTR5 (182455) and SSTR3 (182453) on 16 and 22, respectively; CSNK2A2
(115442) and CSNK1E (600863); UBE2I (601661) and UB2L3; MYH11 (160745)
and MYH9 (160775); CRYM (123740) and a cluster of crystallin genes on
chromosome 22, e.g., CRYBB1 (600929); IL4RA (147781) and IL2RB (146710).
Giles et al. (1998) postulated that these bands show homology because of
an ancestral event of the type proposed by Ohno (1993). Arguing from the
fact that chromosome 14q carries SSTR1 (182451), UBE2L1 (600012), MYH6
(160710), and MYH7 (160760), whereas SSTR2 (182452), CSNK1D (600864),
and CRYBA1 (123610) map to 17q, combined with the location on leukemia
breakpoints, strongly suggested to Giles et al. (1998) that these gene
families arose by tetraploidization resulting in members on 14q, 16p,
17q, and 22q. Genetic redundancy is potentially of great relevance to
organismal evolution since it may protect against potentially harmful
mutations and may provide a pool of diverse yet functionally similar
proteins for further evolution.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tanaka et al. (1997) generated Cbp +/- mice with haploinsufficiency of
the Cbp protein, as demonstrated by Western blot analysis. Many of the
mutant mice exhibited abnormal skeletal patterning similar to some
features found in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, including delayed
ossification of the frontal bones, enlarged anterior fontanels, and
various anomalies of the sternum, rib cage, xiphoid process, and
vertebrae. The mutant mice also had decreased levels of bone
morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP7; 112267), a molecule believed to be part
of the signaling cascade in skeletal development. Tanaka et al. (1997)
found that mice homozygous for the mutation died in utero.

Kung et al. (2000) showed that Cbp +/- mice display an increased cancer
risk similar to that seen in patients with RSTS. These results provided
experimental evidence that CBP has tumor suppressing activity.

To identify the physiologic functions of the Cbp protein using a
loss-of-function mutant, Yamauchi et al. (2002) analyzed Cbp-deficient
mice. As Crebbp-null mice died during embryogenesis, they used
heterozygous mice. Unexpectedly, Crebbp +/- mice showed markedly reduced
weight of white adipose tissue but not of other tissues. Despite this
lipodystrophy, Crebbp +/- mice showed increased insulin sensitivity and
glucose tolerance and were completely protected from body weight gain
induced by high-fat diet. They observed increased leptin sensitivity and
increased serum adiponectin (605441) levels in Crebbp +/- mice. These
increased effects of insulin-sensitizing hormones secreted from white
adipose tissue may explain, at least in part, the phenotypes of Crebbp
+/- mice. The study demonstrated that CBP may function as a
'master-switch' between energy storage and expenditure.

Kasper et al. (2002) demonstrated that the protein-binding KIX domains
of CBP and p300 (602700) have nonredundant functions in mice. In mice
homozygous for point mutations in the KIX domain of p300 designed to
disrupt the binding surface for the transcription factors c-Myb (189990)
and Creb, multilineage defects occur in hematopoiesis, including anemia,
B-cell deficiency, thymic hypoplasia, megakaryocytosis, and
thrombocytosis. By contrast, age-matched mice homozygous for identical
mutations in the KIX domain of CBP are essentially normal. There is a
synergistic genetic interaction between mutations in c-MYB and mutations
in the KIX domain of p300, which suggests that the binding of c-MYB to
this domain of p300 is crucial for the development and function of
megakaryocytes. Thus, Kasper et al. (2002) concluded that conserved
domains in 2 highly related coactivators have contrasting roles in
hematopoiesis.

Bourtchouladze et al. (2003) reasoned that drugs that modulate CREB
function by enhancing cAMP signaling might yield an effective treatment
for the memory defect of CBP +/- mice. To this end, they designed a
cell-based drug screen and discovered inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-4
(see 600126, for example) to be particularly effective enhancers of CREB
function. They extended previous behavioral observations by showing that
CBP +/- mutants have impaired long-term memory but normal learning and
short-term memory in an objective recognition task. They demonstrated
that the prototypic PDE4 inhibitor, rolipram, and a novel one (HT0712)
abolish the long-term memory defect of CBP +/- mice. The genetic lesion
in CBP acts specifically to shift the dose sensitivity for HT0712 to
enhance memory formation, which conveys molecular specificity on the
drug's mechanism of action. The results suggested that PDE4 inhibitors
might be used to treat the cognitive dysfunction of RSTS patients.

Alarcon et al. (2004) found that transgenic mice haploinsufficient for
the Cbp protein exhibited normal activity, motivation, anxiety, and
working short-term memory, but had reduced long-term memory for fear and
object recognition. Electrophysiologic measurements showed that the
mutant mice had normal basal synaptic transmission, but had a defect in
the late phase of hippocampal long-term potentiation that is dependent
on transcriptional activation. Immunohistochemistry and Western blot
analysis showed that the Cbp +/- mice had decreased acetylation of
histone H2B (see 609904), indicating an alteration in chromatin. Both
enhancement of the expression of CREB-dependent genes and inhibition of
histone deacetylation ameliorated the long-term potentiation and memory
defects. Alarcon et al. (2004) concluded that some of the cognitive
deficits in RTS may result from the continued requirement throughout
life for both functions of CBP: activation of CREB and histone
acetylation with chromatin remodeling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, GLN136TER

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849), Petrij et
al. (1995) identified a C-T transition in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
a stop codon and a truncated protein product.

.0002
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, GLN357TER

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849), Petrij et
al. (1995) identified a C-T transition in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
a stop codon and a truncated protein product. In this patient, the
mutation destroyed a PvuII restriction site. Since the site was found to
be intact in both chromosomes of the parents, the mutation in the
patient must have been de novo.

.0003
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, ARG1378PRO

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Murata et al.
(2001) demonstrated a G-C transversion in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
an arg1378-to-pro (R1378P) substitution. In a transgenic mouse model,
this mutation abolished HAT activity of the CREB-binding protein.

.0004
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, 2-BP DEL, NT5222

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Murata et al.
(2001) demonstrated a 2-bp deletion in the CREBBP gene of nucleotides
5222-5223, leading to missense translation from codons 1469-1476,
followed by premature termination at codon 1477.

.0005
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1, INCOMPLETE
CREBBP, TYR1175CYS

In a patient with a mild form of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849),
Bartsch et al. (2002) identified a 3524A-G transition in the CREBBP
gene, resulting in a tyr1175-to-cys (Y1175C) substitution. The authors
concluded that the missense mutation resulted in the milder phenotype.

.0006
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, GLU1278LYS

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Kalkhoven et al.
(2003) identified a 3832G-A transition in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
a glu1278-to-lys (E1278K) substitution at a conserved residue within the
PHD finger of the HAT domain.

.0007
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, IVS21, A-T, -2

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Kalkhoven et al.
(2003) identified an A-to-T transversion 2 bp 5-prime to exon 22 in the
CREBBP gene. The mutation was predicted to result in aberrant splicing
and loss of the 26 amino acids encoded by exon 22. These residues lie in
the middle of the PHD finger of the HAT domain. Expression studies
revealed loss of HAT activity in transiently transfected cells.

.0008
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1, INCOMPLETE
CREBBP, THR910ALA

In a girl, her mother, and maternal grandmother with an incomplete form
of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Bartsch et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous 2728A-G transition in exon 14 of the CREBBP
gene, resulting in a thr910-to-ala (T910A) substitution in a partially
conserved residue. The mutation occurred outside the crucial histone
acetyltransferase domain, which could explain the milder phenotype. The
12-year-old female proband had mild dysmorphic features, such as
high-arched eyebrows, elongated face, prominent nose, high-arched
palate, short broad thumbs, and broad halluces. She had a short
attention span, dyslexia, dyscalculia, reading difficulties, and needed
specal teaching in language and mathematics. Her mother had similar
facial features, was mildly obese, and had normal intelligence. The
grandmother reportedly had a similar appearance and had not finished
school. The report confirmed autosomal dominant inheritance of the
disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Alarcon, J. M.; Malleret, G.; Touzani, K.; Vronskaya, S.; Ishii,
S.; Kandel, E. R.; Barco, A.: Chromatin acetylation, memory, and
LTP are impaired in CBP+/- mice: a model for the cognitive deficit
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and its amelioration. Neuron 42: 947-959,
2004.

2. Arias, J.; Alberts, A. S.; Brindle, P.; Claret, F. X.; Smeal, T.;
Karin, M.; Feramisco, J.; Montminy, M.: Activation of cAMP and mitogen
responsive genes relies on a common nuclear factor. Nature 370:
226-229, 1994.

3. Bartsch, O.; Kress, W.; Kempf, O.; Lechno, S.; Haaf, T.; Zechner,
U.: Inheritance and variable expression in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2254-2261, 2010.

4. Bartsch, O.; Locher, K.; Meinecke, P.; Kress, W.; Seemanova, E.;
Wagner, A.; Ostermann, K.; Rodel, G.: Molecular studies in 10 cases
of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, including a mild variant showing a missense
mutation in codon 1175 of CREBBP. J. Med. Genet. 39: 496-501, 2002.

5. Blobel, G. A.; Nakajima, T.; Eckner, R.; Montminy, M.; Orkin, S.
H.: CREB-binding protein cooperates with transcription factor GATA-1
and is required for erythroid differentiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
2061-2066, 1998.

6. Blough, R. I.; Petrij, F.; Dauwerse, J. G.; Milatovich-Cherry,
A.; Weiss, L.; Saal, H. M.; Rubinstein, J. H.: Variation in microdeletions
of the cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein gene at chromosome
band 16p13.3 in the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90:
29-34, 2000.

7. Borrow, J.; Stanton, V. P., Jr.; Andresen, J. M.; Becher, R.; Behm,
F. G.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Civin, C. I.; Disteche, C.; Dube, I.; Frischauf,
A. M.; Horsman, D.; Mitelman, F.; Volinia, S.; Watmore, A. E.; Housman,
D. E.: The translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) of acute myeloid leukaemia
fuses a putative acetyltransferase to the CREB-binding protein. Nature
Genet. 14: 33-41, 1996.

8. Bourtchouladze, R.; Lidge, R.; Catapano, R.; Stanley, J.; Gossweiler,
S.; Romashko, D.; Scott, R.; Tully, T.: A mouse model of Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome: defective long-term memory is ameliorated by inhibitors
of phosphodiesterase 4. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 10518-10522,
2003.

9. Chen, X.-N.; Korenberg, J. R.: Localization of human CREBBP (CREB
binding protein) to 16p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 71: 56-57, 1995.

10. Chrivia, J. C.; Kwok, R. P. S.; Lamb, N.; Hagiwara, M.; Montminy,
M. R.; Goodman, R. H.: Phosphorylated CREB binds specifically to
the nuclear protein CBP. Nature 365: 855-859, 1993.

11. Coupry, I.; Roudaut, C.; Stef, M.; Delrue, M.-A.; Marche, M.;
Burgelin, I.; Taine, L.; Cruaud, C.; Lacombe, D.; Arveiler, B.: Molecular
analysis of the CBP gene in 60 patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. J.
Med. Genet. 39: 415-421, 2002.

12. Das, C.; Lucia, M. S.; Hansen, K. C.; Tyler, J. K.: CBP/p300-mediated
acetylation of histone H3 on lysine56. Nature 459: 113-117, 2009.
Note: Erratum: Nature 460: 1164 only, 2009.

13. Demarest, S. J.; Martinez-Yamout, M.; Chung, J.; Chen, H.; Xu,
W.; Dyson, H. J.; Evans, R. M.; Wright, P. E.: Mutual synergistic
folding in recruitment of CBP/p300 by p160 nuclear receptor coactivators. Nature 415:
549-553, 2002.

14. Eckner, R.; Ewen, M. E.; Newsome, D.; Gerdes, M.; DeCaprio, J.
A.; Lawrence, J. B.; Livingston, D. M.: Molecular cloning and functional
analysis of the adenovirus E1A-associated 300-kD protein (p300) reveals
a protein with properties of a transcriptional adaptor. Genes Dev. 15:
869-884, 1994.

15. Gervasini, C.; Castronovo, P.; Bentivegna, A.; Mottadelli, F.;
Faravelli, F.; Giovannucci-Uzielli, M. L.; Pessagno, A.; Lucci-Cordisco,
E.; Pinto, A. M.; Salviati, L.; Selicorni, A.; Tenconi, R.; Neri,
G.; Larizza, L.: High frequency of mosaic CREBBP deletions in Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome patients and mapping of somatic and germ-line breakpoints. Genomics 90:
567-573, 2007.

16. Giles, R. H.; Dauwerse, H. G.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; Breuning,
M. H.: Do human chromosomal bands 16p13 and 22q11-13 share ancestral
origins? (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1240-1242, 1998.

17. Giles, R. H.; Petrij, F.; Dauwerse, H. G.; den Hollander, A. I.;
Lushnikova, T.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; Goodman, R. H.; Deaven, L. L.;
Doggett, N. A.; Peters, D. J.; Breuning, M. H.: Construction of a
1.2-Mb contig surrounding, and molecular analysis of, the human CREB-binding
protein (CBP/CREBBP) gene on chromosome 16p13.3. Genomics 42: 96-114,
1997.

18. Gonzalez, G. A.; Montminy, M. R.: Cyclic AMP stimulates somatostatin
gene transcription by phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133. Cell 59:
675-680, 1989.

19. Jiang, H.; Nucifora, F. C., Jr.; Ross, C. A.; DeFranco, D. B.
: Cell death triggered by polyglutamine-expanded huntingtin in a neuronal
cell line is associated with degradation of CREB-binding protein. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1-12, 2003.

20. Kalkhoven, E.; Roelfsema, J. H.; Teunissen, H.; den Boer, A.;
Ariyurek, Y.; Zantema, A.; Breuning, M. H.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Peters,
D. J. M.: Loss of CBP acetyltransferase activity by PHD finger mutations
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 441-450, 2003.

21. Kasper, L. H.; Boussouar, F.; Ney, P. A.; Jackson, C. W.; Rehg,
J.; van Deursen, J. M.; Brindle, P. K.: A transcription-factor-binding
surface of coactivator p300 is required for haematopoiesis. Nature 419:
738-743, 2002.

22. Kung, A. L.; Rebel, V. I.; Bronson, R. T.; Ch'ng, L.-E.; Sieff,
C. A.; Livingston, D. M.; Yao, T.-P.: Gene dose-dependent control
of hematopoiesis and hematologic tumor suppression by CBP. Genes
Dev. 14: 272-277, 2000.

23. Kwok, R. P. S.; Lundblad, J. R.; Chrivia, J. C.; Richards, J.
P.; Bachinger, H. P.; Brennan, R. G.; Roberts, S. G. E.; Green, M.
R.; Goodman, R. H.: Nuclear protein CBP is a coactivator for the
transcription factor CREB. Nature 370: 223-226, 1994.

24. Lin, C. H.; Hare, B. J.; Wagner, G.; Harrison, S. C.; Maniatis,
T.; Fraenkel, E.: A small domain of CBP/p300 binds diverse proteins:
solution structure and functional studies. Molec. Cell 8: 581-590,
2001.

25. Liu, X.; Wang, L.; Zhao, K.; Thompson, P. R.; Hwang, Y.; Marmorstein,
R.; Cole, P. A.: The structural basis of protein acetylation by the
p300/CBP transcriptional coactivator. Nature 451: 846-850, 2008.

26. Lundblad, J. R.; Kwok, R. P. S.; Laurance, M. E.; Harter, M. L.;
Goodman, R. H.: Adenoviral E1A-associated protein p300 as a functional
homologue of the transcriptional co-activator CBP. Nature 374: 85-88,
1995.

27. McCampbell, A.; Taylor, J. P.; Taye, A. A.; Robitschek, J.; Li,
M.; Walcott, J.; Merry, D.; Chai, Y.; Paulson, H.; Sobue, G.; Fischbeck,
K. H.: CREB-binding protein sequestration by expanded polyglutamine. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2197-2202, 2000.

28. Mullighan, C. G.; Zhang, J.; Kasper, L. H.; Lerach, S.; Payne-Turner,
D.; Phillips, L. A.; Heatley, S. L.; Holmfeldt, L.; Collins-Underwood,
J. R.; Ma, J.; Buetow, K. H.; Pui, C.-H.; Baker, S. D.; Brindle, P.
K.; Downing, J. R.: CREBBP mutations in relapsed acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Nature 471: 235-239, 2011.

29. Murata, T.; Kurokawa, R.; Krones, A.; Tatsumi, K.; Ishii, M.;
Taki, T.; Masuno, M.; Ohashi, H.; Yanagisawa, M.; Rosenfeld, M. G.;
Glass, C. K.; Hayashi, Y.: Defect of histone acetyltransferase activity
of the nuclear transcriptional coactivator CBP in Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1071-1076, 2001.

30. Nordheim, A.: CREB takes CBP to tango. Nature 370: 177-178,
1994.

31. Ohno, S.: Patterns in genome evolution. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 3:
911-914, 1993.

32. Oliner, J. D.; Andresen, J. M.; Hansen, S. K.; Zhou, S.; Tjian,
R.: SREBP transcriptional activity is mediated through an interaction
with the CREB-binding protein. Genes Dev. 10: 2903-2911, 1996.

33. Panagopoulos, I.; Fioretos, T.; Isaksson, M.; Samuelsson, U.;
Billstrom, R.; Strombeck, B.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion
of the MORF and CBP genes in acute myeloid leukemia with the t(10;16)(q22;p13). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 395-404, 2001.

34. Panagopoulos, I.; Isaksson, M.; Lindvall, C.; Hagemeijer, A.;
Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Genomic characterization of MOZ/CBP
and CBP/MOZ chimeras in acute myeloid leukemia suggests the involvement
of a damage-repair mechanism in the origin of the t(8;16)(p11;p13). Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 36: 90-98, 2003.

35. Parker, D.; Ferreri, K.; Nakajima, T.; LaMorte, V. J.; Evans,
R.; Koerber, S. C.; Hoeger, C.; Montminy, M. R.: Phosphorylation
of CREB at ser-133 induces complex formation with CREB-binding protein
via a direct mechanism. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 694-703, 1996.

36. Pasqualucci, L.; Dominguez-Sola, D.; Chiarenza, A.; Fabbri, G.;
Grunn, A.; Trifonov, V.; Kasper, L. H.; Lerach, S.; Tang, H.; Ma,
J.; Rossi, D.; Chadburn, A.; Murty, V. V.; Mullighan, C. G.; Gaidano,
G.; Rabadan, R.; Brindle, P. K.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Inactivating mutations
of acetyltransferase genes in B-cell lymphoma. Nature 471: 189-195,
2011.

37. Petrij, F.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Blough, R. I.; Giles, R. H.; van
der Smagt, J. J.; Wallerstein, R.; Maaswinkel-Mooy, P. D.; van Karnebeek,
C. D.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; van Haeringen, A.; Rubinstein, J. H.;
Saal, H. M.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Peters, D. J. M.; Breuning, M. H.
: Diagnostic analysis of the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: five cosmids
should be used for microdeletion detection and low number of protein
truncating mutations. J. Med. Genet. 37: 168-176, 2000.

38. Petrij, F.; Dorsman, J. C.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Giles, R. H.; Peeters,
T.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Breuning, M. H.; Peters, D. J. M.: Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome caused by a de novo reciprocal translocation t(2;16)(q36.3;p13.3). Am.
J. Med. Genet. 92: 47-52, 2000.

39. Petrij, F.; Giles, R. H.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Saris, J. J.; Hennekam,
R. C. M.; Masuno, M.; Tommerup, N.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; Goodman,
R. H.; Peters, D. J. M.; Breuning, M. H.: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
caused by mutations in the transcriptional co-activator CBP. Nature 376:
348-351, 1995.

40. Radhakrishnan, I.; Perez-Alvarado, G. C.; Parker, D.; Dyson, H.
J.; Montminy, M. R.; Wright, P. E.: Solution structure of the KIX
domain of CBP bound to the transactivation domain of CREB: a model
for activator:coactivator interactions. Cell 91: 741-752, 1997.

41. Sobulo, O. M.; Borrow, J.; Tomek, R.; Reshmi, S.; Harden, A.;
Schlegelberger, B.; Housman, D.; Doggett, N. A.; Rowley, J. D.; Zeleznik-Le,
N. J.: MLL is fused to CBP, a histone acetyltransferase, in therapy-related
acute myeloid leukemia with a t(11;16)(q23;p13.3). Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 8732-8737, 1997.

42. Stef, M.; Simon, D.; Mardirossian, B.; Delrue, M.-A.; Burgelin,
I.; Hubert, C.; Marche, M.; Bonnet, F.; Gorry, P.; Longy, M.; Lacombe,
D.; Coupry, I.; Arveiler, B.: Spectrum of CREBBP gene dosage anomalies
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15:
843-847, 2007.

43. Taine, L.; Goizet, C.; Wen, Z. Q.; Petrij, F.; Breuning, M. H.;
Ayme, S.; Saura, R.; Arveiler, B.; Lacombe, D.: Submicroscopic deletion
of chromosome 16p13.3 in patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 78: 267-270, 1998.

44. Tanaka, Y.; Naruse, I.; Maekawa, T.; Masuya, H.; Shiroishi, T.;
Ishii, S.: Abnormal skeletal patterning in embryos lacking a single
Cbp allele: a partial similarity with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 10215-10220, 1997.

45. Thienpont, B.; Bena, F.; Breckpot, J.; Philip, N.; Menten, B.;
Van Esch, H.; Scalais, E.; Salamone, J. M.; Fong, C. T.; Kussmann,
J. L.; Grange, D. K.; Gorski, J. L.; and 12 others: Duplications
of the critical Rubinstein-Taybi deletion region on chromosome 16p13.3
cause a novel recognisable syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 47: 155-161,
2010.

46. Tini, M.; Benecke, A.; Um, S.-J.; Torchia, J.; Evans, R. M.; Chambon,
P.: Association of CBP/p300 acetylase and thymine DNA glycosylase
links DNA repair and transcription. Molec. Cell 9: 265-277, 2002.

47. Tsuda, M.; Takahashi, S.; Takahashi, Y.; Asahara, H.: Transcriptional
co-activators CREB-binding protein and p300 regulate chondrocyte-specific
gene expression via association with Sox9. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 27224-27229,
2003.

48. Turnell, A. S.; Stewart, G. S.; Grand, R. J. A.; Rookes, S. M.;
Martin, A.; Yamano, H.; Elledge, S. J.; Gallimore, P. H.: The APC/C
and CBP/p300 cooperate to regulate transcription and cell-cycle progression. Nature 438:
690-695, 2005.

49. Wang, X.; Arai, S.; Song, X.; Reichart, D.; Du, K.; Pascual, G.;
Tempst, P.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Glass, C. K.; Kurokawa, R.: Induced
ncRNAs allosterically modify RNA-binding proteins in cis to inhibit
transcription. Nature 454: 126-130, 2008.

50. Weaver, B. K.; Kumar, K. P.; Reich, N. C.: Interferon regulatory
factor 3 and CREB-binding protein/p300 are subunits of double-stranded
RNA-activated transcription factor DRAF1. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
1359-1368, 1998.

51. Wessels, J. W.; Mollevanger, P.; Dauwerse, J. G.; Cluitmans, F.
H. M.; Breuning, M. H.; Beverstock, G. C.: Two distinct loci on the
short arm of chromosome 16 are involved in myeloid leukemia. Blood 77:
1555-1559, 1991.

52. Wydner, K. L.; Bhattacharya, S.; Eckner, R.; Lawrence, J. B.;
Livingston, D. M.: Localization of human CREB-binding protein gene
(CREBBP) to 16p13.2-p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 30:
395-396, 1995.

53. Yamauchi, T.; Oike, Y.; Kamon, J.; Waki, H.; Komeda, K.; Tsuchida,
A.; Date, Y.; Li, M.-X.; Miki, H.; Akanuma, Y.; Nagai, R.; Kimura,
S.; Saheki, T.; Nakazato, M.; Naitoh, T.; Yamamura, K.; Kadowaki,
T.: Increased insulin sensitivity despite lipodystrophy in Crebbp
heterozygous mice. Nature Genet. 30: 221-226, 2002.

54. Zanger, K.; Radovick, S.; Wondisford, F. E.: CREB binding protein
recruitment to the transcription complex requires growth factor-dependent
phosphorylation of its GF box. Molec. Cell 7: 551-558, 2001.

55. Zhong, H.; May, M. J.; Jimi, E.; Ghosh, S.: The phosphorylation
status of nuclear NF-kappa-B determines its association with CBP/p300
or HDAC-1. Molec. Cell 9: 625-636, 2002.

56. Zhou, X. Y.; Shibusawa, N.; Naik, K.; Porras, D.; Temple, K.;
Ou, H.; Kaihara, K.; Roe, M. W.; Brady, M. J.; Wondisford, F. E.:
Insulin regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis through phosphorylation
of CREB-binding protein. Nature Med. 10: 633-637, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/20/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/21/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/6/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/26/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/19/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 11/19/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/10/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/23/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/5/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/10/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/24/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/16/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/17/2000
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/10/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 4/16/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/25/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/23/1998
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 11/18/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 8/31/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/6/1994

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2013
wwang: 7/1/2011
ckniffin: 6/20/2011
alopez: 6/16/2011
terry: 6/14/2011
carol: 5/25/2011
wwang: 1/24/2011
ckniffin: 1/6/2011
wwang: 6/28/2010
ckniffin: 6/21/2010
carol: 4/5/2010
mgross: 1/4/2010
terry: 12/8/2009
carol: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 2/2/2009
alopez: 9/11/2008
terry: 8/29/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 3/20/2008
terry: 3/7/2008
wwang: 12/26/2007
terry: 12/21/2007
wwang: 8/23/2007
ckniffin: 8/13/2007
alopez: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/30/2006
alopez: 9/27/2005
tkritzer: 5/13/2005
ckniffin: 5/4/2005
alopez: 1/6/2005
tkritzer: 10/26/2004
alopez: 6/28/2004
carol: 5/19/2004
ckniffin: 11/24/2003
carol: 11/19/2003
ckniffin: 11/13/2003
tkritzer: 11/6/2003
ckniffin: 11/3/2003
cwells: 10/10/2003
mgross: 3/14/2003
terry: 3/11/2003
tkritzer: 2/11/2003
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
mgross: 9/23/2002
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/7/2002
alopez: 1/30/2002
terry: 1/22/2002
mgross: 11/5/2001
alopez: 10/15/2001
cwells: 10/15/2001
cwells: 10/10/2001
cwells: 5/2/2001
cwells: 4/24/2001
mgross: 4/16/2001
terry: 11/17/2000
alopez: 8/10/2000
mgross: 7/7/2000
mcapotos: 5/24/2000
mcapotos: 5/22/2000
terry: 4/25/2000
mgross: 1/18/2000
terry: 1/13/2000
psherman: 4/20/1999
psherman: 4/16/1999
mgross: 3/25/1999
dkim: 11/6/1998
terry: 10/27/1998
terry: 10/23/1998
carol: 8/18/1998
terry: 8/17/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
carol: 1/26/1998
carol: 1/23/1998
mark: 11/19/1997
jenny: 11/18/1997
terry: 9/12/1997
terry: 9/10/1997
mark: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/3/1996
mark: 8/31/1996
mark: 1/14/1996
terry: 11/16/1995
mark: 8/18/1995
carol: 3/2/1995
carol: 3/1/1995
carol: 10/7/1994
carol: 10/6/1994

613482	TITLE *613482 CYCLIN L2; CCNL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones obtained from a human bone marrow stromal
cell cDNA library, followed by database analysis and PCR of a Raji
leukemia cell cDNA library, Yang et al. (2004) cloned CCNL2. The deduced
520-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 58.1 kD. CCNL2
has 2 cyclin domains and 2 putative transmembrane regions in its
N-terminal half, several arg/ser (RS) repeats in its C-terminal half,
and several nuclear localization signals. It shares 65% and 90% amino
acid identity with human CCNL1 (613384) and mouse Ccnl2, respectively.
Raji cell cDNA also contained a CCNL2 splice variant that encodes a
deduced 227-amino acid protein lacking the C-terminal RS motifs.
Northern blot analysis detected a transcript of about 5.0 kb in all
normal tissues analyzed, with highest expression in ovary, heart, liver,
and pancreas, and lower expression in spleen, colon, peripheral blood
leukocytes, lung, and skeletal muscle. RT-PCR detected CCNL2 in all
human hematopoietic cell lines and solid tumor cell lines examined.
Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that epitope-tagged CCNL2 localized
to the nucleus in transfected human hepatoma SMMC-7721 cells. CCNL2
showed both a generalized nucleoplasmic distribution and a punctate
distribution, where it colocalized in nuclear speckles with the splicing
factors SC35 (SFRS2; 600813) and 9G8 (SFRS7; 600572).

By screening a human fetal brain expression library for proteins that
bound to and were phosphorylated by the nuclear protein kinase DYRK1A
(600855), followed by database analysis, de Graaf et al. (2004)
identified 3 CCNL2 transcripts. The longest transcript, T1, is about 4.5
kb long and contains all CCNL2 exons, including the alternatively
spliced exon 6a, which introduces a stop codon. T1 encodes a truncated
CCNL2 protein lacking the RS domain of full-length CCNL2. The T2
transcript is about 2.4 kb long, lacks exon 6a, and encodes the
full-length CCNL2 protein. Transcript T3 is about 1.2 kb long, includes
an alternative polyadenylation signal in exon 6a, and lacks all further
exons. T3 and T1 encode identical truncated proteins. Using
exon-specific probes for Northern blot analysis, de Graaf et al. (2004)
found variable T1 expression in all tissues examined. T2 was
predominantly expressed in testis, and T3 was weakly expressed in almost
all tissues. PCR analysis gave similar results, with T1 and T3 highly
expressed in pancreas, and T2 highly expressed in testis.

Using Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses, Loyer et al. (2008) identified
5 distinct cyclin L2 splice variants that were variably expressed in a
tissue-dependent manner in human brain, liver, testis, spleen, and
thymus. The 5 variants have 3 distinct ORFs and encode the cyclin
L2-alpha, L2-beta-A, and L2-beta-B isoforms, which differ at their
C-terminal ends. Immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell lines
detected all cyclin L1 and L2 isoforms in both nucleoplasm and large
nuclear speckles and showed colocalization with the p110 isoform of
CDK11 (see CDK11A; 116951).

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Yang et al. (2004) showed that CCNL2
interacted with the hyperphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II (RNA
pol II; see 180660), with the p110 subunit of the cyclin-dependent
kinase PITSLRE (see 176873), and with the splicing factors SC35 and 9G8.
Mutation analysis revealed that the cyclin domains of CCNL2 associated
with RNA pol II and p110 PITSLRE, whereas the RS domain of CCNL2
associated with the splicing factors. Using HeLa cell nuclear extracts
in an in vitro splicing assay, Yang et al. (2004) showed that CCNL2
stimulated splicing activity. Overexpression of CCNL2 in SMMC-7721 cells
suppressed cell growth and induced apoptosis, which involved
upregulation of the apoptotic proteins p53 (TP53; 191170) and BAX
(600040) and downregulation of the antiapoptotic protein BCL2 (151430).
Injection of CCNL2 into SMMC-7721 tumors in nude mice inhibited tumor
growth and induced apoptotic changes.

Using FRAP analysis and live cell imaging, de Graaf et al. (2004) showed
that fluorescence-tagged CCNL2 localized transiently to nuclear speckles
in COS-7 cells. Full-length CCNL2, but not the isoform lacking the RS
domain, associated with DYRK1A in pull-down assays. CCNL2 also
interacted with DYRK2 (603496) and with p110 PITSLRE. In vitro
phosphorylation assays showed that DYRK1A phosphorylated CCNL2 on
ser330, ser338, and ser369, all of which are N-terminal to a proline
residue. De Graaf et al. (2004) concluded that CCNL2 is a highly mobile
component of nuclear speckles and that DYRK1A may regulate splicing by
phosphorylating CCNL2.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that the alpha and beta isoforms
of cyclin L1 and L2, but not the gamma isoform of cyclin L1, interacted
with the p110 isoform of CDK11 in a high molecular mass complex that
showed splicing activity in vitro. The alpha isoforms of cyclin L1 and
L2 also interacted with the p58 and p46 isoforms of CDK11. In vivo
splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin L1-alpha, L1-beta,
L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased intron-splicing
activity and altered alternative splice-site selection in a cyclin L1
and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner.

GENE STRUCTURE

De Graaf et al. (2004) determined that the CCNL2 gene contains at least
11 exons and spans about 13 kb. The alternatively spliced exon 6a
contains an alternative stop codon and polyadenylation site. The 3-prime
region of the CCNL2 gene contains 2 additional polyadenylation sites.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that the CCNL2 gene contains 14 exons and
spans about 11.8 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, de Graaf et al. (2004) mapped the CCNL2
gene to chromosome 1p36.33.

Yang et al. (2004) mapped the mouse Ccnl2 gene to the low terminus of
chromosome 4.

REFERENCE 1. de Graaf, K.; Hekerman, P.; Spelten, O.; Herrmann, A.; Packman,
L. C.; Bussow, K.; Muller-Newen, G.; Becker, W.: Characterization
of cyclin L2, a novel cyclin with an arginine/serine-rich domain:
phosphorylation by DYRK1A and colocalization with splicing factors. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 4612-4624, 2004.

2. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

3. Yang, L.; Li, N.; Wang, C.; Yu, Y.; Yuan, L.; Zhang, M.; Cao, X.
: Cyclin L2, a novel RNA polymerase II-associated cyclin, is involved
in pre-mRNA splicing and induces apoptosis of human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 11639-11648, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/13/2010

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
mgross: 8/7/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
mgross: 7/13/2010

602366	TITLE *602366 INTEGRIN-LINKED KINASE; ILK
;;p59
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ILK is a serine-threonine protein kinase that associates with the
cytoplasmic domain of beta integrins and acts as a proximal receptor
kinase regulating integrin-mediated signal transduction (Melchior et
al., 2002).

CLONING

Transduction of extracellular matrix signals through integrins
influences intracellular and extracellular functions, and appears to
require interaction of integrin cytoplasmic domains with cellular
proteins. Using a 2-hybrid screen, Hannigan et al. (1996) isolated from
a placenta cDNA library a gene that interacts with the cytoplasmic
domain of beta-1 integrin (135630). The gene, designated integrin-linked
kinase (ILK), encodes a predicted 451-amino acid protein with an
apparent molecular mass of 59 kD based on SDS-PAGE. Northern blot
analysis showed that the 1.8-kb ILK mRNA is widely expressed. The ILK
protein is a serine/threonine protein kinase with 4 ankyrin-like
repeats.

Melchior et al. (2002) cloned the human ILK gene. The deduced 452-amino
acid protein has 4 N-terminal ankyrin repeats, followed by a pleckstrin
homology domain and a C-terminal kinase catalytic domain composed of 11
subdomains.

By immunofluorescence analysis on cryosections of wildtype mouse hearts,
White et al. (2006) detected ILK protein in a pattern consistent with
that of the Z-bands and costameres of cardiomyocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Melchior et al. (2002) determined that the ILK gene contains 13 exons
and spans 9.0 kb. The ATG codon is located within exon 2. Intron 2 is
more than 3.6 kb long and has an Alu-like repeat sequence. The promoter
region has characteristics typical of housekeeping genes, such as high
GC content, the presence of CpG islands, lack of TATA and CAAT boxes,
and the presence of multiple transcription initiation start sites.

MAPPING

Hannigan et al. (1997) mapped the ILK gene to 11p15.5-p15.4 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Hannigan et al. (1996) found that ILK coimmunoprecipitated with beta-1
integrin from cell lysates, and that overexpression of ILK disrupted
cell architecture and inhibited adhesion to integrin substrates, while
inducing anchorage-independent growth in epithelial cells, suggesting
that ILK regulates integrin-mediated signal transduction.

By knockout of the ILK gene in human embryonic kidney cells and mouse
macrophages, Troussard et al. (2003) showed that ILK is essential for
regulation of AKT (see AKT1; 164730) activity. ILK knockout had no
effect on phosphorylation of AKT on thr308, but resulted in almost
complete inhibition of phosphorylation on ser473, causing significant
inhibition of AKT activity accompanied by significant stimulation of
apoptosis. ILK knockout also suppressed phosphorylation of GSK3B
(605004) on ser9 and cyclin D1 (168461) expression. Troussard et al.
(2003) concluded that ILK is an essential upstream regulator of AKT
activation.

Fukuda et al. (2003) found that PINCH1 (LIMS1; 602567) and ILK are
essential for prompt HeLa cell spreading and motility following passage,
and that they are crucial for cell survival. While ILK depletion reduced
AKT phosphorylation on ser473, PINCH1 depletion reduced AKT
phosphorylation on both ser473 and thr308. PINCH1 also regulated ILK
protein levels. Fukuda et al. (2003) concluded that PINCH1 is an
obligate partner of ILK and both are indispensable for proper control of
cell shape change, motility, and survival.

Bock-Marquette et al. (2004) demonstrated that the G-actin sequestering
peptide thymosin beta-4 (300159) promoted myocardial and endothelial
cell migration in the embryonic heart and retained this property in
postnatal cardiomyocytes. Survival of embryonic and postnatal
cardiomyocytes in culture was also enhanced by thymosin beta-4. Thymosin
beta-4 formed a functional complex with PINCH1 and ILK, resulting in
activation of the survival kinase AKT, also known as protein kinase B.
After coronary artery ligation in mice, thymosin beta-4 treatment
resulted in upregulation of Ilk and Akt activity in the heart, enhanced
early myocyte survival, and improved cardiac function. Bock-Marquette et
al. (2004) concluded that thymosin beta-4 promotes cardiomyocyte
migration, survival, and repair.

Lu et al. (2006) demonstrated a marked increase in ILK protein levels in
hypertrophic ventricles of patients with congenital and acquired outflow
tract obstruction. The increase in ILK was associated with the
activation of Rho family guanine triphosphatases, RAC1 (602048) and
CDC42 (116952), and known hypertrophic signaling kinases, including
extracellular signal-related kinases, such as ERK1/2 (see 601795) and
p70-S6-kinase (RPS6KB1; 608938). Transgenic mice with cardiac-specific
expression of a constitutively active or wildtype ILK exhibited a
compensated ventricular hypertrophic phenotype and displayed an
activation profile of guanine triphosphatases and downstream protein
kinases concordant with that seen in human hypertrophy. In contrast,
transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-restricted expression of a
kinase-inactive ILK were unable to mount a compensatory hypertrophic
response to angiogensin II (see 106150) in vivo. Lu et al. (2006)
concluded that ILK-regulated signaling represents a broadly adaptive
hypertrophic response mechanism relevant to a wide range of clinical
heart disease.

Using a forward genetic screen in zebrafish to identify novel genes
required for myocardial function, Knoll et al. (2007) identified the
lost-contact (loc) mutant, which has a nonsense mutation in the ilk
gene. The loc/ilk mutant is associated with a severe defect in
cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells that leads to severe myocardial
dysfunction.

In primary cultures of human fetal myocardial cells, Traister et al.
(2012) observed that adenovirus-mediated overexpression of ILK potently
increased the number of new aggregates of primitive cardioblasts. The
number of cardioblast colonies was significantly decreased when ILK
expression was knocked down with ILK-targeted siRNA. Overexpression of
an activation-resistant ILK mutant, R211A, resulted in a much greater
increase in the number of new cell aggregates compared to wildtype. The
cardiomyogenic effects of both wildtype and mutant ILK were accompanied
by concurrent activation of beta-catenin (116806) and increased
expression of progenitor cell marker islet-1 (ISL1; 600366), which was
also observed in lysates of transgenic mice with cardiac-specific
overexpression of the R211A mutant and wildtype ILK. Endogenous ILK
expression was shown to increase in concert with those of cardiomyogenic
markers during directed cardiomyogenic differentiation in human
embryonic stem cells. Traister et al. (2012) concluded that ILK
represents a regulatory checkpoint in human cardiomyogenesis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Knoll et al. (2007) sequenced the ILK gene in 192 Caucasian individuals
with severe dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see 115200) and identified a
heterozygous missense mutation in 1 patient (A262V; 602366.0001) that
was not found in 712 controls.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sakai et al. (2003) found that embryonic mice lacking Ilk expression
died at the periimplantation stage due to failure of epiblast
polarization and cavitation. The impaired epiblast polarization was
associated with abnormal F-actin accumulation at sites of integrin
attachment to the basement membrane zone. Likewise, Ilk-deficient
fibroblasts showed abnormal F-actin aggregates associated with impaired
cell spreading and delayed formation of stress fibers and focal
adhesions. Ilk-deficient fibroblasts also had diminished proliferation
rates. The proliferation defect was not due to absent or reduced
Ilk-mediated phosphorylation of Akt or Gsk3b. Expression of mutant Ilk
lacking kinase activity and/or paxillin (602505) binding in
Ilk-deficient fibroblasts rescued cell spreading, F-actin organization,
focal adhesion formation, and proliferation.

Friedrich et al. (2004) found that endothelial cell-specific deletion of
Ilk in mice conferred placental insufficiency with decreased
labyrinthine vascularization, and yielded no viable offspring. Deletion
of Ilk in zebrafish resulted in marked patterning abnormalities of the
vasculature and was similarly lethal. Phenotypic rescue of Ilk-deficient
mouse lung endothelial cells with wildtype Ilk, but not by a
constitutively active mutant of Akt, suggested that regulation of
endothelial cell survival by ILK is independent of AKT.

The recessive 'main squeeze' (msq) mutation in zebrafish is embryonic
lethal due to heart failure. Bendig et al. (2006) found that
stretch-responsive genes, such as atrial natriuretic factor (ANF;
108780) and Vegf (192240), were downregulated in msq mutant hearts.
Through positional cloning, they found that heart failure in msq mutants
was due to a point mutation in the Ilk gene. In normal hearts, Ilk
specifically localized to costameres and sarcomeric Z discs. The msq
mutation reduced Ilk kinase activity and disrupted binding of Ilk to the
Z disc adaptor protein beta-parvin (PARVB; 608121). In msq mutant
embryos, heart failure could be suppressed by expression of Ilk or
constitutively active forms of Akt and Vegf. Antisense-mediated
abrogation of zebrafish beta-parvin phenocopied the msq phenotype.

White et al. (2006) performed targeted ablation of Ilk expression in the
mouse heart and observed spontaneous cardiomyopathy and heart failure by
6 weeks of age. The murine symptoms reflected classic human symptoms of
dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see 115200), with labored breathing, lack
of strength, and sudden death; postmortem examination revealed grossly
enlarged hearts in all animals, with dramatically dilated left
ventricular chambers and evidence of fibrosis on histology.
Immunofluorescence analysis of frozen heart sections from the mutant
mice revealed loss of Ilk from the sarcolemma, resulting in
disaggregation of adjacent cardiomyocytes within the heart tissue;
trichrome staining confirmed the dramatic disaggregation in mutant mice
compared to the compact arrangement of cardiomyocytes in controls.
Deletion of Ilk was associated with disruption of adhesion signaling
through the beta-1 integrin (135630)/Fak (PTK2; 600758) complex, and
loss of Ilk was accompanied by a reduction in cardiac Akt (164730)
phosphorylation, which normally provides a protective response against
stress. White et al. (2006) suggested that ILK plays a central role in
protecting the mammalian heart against cardiomyopathy and failure.

Lange et al. (2009) showed that mice carrying point mutations in the
proposed autophosphorylation site of the putative kinase domain and in
the pleckstrin homology domain of Ilk are normal. In contrast, mice with
point mutations in the conserved lysine residue of the potential
ATP-binding site of the kinase domain, which mediates Ilk binding to
alpha-parvin (608120), die owing to renal agenesis. Similar renal
defects occur in alpha-parvin-null mice. Lange et al. (2009) concluded
that their results provided genetic evidence that the kinase activity of
Ilk is dispensable for mammalian development; however, an interaction
between Ilk and alpha-parvin is critical for kidney development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
ILK, ALA262VAL

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to dilated cardiomyopathy (see 115200) has not been
confirmed.

In a Caucasian man with severe dilated cardiomyopathy who had been
diagnosed at 54 years of age and had an ejection fraction of only 25%,
Knoll et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 785C-T transition in
the ILK gene, resulting in an ala262-to-val (A262V) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in a proline-rich region of the ILK kinase
domain. In vitro kinase assay revealed a 63% reduction in kinase
activity for the A262V variant compared to wildtype.
Immunohistochemistry on a myocardial biopsy sample from the patient
showed a significant loss of endothelial cells.

REFERENCE 1. Bendig, G.; Grimmler, M.; Huttner, I. G.; Wessels, G.; Dahme, T.;
Just, S.; Trano, N.; Katus, H. A.; Fishman, M. C.; Rottbauer, W.:
Integrin-linked kinase, a novel component of the cardiac mechanical
stretch sensor, controls contractility in the zebrafish heart. Genes
Dev. 20: 2361-2372, 2006.

2. Bock-Marquette, I.; Saxena, A.; White, M. D.; DiMaio, J. M.; Srivastava,
D.: Thymosin beta-4 activates integrin-linked kinase and promotes
cardiac cell migration, survival and cardiac repair. Nature 432:
466-472, 2004.

3. Friedrich, E. B.; Liu, E.; Sinha, S.; Cook, S.; Milstone, D. S.;
MacRae, C. A.; Mariotti, M.; Kuhlencordt, P. J.; Force, T.; Rosenzweig,
A.; St-Arnaud, R.; Dedhar, S.; Gerszten, R. E.: Integrin-linked kinase
regulates endothelial cell survival and vascular development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 8134-8144, 2004.

4. Fukuda, T.; Chen, K.; Shi, X.; Wu, C.: PINCH-1 is an obligate
partner of integrin-linked kinase (ILK) functioning in cell shape
modulation, motility, and survival. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 51324-51333,
2003.

5. Hannigan, G. E.; Bayani, J.; Weksberg, R.; Beatty, B.; Pandita,
A.; Dedhar, S.; Squire, J.: Mapping of the gene encoding the integrin-linked
kinase, ILK, to human chromosome 11p15.5-p15.4. Genomics 42: 177-179,
1997.

6. Hannigan, G. E.; Leung-Hagesteijn, C.; Fitz-Gibbon, L.; Coppolino,
M. G.; Radeva, G.; Filmus, J.; Bell, J. C.; Dedhar, S.: Regulation
of cell adhesion and anchorage-dependent growth by a new beta-1-integrin-linked
protein kinase. Nature 379: 91-96, 1996.

7. Knoll, R.; Postel, R.; Wang, J.; Kratzner, R.; Hennecke, G.; Vacaru,
A. M.; Vakeel, P.; Schubert, C.; Murthy, K.; Rana, B. K.; Kube, D.;
Knoll, G.; and 17 others: Laminin-alpha-4 and integrin-linked kinase
mutations cause human cardiomyopathy via simultaneous defects in cardiomyocytes
and endothelial cells. Circulation 116: 515-525, 2007.

8. Lange, A.; Wickstrom, S. A.; Jakobson, M.; Zent, R.; Sainio, K.;
Fassler, R.: Integrin-linked kinase is an adaptor with essential
functions during mouse development. Nature 461: 1002-1106, 2009.

9. Lu, H.; Fedak, P. W. M.; Dai, X.; Du, C.; Zhou, Y.-Q.; Henkelman,
M.; Mongroo, P. S.; Lau, A.; Yamabi, H.; Hinek, A.; Husain, M.; Hannigan,
G.; Coles, J. G.: Integrin-linked kinase expression is elevated in
human cardiac hypertrophy and induces hypertrophy in transgenic mice. Circulation 114:
2271-2279, 2006.

10. Melchior, C.; Kreis, S.; Janji, B.; Kieffer, N.: Promoter characterization
and genomic organization of the gene encoding integrin-linked kinase
1. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1575: 117-122, 2002.

11. Sakai, T.; Li, S.; Docheva, D.; Grashoff, C.; Sakai, K.; Kostka,
G.; Braun, A.; Pfeifer, A.; Yurchenco, P. D.; Fassler, R.: Integrin-linked
kinase (ILK) is required for polarizing the epiblast, cell adhesion,
and controlling actin accumulation. Genes Dev. 17: 926-940, 2003.

12. Traister, A.; Aafaqi, S.; Masse, S.; Dai, X.; Li, M.; Hinek, A.;
Nanthakumar, K.; Hannigan, G.; Coles, J. G.: ILK induces cardiomyogenesis
in the human heart. PloS One 7: e37802, 2012. Note: Electronic Article.

13. Troussard, A. A.; Mawji, N. M.; Ong, C.; Mui, A.; St.-Arnaud,
R.; Dedhar, S.: Conditional knock-out of integrin-linked kinase demonstrates
an essential role in protein kinase B/Akt activation. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
22374-22378, 2003.

14. White, D. E.; Coutu, P.; Shi, Y.-F.; Tardif, J.-C.; Nattel, S.;
St. Arnaud, R.; Dedhar, S.; Muller, W. J.: Targeted ablation of ILK
from the murine heart results in dilated cardiomyopathy and spontaneous
heart failure. Genes Dev. 20: 2355-2360, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 05/16/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/18/1998

EDITED carol: 05/16/2013
alopez: 11/17/2009
terry: 11/13/2009
mgross: 10/6/2006
terry: 10/5/2006
tkritzer: 1/3/2005
terry: 12/28/2004
mgross: 10/18/2004
mgross: 10/5/2004
alopez: 2/24/1998
carol: 2/23/1998

609196	TITLE *609196 MELANOCORTIN 2 RECEPTOR ACCESSORY PROTEIN; MRAP
;;FAT TISSUE-SPECIFIC LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT PROTEIN; FALP;;
CHROMOSOME 21 OPEN READING FRAME 61; C21ORF61
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Melanocortin receptors (MCRs; see 155555) are G protein-coupled
receptors with diverse physiologic functions. MRAP and MRAP2 (615410)
are accessory proteins responsible for melanocortin receptor targeting
and function (Chan et al., 2009).

CLONING

In a search for novel proteins that were differentially expressed during
adipose conversion, Xu et al. (2002) detected a fat tissue-specific low
molecular weight protein (Falp) in mouse adipocytes at day 8 after
differentiation, but not in preadipocytes, by 2-dimensional gel
electrophoresis. They identified the human homolog by sequence
comparison. Analysis by RACE demonstrated that the human FALP gene
encodes 2 isoforms, FALP-alpha and FALP-beta. The FALP-alpha and
FALP-beta transcripts differ in their 3-prime terminal exons and encode
173- and 102-amino acid isoforms, respectively. FALP-alpha and FALP-beta
share a common N terminus containing a transmembrane region, but they
have distinct C termini. The transmembrane domain is conserved in mouse
Falp. Immunofluorescent analyses of mouse adipocytes showed that Falp
strictly localizes at a compact perinuclear membrane compartment.
Treatment of cells with insulin (176730) induced the redistribution of
Falp into numerous discrete spotty structures spreading throughout the
cytoplasm. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed expression
predominantly in white and brown adipose tissue.

Using RT-PCR, Metherell et al. (2005) detected highest expression of
both MRAP-alpha and MRAP-beta in adrenal gland. In other tissues, the
variants showed variable and tissue-specific expression. Other than
adrenal gland, MRAP-alpha showed highest expression in testis, breast,
thyroid, lymph node, and ovary, with weaker expression in fat, heart,
skin, jejunum, ileum, liver, stomach, and pituitary. In addition to
adrenal gland, MRAP-beta showed highest expression in breast and testis,
with lower expression in skin, brain, jejunum, ovary, and fat. Little to
no expression of either variant was detected in other tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Metherell et al. (2005) found that FALP and melanocortin-2 receptor
(MC2R; 607397) interacted and that both colocalized in endoplasmic
reticulum and plasma membrane. Therefore, they renamed FALP
'melanocortin-2 receptor accessory protein' (MRAP). They stated that
MRAP was required for MC2R expression in certain cell types, supporting
the idea that MRAP has a role in the processing, trafficking, or
function of MC2R.

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis of transfected CHO cells, Chan et al.
(2009) found that MRAP and MRAP2 formed homodimers and heterodimers.
Both proteins interacted with all MCRs examined. Both MRAP and MRAP2
showed similar functions in inhibiting or inducing cell surface
expression of individual MCRs and in their effects on MCR
ligand-dependent cAMP production.

Using fluorescence-tagged proteins expressed in CHO cells, Sebag and
Hinkle (2010) found that both MRAP and MRAP2 formed antiparallel
homodimers, with proteins inserted into the membrane in opposing
orientations. MRAP and MRAP2 also formed antiparallel heterodimers when
coexpressed. Both MRAP and MRAP2 escorted MC2R to the plasma membrane.
However, MRAP was essential for activation of MC2R signaling, whereas
MRAP2 functioned in a dominant-negative manner to inhibit MRAP-dependent
MC2R activation. Neither MRAP nor MRAP2 had any effect on alpha-MSH
(176830) binding to MC2R or on alpha-MSH-dependent MC2R activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Metherell et al. (2005) stated that the MRAP gene contains 6 exons that
extend 23 kb. MRAP-alpha, derived from exons 1 through 5, encodes a
172-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 19 kD;
MRAP-beta, derived from exons 1 through 4 and 6, encodes a 102-amino
acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 14.1 kD.

MAPPING

Xu et al. (2002) identified the MRAP gene at chromosome 21q22.1 by
sequence analysis. Metherell et al. (2005) identified the MRAP gene as
mutant in the form of familial glucocorticoid deficiency that maps to
21q22.1 (FGD2; 607398).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD), or hereditary unresponsiveness
to adrenocorticotropin (202200), is an autosomal recessive disorder
resulting from resistance to the action of ACTH on the adrenal cortex,
which normally stimulates glucocorticoid production. Affected
individuals are deficient in cortisol and, if untreated, are likely to
succumb to hypoglycemia or overwhelming infection in infancy or
childhood. Mutations of the ACTH receptor (melanocortin-2 receptor,
MC2R; 607397), account for approximately 25% of cases of familial
glucocorticoid deficiency. Several consanguineous families including 1
or more members with FGD whose disease did not segregate with either
MC2R or a locus at 8q12.1-q21.2 (609197) had been identified. In 1 such
family, Metherell et al. (2005) carried out a whole-genome scan by
microarray analysis of SNPs with genomic DNA from the parents, affected
children, and unaffected sibs. They identified a single candidate region
at 21q22.1 extending over a 2.75-Mbp region that gave a maximum lod
score of 2.64. Homozygosity of this region was confirmed and its size
was reduced to 2.2 Mbp in this and in another consanguineous family with
a single affected individual. Of 30 candidate genes located in the
critical region, only 1, MRAP, was expressed in the adrenal cortex but
not in liver or brain. Metherell et al. (2005) screened the entire exon
sequence and the relevant flanking intronic regions by DNA sequencing in
2 families showing linkage of glucocorticoid deficiency to 21q22.1
(GCCD2; 607398). Splice site mutations were identified in each of the 2
families, in each case involving nucleotide +1 of the donor site of
intron 3 (609196.0001, 609196.0002); another mutation at this position
was identified in an unrelated individual (609196.0003). Six other
individuals from 5 families carried a deletion, IVS3DS+1delG
(609196.0004). In 4 individuals from 3 families a 1-bp insertion at the
intron 3 donor site was found (609196.0005). Nine individuals from 8
families carried the missense mutation M1I (609196.0006) and 1
individual carried the nonsense mutation V44X (609196.0007). All of
these homozygous changes cosegregated with the disease and were not
found in 120 control chromosomes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G-T, +1

In the proband of a family with glucocorticoid deficiency mapping to
chromosome 21q22.1 (607398) and in 2 affected sibs, Metherell et al.
(2005) found a homozygous G-to-T transversion at the splice donor site
of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1G-T).

.0002
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G-C, +1

In the proband of a family with glucocorticoid deficiency (607398),
Metherell et al. (2005) found a G-to-C transversion at the splice donor
site of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1G-C). This mutation was also
found in an unrelated affected individual.

.0003
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G-A, +1

In an individual with glucocorticoid deficiency (607398), Metherell et
al. (2005) found a G-to-A transition at the splice donor site of intron
3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1G-A).

.0004
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G DEL, +1

In 6 individuals from 5 families with glucocorticoid deficiency
(607398), Metherell et al. (2005) found deletion of the first nucleotide
in the donor site of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1delG). This was
the second most frequent mutation causing glucocorticoid deficiency
unrelated to defect in the MC2R gene (see 202200) in their study.

.0005
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, T INS, +3

In 4 individuals from 3 families with glucocorticoid deficiency
(607398), Metherell et al. (2005) found an insertion of a T nucleotide
at the splice donor site of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3insT+3).

.0006
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, MET1ILE

Metherell et al. (2005) found the missense mutation met1-to-ile (M1I) in
the MRAP gene in 9 individuals from 8 families with glucocorticoid
deficiency (607398), making this the most frequent mutation causing
glucocorticoid deficiency unrelated to defect in the MC2R gene (see
202200) in their study.

.0007
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, 1-BP DEL, 128G

In an individual with glucocorticoid deficiency (607398), Metherell et
al. (2005) found homozygous deletion of a G nucleotide at position 128
of the MRAP gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein
(val44 to ter; V44X). This was the only MRAP mutation located in exon 4
found in their study.

.0008
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, 7-BP DEL, NT17

Modan-Moses et al. (2006) reported a Jewish Ethiopian family with
glucocorticoid deficiency (607398). The proband presented at the age of
19 months with hypocortisolism, severe psychomotor retardation,
myoclonic seizures, spastic quadriparesis, and microcephaly. Before a
definite diagnosis was made, a female sib was born in another hospital
and succumbed during the neonatal period due to sepsis and adrenal
crisis. The proband was diagnosed and found to be homozygous for a novel
MRAP mutation, a seven-base deletion in exon 3 (ACGCCTC). This deletion
caused a frameshift, resulting in a stop codon after 23 amino acids
(L31X). The sister of the proband carried the same mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chan, L. F.; Webb, T. R.; Chung, T.-T.; Meimaridou, E.; Cooray,
S. N.; Guasti, L.; Chapple, J. P.; Egertova, M.; Elphick, M. R.; Cheetham,
M. E.; Metherell, L. A.; Clark, A. J. L.: MRAP and MRAP2 are bidirectional
regulators of the melanocortin receptor family. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 106: 6146-6151, 2009.

2. Metherell, L. A.; Chapple, J. P.; Cooray, S.; David, A.; Becker,
C.; Ruschendorf, F.; Naville, D.; Begeot, M.; Khoo, B.; Nurnberg,
P.; Huebner, A.; Cheetham, M. E.; Clark, A. J. L.: Mutations in MRAP,
encoding a new interacting partner of the ACTH receptor, cause familial
glucocorticoid deficiency type 2. Nature Genet. 37: 166-170, 2005.

3. Modan-Moses, D.; Ben-Zeev, B.; Hoffmann, C.; Falik-Zaccai, T. C.;
Bental, Y. A.; Pinhas-Hamiel, O.; Anikster, Y.: Unusual presentation
of familial glucocorticoid deficiency with a novel MRAP mutation. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 3713-3717, 2006.

4. Sebag, J. A.; Hinkle, P. M.: Regulation of G protein-coupled receptor
signaling: specific dominant-negative effects of melanocortin 2 receptor
accessory protein 2. Sci. Signal. 3: ra28, 2010. Note: Electronic
Article.

5. Xu, A.; Choi, K.-L.; Wang, Y.; Permana, P. A.; Xu, L. Y.; Bogardus,
C.; Cooper, G. J. S.: Identification of novel putative membrane proteins
selectively expressed during adipose conversion of 3T3-L1 cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 293: 1161-1167, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/12/2013
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2007
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 2/8/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/8/2005

EDITED mgross: 09/12/2013
alopez: 7/11/2007
alopez: 3/2/2005
alopez: 2/8/2005

600925	TITLE *600925 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, RECEPTOR-TYPE, J; PTPRJ
;;DEP1;;
PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, ETA;;
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO COLON CANCER 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SCC1;;
CD148
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Experimental evidence indicates that specific protein-tyrosine
phosphatases (PTPases) interact with members of cascades to modulate
biologic function differentiation and development. Experiments suggested
that the PTPases PTP-beta (176882) and PTP-epsilon (600926) are involved
in the early molecular events for in vitro differentiation of mouse
erythroleukemia (MEL) as well as embryonic carcinoma (F9) cells
(Watanabe et al., 1995).

CLONING

A human homolog of mouse Ptprj, encoding PTP-beta-2, was identified by
Ostman et al. (1994).

Honda et al. (1994) cloned and characterized the PTPRJ gene, which they
designated HPTP-eta. The predicted protein has a molecular mass of
approximately 220 to 250 kD and contains an extracellular region
homologous to fibronectin type III repeats, a transmembrane region, and
a cytoplasmic region containing a single PTPase-like domain.

MAPPING

Honda et al. (1994) mapped the PTPRJ gene to chromosome 11p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Using mouse cDNA for PTP-beta-2 and PTP-epsilon, Watanabe et al. (1995)
assigned the genes, Ptprj and Ptpre, to chromosome 2 and chromosome 7,
respectively.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nonfamilial, 'sporadic' cancers, which represent most cancer cases, have
a significant hereditary component, but the genes involved have low
penetrance and are extremely difficult to detect. Therefore, mapping and
cloning of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for cancer susceptibility in
animals may help identify homologous genes in humans. For example,
several cancer susceptibility QTLs were mapped in mouse and rat. One of
these, the mouse gene Scc1 (susceptibility to colon cancer-1), was
positionally cloned by Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) and identified as Ptprj,
which encodes a receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase. Furthermore,
in human cancers of colon, lung, and breast, Ruivenkamp et al. (2002)
found frequent deletions, loss of heterozygosity, and missense mutations
in the PTPRJ gene (see, e.g., 600925.0001-600925.0002).

Lesueur et al. (2005) assessed common SNPs and haplotypes of the PTPRJ
gene in 4,512 breast cancer (114480) patients and 4,554 controls from
East Anglia, U.K. The authors observed a difference in the haplotype
frequency distributions between patients and controls (P = 0.0023; OR =
0.81; range 0.72-0.92). They concluded that carrying a specific PTPRJ
haplotype may confer a protective effect on the risk of breast cancer.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
PTPRJ, ARG214CYS

Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) identified 5 somatic missense mutations in the
PTPRJ gene in colon cancer (see 114500). Sequence alignments, secondary
structure prediction, and homology modeling predicted with high
confidence levels that most of these in the extracellular portion of the
gene product occur in exposed regions available for interactions with
ligands or other proteins and could affect the signaling process. One of
these missense mutations was an arg214-to-cys mutation (R214C) that
resulted in loss of a positive charge.

.0002
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
PTPRJ, GLN276PRO

In a colon cancer (see 114500), Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) found a
gln276-to-pro (Q276P) mutation in exon 5 of the PTPRJ gene. The change
was predicted to result in torsional stress.

REFERENCE 1. Honda, H.; Inazawa, J.; Nishida, J.; Yazaki, Y.; Hirai, H.: Molecular
cloning, characterization, and chromosomal localization of a novel
protein-tyrosine phosphatase, HPTP eta. Blood 84: 4186-4194, 1994.

2. Lesueur, F.; Pharoah, P. D.; Laing, S.; Ahmed, S.; Jordan, C.;
Smith, P. L.; Luben, R.; Wareham, N. J.; Easton, D. F.; Dunning, A.
M.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Allelic association of the human homologue
of the mouse modifier Ptprj with breast cancer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
2349-2356, 2005.

3. Ostman, A.; Yang, Q.; Tonks, N. K.: Expression of DEP-1, a receptor-like
protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, is enhanced with increasing cell density. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9680-9684, 1994.

4. Ruivenkamp, C. A. L.; van Wezel, T.; Zanon, C.; Stassen, A. P.
M.; Vlcek, C.; Csikos, T.; Klous, A. M.; Tripodis, N.; Perrakis, A.;
Boerrigter, L.; Groot, P. C.; Lindeman, J.; Mooi, W. J.; Meijjer,
G. A.; Scholten, G.; Dauwerse, H.; Paces, V.; van Zandwijk, N.; van
Ommen, G. J. B.; Demant, P.: Ptprj is a candidate for the mouse colon-cancer
susceptibility locus Scc1 and is frequently deleted in human cancers. Nature
Genet. 31: 295-300, 2002.

5. Watanabe, T.; Mukouyama, Y.; Rhodes, M.; Thomas, M.; Kume, T.;
Oishi, M.: Chromosomal location of murine protein tyrosine phosphatase
(Ptprj and Ptpre) genes. Genomics 29: 793-795, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/9/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/2/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2011
wwang: 1/9/2009
carol: 4/18/2005
alopez: 6/24/2002
terry: 6/19/2002
carol: 4/2/1999
joanna: 1/7/1999
dkim: 7/23/1998
alopez: 8/7/1997
terry: 11/7/1995

