611275	TITLE *611275 BCL2/ADENOVIRUS E1B 19-KD PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2-LIKE; BNIPL
;;BNIP2-SIMILAR; BNIPS;;
BNIPL1;;
BNIPL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis using full-length BNIP2 (603292) or its BNIP2 and
CDC42GAP (ARHGAP1; 602732) homology (BCH) domain as probe, followed by
5-prime RACE of human kidney epithelial cells, Zhou et al. (2002) cloned
BNIPL, which they called BNIPS. They identified 2 alternative splicing
isoforms, a deduced 275-amino acid BNIPS-alpha isoform and a deduced
204-amino acid BNIPS-beta isoform. The BNIPS-alpha isoform shared 46%
identity with BNIP2 with higher similarity over the BCH domain, which is
predicted to comprise several alpha helices. PCR analysis detected
differing levels of expression of the BNIPS-alpha and BNIPS-beta
isoforms in a number of human cancer cell lines including breast cancer
MCF-7, HeLa cells, 293T embryonic transformed kidney epithelial cells,
and stomach and colon cancer cell lines. PCR analysis of mouse tissues
detected expression of BNIPS-alpha in all tissues examined.
Immunofluorescence studies localized the BNIPS-alpha isoform to the
cytosol and BNIPS-beta primarily to the nucleus.

Using a high-throughput transfection screen for suppressors of cell
growth from a human placental cDNA library, followed by 5-prime RACE,
Qin et al. (2003) independently cloned BNIPL. They identified 2
alternatively spliced isoforms that used different start codons: a
deduced 275-amino acid isoform, BNIPL1, isoform identical to the
BNIPS-alpha isoform isolated by Zhou et al. (2002) and a longer
357-amino acid isoform, BNIPL2, containing 82 additional N-terminal
amino acids, followed by the 275-amino acid sequence identical to
BNIPL1. By Northern blot analysis of human tissues, Shen et al. (2003)
detected a 2.4-kb BNIPL transcript in placenta and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhou et al. (2002) showed that overexpression of the BNIPS-alpha isoform
in human breast cancer cells caused cell rounding, which was accompanied
by annexin V (ANXA5; 131230) binding, cell shrinkage, and detachment.
BNIPS-beta showed no change in cell morphology. The BCH domain was
required for proapoptotic activity. Zhou et al. (2002) concluded that
BNIPS-alpha induces apoptosis.

Using yeast 2-hybrid and pull-down affinity studies, Qin et al. (2003)
showed that the BCH domain of the BNIPL2 isoform interacted with Bcl2
(151430), Cdc42GAP, and with itself. They demonstrated that the BCH
domain was responsible for the ability of BNIPL2 to suppress GAP
activity of Cdc42GAP toward CDC42 (116952) and for the proapoptotic
function of BNIPL2. Shen et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of
BNIPL inhibited cell growth in human hepatocarcinoma cells. Using in
vivo and in vitro assays, they found that BNIPL interacted with MIF
(153620) and GFER (600924).

GENE STRUCTURE

Qin et al. (2003) determined that the BNIPL gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Qin et al. (2003) mapped the BNIPL gene to
chromosome 1q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Qin, W.; Hu, J.; Guo, M.; Xu, J.; Li, J.; Yao, G.; Zhou, X.; Jiang,
H.; Zhang, P.; Shen, L.; Wan, D.; Gu, J.: BNIPL-2, a novel homologue
of BNIP-2, interacts with Bcl-2 and Cdc42GAP in apoptosis. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 379-385, 2003.

2. Shen, L.; Hu, J.; Lu, H.; Wu, M.; Qin, W.; Wan, D.; Li, Y.-Y.;
Gu, J.: The apoptosis-associated protein BNIPL interacts with two
cell proliferation-related proteins, MIF and GFER. FEBS Lett. 540:
86-90, 2003.

3. Zhou, Y. T.; Soh, U. J. K.; Shang, X.; Guy, G. R.; Low, B. C.:
The BNIP-2 and Cdc42GAP homology/Sec14p-like domain of BNIP-S-alpha
is a novel apoptosis-inducing sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 7483-7492,
2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/1/2007

EDITED wwang: 08/01/2007
wwang: 8/1/2007

606165	TITLE *606165 BOL-LIKE; BOLL
;;BOULE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; BOULE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Deletions encompassing the Y chromosomal DAZ genes (deleted in
azoospermia; 400003) are the most common molecularly defined cause of
infertility in humans. An array of 4 DAZ genes in 2 clusters is located
on the Y chromosome and encodes RNA-binding proteins with a common RNA
recognition motif and a series of 8 to 18 DAZ repeats consisting of 24
amino acids each that are rich in N, Y, and Q amino acid residues. DAZ
homologs, identified in diverse organisms, are required for germ cell
development but differ in null phenotypes and expression patterns. In
flies, disruption of the DAZ homolog 'Boule' causes male meiotic arrest
(Eberhart et al., 1996).

CLONING

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system with a DAZ/DAZL (601486) construct as
bait, Xu et al. (2001) identified an additional member of the human DAZ
gene family, BOULE. The protein encoded by human BOULE is more similar
to Drosophila Boule than to human DAZ or DAZL. The BOULE protein
contains a single RNA binding domain with signature RNP1 and RNP2
repeats. Extensive similarity is shared by the potential RNA binding
domains of fly Boule, human BOULE, DAZ, and DAZL. The protein predicted
by a mouse Boule cDNA clone was 86% identical to human BOULE.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2001) found that human and mouse BOULE resemble the
invertebrate meiotic regulator Boule, the proposed ortholog of DAZ, in
sequence and expression pattern, and hence likely perform a similar
meiotic function. In contrast, human DAZ and DAZL are expressed much
earlier than BOULE in prenatal germ stem cells and spermatogonia; DAZL
also is expressed in female germ cells. These data suggested that
homologs of the DAZ gene family can be grouped into 2 subfamilies (BOULE
and DAZL) and that members of the DAZ family evolved from an ancestral
meiotic regulator, Boule, to assume distinct, yet overlapping, functions
in germ cell development.

Xu et al. (2003) reported that a human BOULE transgene was capable of
advancing meiosis in infertile Boule mutant flies. The authors proposed
that BOULE may encode a key conserved switch that regulates progression
of germ cells through meiosis in men.

In Drosophila, Boule is expressed in the prophase of the first meiotic
division and regulates the expression of 'twine,' a cdc25 phosphatase
required for entering the G2/M transition phase to complete the first
meiotic division. Luetjens et al. (2004) investigated whether a common
mechanism underlies the block of germ cell maturation observed in
idiopathic and nonidiopathic azoospermic patients with meiotic arrest
(270960). They examined, by immunohistochemistry, expression of BOULE
and CDC25A phosphatase protein (116947), the human homolog of Drosophila
'twine,' in 47 men with meiotic arrest, mixed atrophy, or normal
spermatogenesis. The presence of genetic alterations in the BOULE gene
was investigated by SSCP. BOULE protein expression in men with complete
spermatogenesis was restricted to stages from leptotene up to stages of
late spermatocytes, whereas CDC25A expression ranged from leptotene
spermatocytes to elongating spermatids. Although spermatocytes were
present in all testicular biopsies with meiotic arrest (28 testes),
BOULE protein expression was completely lacking. In addition, in nearly
all biopsies in which BOULE was absent, CDC25A was concomitantly
lacking. However, no mutations or polymorphisms in the BOULE gene were
identified that could explain the lack of BOULE or CDC25A expression.
The authors concluded that a major group of infertile men with meiotic
arrest lack BOULE protein and its putative target, CDC25A expression.
They also concluded that spermatogenic failure seems to arise from
factor(s) upstream of BOULE, which are possibly involved in regulating
transcription and/or translation of BOULE.

Kee et al. (2009) used a germ cell reporter to quantify and isolate
primordial germ cells derived from both male and female human embryonic
stem cells. By silencing and overexpressing genes that encode germ
cell-specific cytoplasmic RNA-binding proteins (not transcription
factors), Kee et al. (2009) modulated human germ cell formation and
developmental progression and observed that human DAZL (601486)
functions in primordial germ cell formation, whereas closely related
genes DAZ (400003) and BOULE promote later stages of meiosis and
development of haploid gametes.

EVOLUTION

Phylogenetic analyses suggested to Xu et al. (2001) that the DAZ gene
family is composed of 2 subfamilies required for different stages of
germ cell development: DAZL for early germ cell function and Boule for
meiotic function. Boule is the ancestral gene that is conserved from
flies to humans, whereas DAZL arose in the early vertebrate lineage and
DAZ arrived on the Y chromosome during primate evolution. Thus, Xu et
al. (2001) referred to DAZL as the 'father' of DAZ; homologs are
required for both female and male germ cell development in other
organisms. They referred to Boule as the 'grandfather' of DAZ.

Xu et al. (2003) investigated the micro- and macroevolution of BOULE
within primates, mammals, and metazoans. Sequence divergence of BOULE
was unexpectedly low, and rapid evolution was not detectable.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping, Xu et al. (2001) placed the human BOLL gene
on chromosome 2q33 and verified the location by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The mouse Boule gene maps to chromosome 1, in a region
syntenic to human 2q33. A male sterile mouse mutation, jsd (juvenile
spermatogonial degeneration), maps to mouse chromosome 1 in that region.

ANIMAL MODEL

VanGompel and Xu (2010) generated Boule knockout mice and found it to be
required only for spermatogenesis, as in Drosophila. Meiosis completed
normally in the absence of Boule, and haploid round spermatids were
readily detected. However, round spermatids did not progress beyond step
6, revealing a novel role for Boule in spermiogenesis: the
differentiation of round spermatids into mature spermatozoa. Expression
of key regulators of spermiogenesis was unaffected in Boule -/- mice,
suggesting to the authors that Boule may regulate germ cell
differentiation through a novel pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Eberhart, C. G.; Maines, J. Z.; Wasserman, S. A.: Meiotic cell
cycle requirement for a fly homologue of human deleted in azoospermia. Nature 381:
783-785, 1996.

2. Kee, K.; Angeles, V. T.; Flores, M.; Nguyen, H. N.; Reijo Pera,
R. A.: Human DAZL, DAZ and BOULE genes modulate primordial germ-cell
and haploid gamete formation. Nature 462: 222-225, 2009.

3. Luetjens, C. M.; Xu, E. Y.; Rejo Pera, R. A.; Kamischke, A.; Nieschlag,
E.; Gromoll, J.: Association of meiotic arrest with lack of BOULE
protein expression in infertile men. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
1926-1933, 2004.

4. VanGompel, M. J. W.; Xu, E. Y.: A novel requirement in mammalian
spermatid differentiation for the DAZ-family protein Boule. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2360-2369, 2010.

5. Xu, E. Y.; Lee, D. F.; Klebes, A.; Turek, P. J.; Kornberg, T. B.;
Reijo Pera, R. A.: Human BOULE gene rescues meiotic defects in infertile
flies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 169-175, 2003.

6. Xu, E. Y.; Moore, F. L.; Reijo Pera, R. A.: A gene family required
for human germ cell development evolved from an ancient meiotic gene
conserved in metazoans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7414-7419, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 08/02/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/29/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/2/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/26/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/31/2001

EDITED alopez: 08/02/2013
terry: 9/9/2010
alopez: 1/5/2010
terry: 12/29/2009
alopez: 8/2/2005
tkritzer: 11/2/2004
terry: 10/26/2004
alopez: 7/31/2001

602133	TITLE *602133 PHOSPHORIBOSYLFORMYLGLYCINAMIDINE SYNTHASE; PFAS
;;PHOSPHORIBOSYLFORMYLGLYCINAMIDE AMIDOTRANSFERASE; FGARAT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Five-prime-phosphoribosyl N-formylglycinamide (FGAR) amidotransferase
(EC 6.3.5.3) catalyzes the fourth reaction in the de novo synthesis of
purines, that is, the conversion of FGAR to 5-prime-phosphoribosyl
N-formylglycinamidine (FGAM) (summary by Barnes et al., 1994).

CLONING

Barnes et al. (1994) purified and characterized
phosphoribosylformylglycinamide amidotransferase (FGARAT) the fourth
enzyme in the de novo purine pathway.

GENE FUNCTION

The human GARS-AIRS-GART locus (138440), located on chromosome 21,
encodes 3 of the 10 enzymatic steps necessary for the conversion of
phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate to inosine monophosphate by the de novo
purine pathway. The 3 enzyme activities are encoded in a linear,
nonoverlapping fashion on the GARS-AIRS-GART mRNA, starting at the
5-prime end of the cDNA. These enzymatic activities catalyze the second,
fifth, and third step of the de novo purine pathway, respectively.
FGARAT catalyzes the fourth step in the pathway (summary by Brodsky et
al., 1997).

Brodsky et al. (1997) reported that, unlike the developmentally
regulated expression of the GARS-AIRS-GART locus, expression of the
FGARAT gene appears to be constitutive.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Barnes et al. (1994) mapped the
PFAS gene to chromosome 17p.

REFERENCE 1. Barnes, T. S.; Bleskan, J. H.; Hart, I. M.; Walton, K. A.; Barton,
J. W.; Patterson, D.: Purification of, generation of monoclonal antibodies
to, and mapping of phosphoribosyl N-formylglycinamide amidotransferase. Biochemistry 33:
1850-1860, 1994.

2. Brodsky, G.; Barnes, T.; Bleskan, J.; Becker, L.; Cox, M.; Patterson,
D.: The human GARS-AIRS-GART gene encodes two proteins which are
differentially expressed during human brain development and temporally
overexpressed in cerebellum of individuals with Down syndrome. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 2043-2050, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/26/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/02/2012
alopez: 3/16/2010
mark: 12/20/1997
jenny: 12/2/1997
jenny: 11/26/1997

607070	TITLE *607070 ZINC FINGER MYND DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; ZMYND10
;;BLU
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ZMYND10 gene encodes a protein involved in motile ciliary function
(Zariwala et al., 2013).

CLONING

By physical cloning methodologies and bioinformatic computational
analyses, Lerman and Minna (2000) identified a number of genes,
including BLU, in a region of chromosome 3p21.3 that is associated with
a putative lung cancer tumor suppressor gene. The deduced 440-amino acid
conserved soluble cytoplasmic protein is 89% identical to the mouse
protein and is somewhat homologous to the MTG/ETO family of
transcription factors (see CBFA2T1; 133435). It contains a zinc knuckle
motif. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 2.0-kb transcript
limited to lung, with trace expression in kidney, liver, placenta, and
brain; a shorter isoform was found to be expressed in testis. BLU was
expressed in few lung cancer cell lines. Mutations were found in
approximately 5% of cell lines tested, but none of the genes identified
in the search had a high frequency of mutations. Lerman and Minna (2000)
suggested that BLU is a candidate for functional tumor suppressor gene
studies.

In mouse embryos, Moore et al. (2013) found expression of the Zmynd10
gene in the ciliated epithelial layers associated with nasal and lung
epithelium, where motile cilia are located.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Lerman and Minna (2000) determined that
the BLU gene contains 12 exons and spans 4.7 kb. The testis isoform
contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lerman and Minna (2000) determined that
the BLU gene resides in a 120-kb critical region for a lung cancer tumor
suppressor gene on chromosome 3p21.3.

GENE FUNCTION

To evaluate the role of BLU in tumorigenesis, Agathanggelou et al.
(2003) analyzed BLU promoter methylation status in tumor cell lines and
detected promoter region hypermethylation in 39% of lung, 42% of breast,
50% of kidney, 86% of neuroblastoma, and 80% of nasopharyngeal tumor
cell lines. Methylation of the BLU promoter region correlated with the
downregulation of BLU transcript expression in tumor cell lines.
Expression was recovered in tumor cell lines treated with 5-aza
2-deoxycytidine.

Zariwala et al. (2013) found that ZMYND10 bound to LRRC6 (614930) in
HEK293T and in human tracheal epithelial cells. These 2 proteins
localized to both the basal body and the striated rootlet in Xenopus
ciliated epithelial cells. Pull-down studies indicated that the
C-terminal MYND domain of ZMYND10 was insufficient for interaction with
the CS domain of LRRC6; rather, a C-terminal fragment that extended
beyond the MYND domain was necessary for interaction between the 2
proteins. Similar studies using progressive truncating constructs of
LRRC6 confirmed that the C-terminal CS domain of LRRC6 was sufficient
for pull-down of ZMYND10. The C termini of the 2 proteins engaged in a
protein-protein interaction that was abrogated by truncating mutations
in either gene in patients with CILD. Immunofluorescence studies in rat
trachea showed that ZMYND10 localized to sites proximal to the axoneme
and colocalized to cytoplasmic puncta of varying sizes with SAS6
(609321), which is required for centriole assembly during ciliogenesis,
and PCM1 (600299), which is a component of centriolar satellites. LRRC6
colocalized with ZMYND10 to the cytoplasmic puncta, but not to the
axonemal domain. In cellular studies, knockdown of ZMYND10 using shRNA
was associated with decreased amounts of DNAH5 and DNALI1 mRNA,
suggesting that ZMYND10 can regulate transcription of dynein proteins.
Overall, the findings indicated that ZMYND10 has a role in motile cilia.

Moore et al. (2013) also found that ZMYND10 interacted with LRRC6.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 14 families with primary ciliary dyskinesia-22
(CILD22; 615444) with or without situs inversus, Zariwala et al. (2013)
identified 11 different homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in
the ZMYND10 gene (see, e.g., 607070.0001-607070.0004). The initial
mutation was found by homozygosity mapping combined with whole-exome
sequencing in an Israeli individual with situs inversus. The subsequent
mutations were found by sequencing the ZMYND10 gene in 300 patients with
CILD. Transmission electron microscopy of respiratory ciliary epithelial
samples from affected individuals showed a lack of outer and inner
dynein arms on the ciliary axonemes, and immunofluorescence studies
showed absence of the inner-arm protein DNALI1 (602135) and the
outer-arm protein DNAH5 (603335). Truncating mutations in ZMYND10 (see,
e.g., 606070.0002 and 606070.0004) abrogated the interaction between
ZMYND10 and LRRC6, whereas missense mutations did not.

Moore et al. (2013) identified biallelic mutations in the ZMYND10 gene
(see, e.g., 607070.0001; 607070.0005-607070.0006) in 6 (16%) of 38
families with CILD characterized by inner and outer dynein arm defects
on ultrastructural analysis of respiratory epithelial cells. The initial
mutations were found by whole-exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. The mutations segregated with the disorder in the families.
Most patients had a loss of inner and outer dynein arms from the cilia,
but those with the missense mutation V16G (607070.0001) had an
apparently intermediate phenotype with variable retention of the inner
and outer dynein arms. Video microscopy of most patients showed cilia
that were almost completely static, but 1 patient with the V16G mutation
had cilia with a slowed and stiff beating pattern.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zariwala et al. (2013) found that knockdown of the Zmynd10 gene in
zebrafish caused ciliopathy phenotypes, including the appearance of 3
otoliths, kidney cysts, and dilated kidney tubules. Cilia in the kidney
showed disorganized cilia bundles with either severely reduced beat
amplitude or paralysis, and olfactory motile cilia were nearly
completely paralyzed. Knockdown of Zmynd10 in Xenopus embryos caused a
defect in ciliogenesis and a weaker flow.

Moore et al. (2013) found that the Drosophila Zmynd10 ortholog is highly
expressed in the transcriptome of developing chordotonal sensory
neurons, which have motile mechanosensory cilia. In adults, Zmynd10 was
exclusively expressed in the testes. Drosophila homozygous for a
loss-of-function Zmynd10 mutation showed uncoordinated locomotion due to
defective proprioception as a result of malfunctioning chordotonal
neurons. The mice were also infertile. Ultrastructural analysis of the
chordotonal neuron cilium from mutant flies showed that the inner and
outer dynein arms were reduced, although ciliogenesis appeared normal.
Sperm from mutant flies were immotile and sperm flagella showed a
partial loss of dynein arms, as well as axoneme splitting.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22
ZMYND10, VAL16GLY (dbSNP rs138815960)

In a patient with primary ciliary dyskinesia-22 (CILD22; 615444) and
situs inversus, Zariwala et al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.47T-G
transversion in exon 1 of the ZMYND10 gene, resulting in a val16-to-gly
(V16G) substitution at a conserved residue. Video microscopy of patient
respiratory cells showed immotile cilia, and electron microscopy showed
outer and inner dynein arm defects.

In 3 patients from 2 unrelated families of northern European descent
with CILD22, Moore et al. (2013) identified a homozygous V16G (dbSNP
rs138815960) substitution. The mutation, which was found by whole-exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in the families. The V16G variant was present in 6 of 4,300
European control exomes from the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project Exome
Variant Server, corresponding to a frequency of 0.000698; the variant
was absent from 700 in-house control exomes. The clinical features were
available for 1 of the homozygous patients. She had recurrent
respiratory infections from birth, persistent rhinitis, recurrent otitis
media, and bronchiectasis. Light microscopy of respiratory epithelial
cells from this patient showed cilia with slowed frequency and stiff
beat, and electron microscopy showed reduced, but not absent, inner and
outer dynein arms. Two additional unrelated patients with CILD22 were
compound heterozygous for V16G and another pathogenic mutation in the
ZMYND10 gene (see, e.g., 607070.0006). Haplotype analysis suggested a
founder effect among these patients. Transfection of the corresponding
mutation (V14G) in Drosophila restored fertility in a mutant model, but
not as fully as transfection with the wildtype protein. The findings
suggested that the V16G allele may retain some function.

.0002
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22
ZMYND10, 1-BP DEL, 300C

In a patient with CILD22 (615444), Zariwala et al. (2013) identified a
homozygous 1-bp deletion (c.300delC) in exon 3 of the ZMYND10 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Phe101SerfsTer38).
Video microscopy of patient respiratory cells showed immotile cilia, and
electron microscopy showed outer and inner dynein arm defects.

.0003
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22
ZMYND10, 1-BP DUP, 486A

In a Turkish patient, born of consanguineous parents, with CILD22
(615444), Zariwala et al. (2013) identified a homozygous 1-bp
duplication (c.486dupA) in exon 5 in the ZMYND10 gene, resulting in a
frameshift and premature termination (Ser163IlefsTer20).
Immunofluorescence studies showed decreases in DNAH5 (603335) and DNALI1
(602135), and video microscopy of patient respiratory cells showed
immotile cilia.

.0004
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22
ZMYND10, GLN323TER

In 2 unrelated patients of French and Hispanic origin, respectively,
with CILD22 (615444), Zariwala et al. (2013) identified a homozygous
c.967C-T transition in exon 9 of the ZMYND10 gene, resulting in a
gln323-to-ter (Q323X) substitution. Both patients had situs inversus and
defects of the outer and inner dynein arms on electron microscopy. Video
microscopy, which was done on 1 patient's respiratory cells, showed
immotile cilia.

.0005
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22
ZMYND10, 2-BP DEL, 589TG

In a girl of northern European descent with CILD22 (615444), Moore et
al. (2013) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the ZMYND10
gene: a 2-bp deletion (c.589_590delTG), resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination (Val198GlyfsTer13), and V16G (607070.0001). The
patient had respiratory distress from birth, chronic cough, persistent
rhinosinusitis, bronchiectasis, otitis media, and dextrocardia. Light
microscopy of respiratory epithelial cells showed static cilia, and
electron microscopy showed absence of the inner and outer dynein arms.
The unaffected parents were heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. The
mutation was present at a frequency of less than 0.01 in the 1000
Genomes Project database and was not found in 700 in-house control
exomes.

.0006
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 22
ZMYND10, LEU266PRO

In 2 sibs of northern European descent with CILD22 (615444), Moore et
al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.797T-C transition in the ZMYND10
gene, resulting in a leu266-to-pro (L266P) substitution at a conserved
residue in an LxxLL motif. Both had recurrent respiratory infections,
ciliary motility defects, and absence of the inner and outer dynein arms
on electron microscopy. One had situs inversus. The mutation was present
at a frequency of less than 0.01 in the 1000 Genomes Project database
and was not found in 700 in-house control exomes. The unaffected parents
were heterozygous for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Agathanggelou, A.; Dallol, A.; Zochbauer-Muller, S.; Morrissey,
C.; Honorio, S.; Hesson, L.; Martinsson, T.; Fong, K. M.; Kuo, M.
J.; Yuen, P. W.; Maher, E. R.; Minna, J. D.; Latif, F.: Epigenetic
inactivation of the candidate 3p21.3 suppressor gene BLU in human
cancers. Oncogene 22: 1580-1588, 2003.

2. Lerman, M. I.; Minna, J. D.: The 630-kb lung cancer homozygous
deletion region on human chromosome 3p21.3: identification and evaluation
of the resident candidate tumor suppressor genes. Cancer Res. 60:
6116-6133, 2000.

3. Moore, D. J.; Onoufriadis, A.; Shoemark, A.; Simpson, M. A.; zur
Lage, P. I.; de Castro, S. C.; Bartoloni, L.; Gallone, G.; Petridi,
S.; Woollard, W. J.; Antony, D.; Schmidts, M.; and 19 others: Mutations
in ZMYND10, a gene essential for proper axonemal assembly of inner
and outer dynein arms in humans and flies, cause primary ciliary dyskinesia. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 93: 346-356, 2013.

4. Zariwala, M. A.; Gee, H. Y.; Kurkowiak, M.; Al-Mutairi, D. A.;
Leigh, M. W.; Hurd, T. W.; Hjeij, R.; Dell, S. D.; Chaki, M.; Dougherty,
G. W.; Adan, M.; Spear, P. C.; and 46 others: ZMYND10 is mutated
in primary ciliary dyskinesia and interacts with LRRC6. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 93: 336-345, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/1/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/4/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/25/2002

EDITED carol: 10/03/2013
carol: 10/2/2013
ckniffin: 10/1/2013
mgross: 5/19/2004
tkritzer: 8/4/2003
mgross: 6/27/2002
mgross: 6/25/2002

609619	TITLE *609619 GOLGI AUTOANTIGEN, GOLGIN SUBFAMILY A, 8B; GOLGA8B
;;GOLGIN 67;;
KIAA0855
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis with the sequence of the Golgi complex autoantigen
golgin-95/golgin-130 (GOLGA2; 602580) as probe, Eystathioy et al. (2000)
identified a novel Golgi autoantigen, golgin-67. Using overlapping cDNAs
and RACE, Eystathioy et al. (2000) constructed a full-length clone
encoding a 459-amino acid protein with numerous alpha-helical
coiled-coils. Golgin-67 shares 4 regions with sequence identity to
golgin-95, ranging between 42% and 60%. Golgin-67 is identical to the
KIAA0855 clone identified by Nagase et al. (1998) from a human brain
cDNA library.

Of 84 human anti-Golgi sera, Eystathioy et al. (2000) identified 5 (6%)
containing autoantibodies to golgin-67. Two of these sera, from patients
with Sjogren syndrome (270150) and rheumatoid arthritis (180300), bound
to a protein of 67 kD on Western blots. Anti-golgin-67 human sera and
affinity purified rabbit antibody to the recombinant protein gave
predominant Golgi staining.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GOLGA8B
gene to chromosome 15 (TMAP RH48788).

REFERENCE 1. Eystathioy, T.; Jakymiw, A.; Fujita, D. J.; Fritzler, M. J.; Chan,
E. K. L.: Human autoantibodies to a novel Golgi protein golgin-67:
high similarity with golgin-95/gm 130 autoantigen. J. Autoimmun. 14:
179-187, 2000.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Oharo, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 9/29/2005

EDITED carol: 07/28/2006
carol: 9/29/2005

139265	TITLE *139265 GUANOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE REDUCTASE; GMPR
;;GUANOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE REDUCTASE 1; GMPR1;;
GMP REDUCTASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Guanosine monophosphate reductase (EC 1.7.1.7) catalyzes the
irreversible NADPH-dependent reductive deamination of guanosine
monophosphate (GMP) to inosine monophosphate (IMP). GMPR is able to
convert guanosine nucleotides to the pivotal precursor of both guanine
(G) and adenine (A) nucleotides. It plays an important role in
maintaining the intracellular balance of A and G nucleotides.

CLONING

Beutler et al. (1990) and Mason et al. (1990) presented evidence that a
gene mapped to chromosome 6 by Kanno et al. (1989) was GMP reductase.
Henikoff and Smith (1989) had pointed out similarities between the
sequence described by Kanno et al. (1989) for the chromosome 6-encoded
gene and the sequence of E. coli GMP reductase. Kondoh et al. (1991)
found that the GMPR gene encodes a deduced 345-amino acid protein.

By Northern blot analysis, Deng et al. (2002) detected relatively high
levels of both GMPR1 and GMPR2 (610781) in heart, skeletal muscle, and
kidney, and relatively low levels of both in colon, thymus, and
peripheral blood leukocyte. Strong signals of GMPR2 were detected in
brain, liver, and placenta, whereas weak signals of GMPR1 were observed
in these tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kondoh et al. (1991) determined that the GMPR gene spans about 50 kb and
contains 9 exons. The gene contains 2 potential Sp1 binding sites within
exon 1, and a functional, atypical polyadenylation signal in exon 9.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Murano et al. (1994) mapped the
GMPR gene to 6p23.

HISTORY

Kanno et al. (1989) suggested that red cell G6PD (305900) is a fusion
protein consisting of an NH2-terminus encoded by chromosome 6 and a
COOH-portion coded by an X chromosome. This was subsequently disproved
by Beutler et al. (1990) and by Mason et al. (1990).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GMP REDUCTASE POLYMORPHISM
GMPR, PHE256ILE

Kondoh et al. (1991) identified a T-to-A substitution at nucleotide 766
of the GMPR gene resulting in substitution of isoleucine for
phenylalanine at amino acid residue 256 in the variant protein. The
frequency of the ile256 variant was thought to be about 30%. A silent
C-to-T change at codon 630 was also found, with a frequency of about
10%; the silent change created an additional restriction cleavage site.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Yoshida and Kan (1990)
REFERENCE 1. Beutler, E.; Gelbart, T.; Kuhl, W.: Human red cell glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase: all active enzyme has sequence predicted by the X chromosome-encoded
cDNA. Cell 62: 7-9, 1990.

2. Deng, Y.; Wang, Z.; Ying, K.; Gu, S.; Ji, C.; Huang, Y.; Gu, X.;
Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: NADPH-dependent GMP reductase
isoenzyme of human (GMPR2): expression, purification, and kinetic
properties. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 1035-1050, 2002.

3. Henikoff, S.; Smith, J. M.: The human mRNA that provides the N-terminus
of chimeric G6PD encodes GMP reductase. Cell 58: 1021-1022, 1989.

4. Kanno, H.; Huang, I.-Y.; Kan, Y. W.; Yoshida, A.: Two structural
genes on different chromosomes are required for encoding the major
subunit of human red cell glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Cell 58:
595-606, 1989.

5. Kondoh, T.; Kanno, H.; Chang, L.; Yoshida, A.: Identification
of common variant alleles of the human guanosine monophosphate reductase
gene. Hum. Genet. 88: 225-227, 1991.

6. Kondoh, T.; Kanno, H.; Chang, L.; Yoshida, A.: Genomic structure
and expression of human guanosine monophosphate reductase. Hum. Genet. 88:
219-224, 1991.

7. Mason, P. J.; Bautista, J. M.; Vulliamy, T. J.; Turner, N.; Luzzatto,
L.: Human red cell glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is encoded only
on the X chromosome. Cell 62: 9-10, 1990.

8. Murano, I.; Tsukahara, M.; Kajii, T.; Yoshida, A.: Mapping of
the human guanosine monophosphate reductase gene (GMPR) to chromosome
6p23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 19: 179-180,
1994.

9. Yoshida, A.; Kan, Y. W.: Origin of 'fused' glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase. Cell 62: 11-12, 1990.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1991

EDITED carol: 02/21/2007
carol: 2/21/2007
carol: 2/8/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/23/1992
carol: 2/13/1991

606330	TITLE *606330 PROTOCADHERIN-BETA 4; PCDHB4
;;PCDH-BETA-4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHB4 is
1 of 16 tandemly arranged genes in the PCDHB gene cluster (604967) on
chromosome 5q31. Unlike the PCDHA (see 604966) and PCDHG (see 604968)
genes, which function as 'variable' exons that are spliced to downstream
constant region exons to produce mRNAs, the PCDHB genes do not use
constant region exons to produce mRNAs. Thus, each single-exon PCDHB
gene encodes the extracellular, transmembrane, and short cytoplasmic
domains of the protein (Wu et al., 2001). For further information on the
PCDHB genes, see 604967.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHB4.

Wu et al. (2001) determined that human PCDHB4 is paralogous to 3 mouse
PCDHBs, Pcdhb5, Pcdhb7, and Ppcdhb9.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHB4 gene to
chromosome 5q31. They localized the mouse PCDHB genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/1/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 10/1/2001

608917	TITLE *608917 ATP SYNTHASE, MITOCHONDRIAL F1 COMPLEX, ASSEMBLY FACTOR 1; ATPAF1
;;ATP11, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; ATP11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In yeast, Atp11 is required for the proper assembly of the F1 component
of the mitochondrial ATP synthase complex. By searching an EST database
for sequences similar to yeast Atp11, followed by PCR and 5-prime RACE
of a human fetal liver cDNA library, Wang et al. (2001) obtained a
partial ATPAF1 cDNA. By database analysis they identified the complete
transcript, which encodes a deduced 328-amino acid protein with an
N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence. EST database analysis and
SAGE data indicated that ATPAF1 is widely expressed at moderate
abundance.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Wang et al. (2001) found that ATPAF1
interacted directly with the ATP synthase F1 beta subunit (ATP5B;
102910), but not with the F1 alpha subunit (ATP5A1; 164360).

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang et al. (2001) determined that the ATPAF1 gene contains 9 exons and
spans at least 32.5 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2001) mapped the ATPAF1 gene
to chromosome 1p33-p32.2.

REFERENCE 1. Wang, Z.-G.; White, P. S.; Ackerman, S. H.: Atp11p and Atp12p
are assembly factors for the F(1)-ATPase in human mitochondria. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 30773-30778, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/13/2004

EDITED mgross: 09/13/2004

300013	TITLE *300013 N-ALPHA-ACETYLTRANSFERASE 10, NatA CATALYTIC SUBUNIT; NAA10
;;ARD1 N-ACETYLTRANSFERASE, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, A; ARD1A;;
ARREST-DEFECTIVE PROTEIN 1; ARD1;;
TE2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

N-alpha-acetylation is one of the most common protein modifications that
occurs during protein synthesis and involves the transfer of an acetyl
group from acetyl-coenzyme A to the protein alpha-amino group. ARD1A,
together with NATH (NARG1, NAA15; 608000), is part of a major
N-alpha-acetyltransferase complex responsible for alpha-acetylation of
proteins and peptides (Sanchez-Puig and Fersht, 2006).

CLONING

Tribioli et al. (1994) described the physical and transcriptional
organization of a region of 140 kb in Xq28, 5-prime to the L1CAM gene
(308840). They established a transcriptional map of the region by
isolating and mapping CpG islands to the physical map, determining
partial nucleotide sequences, and studying the pattern of expression and
orientation of the transcripts. They succeeded in positioning 4
previously identified genes: L1CAM, AVPR2 (300538), HFC1 (300019), and
RENBP (312420). All genes in the region are rather small, ranging in
size from 2 to 30 kb, and very close to one another. With the exception
of the AVPR2 gene, they serve a housekeeping function, having a CpG
island at their 5-prime end and the same orientation of transcription.
This kind of organization is consistent with the one previously
described for the more distal portion of Xq28, between the color vision
pigment genes and the G6PD gene and indicates that genes with a
housekeeping and tissue-specific pattern of expression are interspersed
in the genome but are probably found in different 'transcriptional
domains' (characterized by different orientation). Three new genes were
identified and positioned. One of these, termed TE2, demonstrated 40%
identity with the ARD1 protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Whiteway and
Szostak, 1985), a protein required for the expression of an N-terminal
protein acetyltransferase activity.

Using Northern blot analysis, Sugiura et al. (2003) showed mouse Ard1
was ubiquitously expressed. By database analysis and PCR, Kim et al.
(2006) identified 3 splice variants of mouse Ard1 and 2 splice variants
of human ARD1. The mouse variants encoded proteins of 235-, 225-, and
198-amino acids. Ard1(235) and Ard1(225) have well-conserved
N-acetyltransferase domains, but Ard1(198) has only a partial domain.
The human ARD1 variants encoded proteins of 131- and 235-amino acids.
The C-terminal region of mouse Ard1(225) differs from that of both mouse
and human ARD1(235), likely due to alternative splicing of exon 8.
Western blot analysis of human cell lines showed a major intense band of
about 32 kD, which corresponded to ARD1(235). In contrast, mouse
fibroblasts strongly expressed a 30-kD protein, corresponding to
Ard1(225).

Asaumi et al. (2005) cloned ARD1 and identified it as a potential APP
(104760)-binding protein in a yeast 2-hybrid assay. The 235-amino acid
protein contains an N-acetyltransferase domain, a highly conserved
acetyl-coenzyme A binding motif, and a C-terminal APP-binding domain.

GENE FUNCTION

N-terminal protein acetylation is one of the most common protein
modifications which appears to play a role in many biologic processes.
The most extensively studied acetylated proteins are the 4 histones,
which in all eukaryotic cells organize the nucleosome particles and are
subject to an enzyme-catalyzed cycle of acetylation and deacetylation
which plays a role in chromatin structure, transcriptional activation,
and cell cycle transit. Lack of acetylation of histone H4 distinguishes
the inactive from the active mammalian X chromosome (Jeppesen and
Turner, 1993).

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with
the ODD domain of HIF1A (603348), Jeong et al. (2002) identified mouse
Ard1. They established the function of Ard1 as a protein
acetyltransferase in mammalian cells by direct binding to HIF1A to
regulate its stability. Jeong et al. (2002) also showed that
Ard1-mediated acetylation enhances interaction of HIF1A with VHL
(608537) and HIF1A ubiquitination, suggesting that the acetylation of
HIF1A by ARD1 is critical to proteasomal degradation. They concluded
that the role of ARD1 in the acetylation of HIF1A provides a key
regulatory mechanism underlying HIF1A stability. By assaying ARD1
variants expressed in HeLa cells, Kim et al. (2006) determined that
mouse Ard1(225), but not mouse or human ARD1(235) strongly decreased
VEGF (192240) mRNA expression under hypoxic conditions. As described by
Jeong et al. (2002), Ard1(225) mediated epsilon-acetylation of a HIF1A
lysine residue; however, mouse and human ARD1(235) had weaker effects.
Kim et al. (2006) concluded that the different ARD1 isoforms may have
different effects on HIF1A stability and acetylation.

Using in vitro translated mouse proteins, Sugiura et al. (2003) showed
that Ard1 and Narg1, which they called Nat1, assembled to form a
functional acetyltransferase. Narg1 alone showed no activity.
Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis demonstrated that Narg1
and Ard1 coassembled in mammalian cells. By cotransfection of rat kidney
fibroblasts, they showed that Narg1 and Ard1 localized to the cytoplasm
in both overlapping and separate compartments. In situ hybridization
demonstrated that during mouse brain development, Narg1 and Ard1 were
highly expressed in areas of cell division and migration, and their
expression appeared to be downregulated as neurons differentiated. Narg1
and Ard1 were expressed in proliferating mouse embryonic carcinoma
cells. Treatment of these cells with retinoic acid initiated neuronal
differentiation and downregulation of Narg1 and Ard1 as a neuronal
marker gene was induced. Sugiura et al. (2003) concluded that NARG1 and
ARD1 play a role in the generation and differentiation of neurons.

Asaumi et al. (2005) confirmed interaction of APP with ARD1 in mammalian
cells by coimmunoprecipitation studies. Using human ACTH as a substrate,
they showed that the ARD1/NATH (NARG1; 608000) complex has strong
N-terminal transferase activity. Immunoprecipitation and Western
blotting experiments showed that ARD1 and NATH formed a complex in
HEK293 cells. Because APP-binding proteins can modulate APP metabolism,
they tested the ability of ARD1 to modulate beta-amyloid-40 secretion
and found that coexpression of both ARD1 and NATH was required to
suppress beta-amyloid-40 generation from APP. APP endocytosis assay in
HEK293 cells showed that ARD1 and NATH suppressed endocytosis of APP.

Using reciprocal immunoprecipitation, followed by mass spectroscopic
analysis, Arnesen et al. (2005) showed that endogenous ARD1 and NATH
formed stable complexes in several human cell lines and that the complex
showed N-terminal acetylation activity. Mutation analysis and
examination of proteolytic fragments indicated that interaction was
mediated through an N-terminal domain of ARD1 and the C-terminal end of
NATH. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed ARD1 and NATH associated with
several ribosomal proteins. ARD1 and NATH were also detected in isolated
polysomes; however, they were predominantly nonpolysomal. Endogenous
ARD1 was present in both the nuclei and cytoplasm in several human cell
lines, whereas NATH was predominantly in the cytoplasm, despite the
presence of a well-defined nuclear localization signal within the NATH
coiled-coil region. Both ARD1 and NATH were cleaved in a
caspase-dependent manner during apoptosis in stressed HeLa cells, which
resulted in reduced acetylation activity.

Using size-exclusion chromatography, circular dichroism, and
fluorescence spectroscopy, Sanchez-Puig and Fersht (2006) found that
ARD1 consists of a compact globular region comprising two-thirds of the
protein and a flexible unstructured C terminus. In addition, ARD1 could
assume a misfolded conformation and form amyloid protofilaments under
physiologic conditions of pH and temperature. The process was
accelerated by thermal denaturation and high protein concentration.
Limited proteolysis of ARD1 protofilaments revealed a
proteolysis-resistant core within the acetyltransferase domain.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rope et al. (2011) identified a missense mutation in the NAA10 gene
(ser37 to pro; 300013.0001) in 2 families segregating a lethal X-linked
recessive disorder of infancy, designated Ogden syndrome (OGDNS;
300855), characterized by an aged appearance due to lack of subcutaneous
fat and loose skin, and craniofacial anomalies including prominent eyes,
large ears, downslanting palpebral fissures, flared nares, hypoplastic
alae, short columella, protruding upper lip, and microretrognathia. The
boys had initial hypotonia progressing to hypertonia, global
developmental delay, usually unilateral cryptorchidism, and cardiac
arrhythmias leading to death in the first or second year of life.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OGDEN SYNDROME
NAA10, SER37PRO

Rope et al. (2011) identified 2 unrelated families segregating a lethal
X-linked disorder, Ogden syndrome (OGDNS; 300855). The 2 families had
independent occurrences of a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 109 of the
NAA10 gene, resulting in a serine-to-proline substitution at codon 37
(S37P). The NAA10 gene encodes the catalytic subunit of the N-terminal
acetyltransferase. Substitution of proline for serine at position 37 is
likely to affect structure, and in vitro assays of protein function
demonstrated 60 to 80% reduction in NAT activity of the mutant protein
toward the in vivo substrate RNase P protein p30 (606115). In contrast,
the activity toward the substrate high mobility group protein A1
(600701) was reduced by only 20%.

REFERENCE 1. Arnesen, T.; Anderson, D.; Baldersheim, C.; Lanotte, M.; Varhaug,
J. E.; Lillehaug, J. R.: Identification and characterization of the
human ARD1-NATH protein acetyltransferase complex. Biochem. J. 386:
433-443, 2005.

2. Asaumi, M.; Iijima, K.; Sumioka, A.; Iijima-Ando, K.; Kirino, Y.;
Nakaya, T.; Suzuki, T.: Interaction of N-terminal acetyltransferase
with the cytoplasmic domain of beta-amyloid precursor protein and
its effect on A-beta secretion. J. Biochem. 137: 147-155, 2005.

3. Jeong, J.-W.; Bae, M.-K.; Ahn, M.-Y.; Kim, S.-H.; Sohn, T.-K.;
Bae, M.-H.; Yoo, M.-A.; Song, E. J.; Lee, K.-J.; Kim, K.-W.: Regulation
and destabilization of HIF-1-alpha by ARD1-mediated acetylation. Cell 111:
709-720, 2002.

4. Jeppesen, P.; Turner, B. M.: The inactive X chromosome in female
mammals is distinguished by a lack of histone H4 acetylation, a cytogenetic
marker for gene expression. Cell 74: 281-289, 1993.

5. Kim, S.-H.; Park, J. A.; Kim, J. H.; Lee, J.-W.; Seo, J. H.; Jung,
B.-K.; Chun, K.-H.; Jeong, J.-W.; Bae, M.-K.; Kim, K.-W.: Characterization
of ARD1 variants in mammalian cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 340:
422-427, 2006.

6. Rope, A. F.; Wang, K.; Evjenth, R.; Xing, J.; Johnston, J. J.;
Swensen, J. J.; Johnson, W. E.; Moore, B.; Huff, C. D.; Bird, L. M.;
Carey, J. C.; Opitz, J. M.; and 16 others: Using VAAST to identify
an X-linked disorder resulting in lethality in male infants due to
N-terminal acetyltransferase deficiency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89:
28-43, 2011. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 345 only, 2011.

7. Sanchez-Puig, N.; Fersht, A. R.: Characterization of the native
and fibrillar conformation of the human N-alpha-acetyltransferase
ARD1. Protein Sci. 15: 1968-1976, 2006.

8. Sugiura, N.; Adams, S. M.; Corriveau, R. A.: An evolutionarily
conserved N-terminal acetyltransferase complex associated with neuronal
development. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 40113-40120, 2003.

9. Tribioli, C.; Mancini, M.; Plassart, E.; Bione, S.; Rivella, S.;
Sala, C.; Torri, G.; Toniolo, D.: Isolation of new genes in distal
Xq28: transcriptional map and identification of a human homologue
of the ARD1 N-acetyltransferase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 1061-1067, 1994.

10. Whiteway, M.; Szostak, J. W.: The ARD1 gene of yeast functions
in the switch between the mitotic cell cycle and alternative developmental
pathways. Cell 43: 483-492, 1985.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/19/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/6/2007
Stefanie A. Nelson - updated: 2/22/2007
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/17/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/4/1996

EDITED carol: 12/20/2011
carol: 9/13/2011
alopez: 9/12/2011
alopez: 8/24/2011
terry: 8/19/2011
carol: 7/6/2011
alopez: 6/17/2010
wwang: 3/6/2007
wwang: 2/22/2007
ckniffin: 8/3/2005
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
mgross: 1/17/2003
joanna: 8/31/1998
joanna: 2/4/1996

601045	TITLE *601045 CATENIN, DELTA-1; CTNND1
;;CATENIN, DELTA; CTNND;;
CADHERIN-ASSOCIATED SRC SUBSTRATE; CAS;;
p120(CTN)
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Catenins were discovered as proteins that are linked ('catena' means
'chain' in Latin) to the cytoplasmic domain of transmembrane cadherin
(see 601120) proteins. Delta-catenin, also called CAS, p120(cas), or
p120(ctn), is a tyrosine kinase substrate implicated in ligand-induced
receptor signaling through the EGF receptor (131550), the PDGF receptor
(PDGFR; see 173490), and the CSF1 receptor (164770), as well as in cell
transformation by SRC (190090). Delta-catenin is a major component of
multiprotein cell-cell adhesion complexes containing E-cadherin
(192090), alpha-catenin (116805), beta-catenin (116806), and
gamma-catenin, also known as plakoglobin (173325) (summary by
Keirsebilck et al., 1998).

CLONING

Reynolds et al. (1992) isolated a mouse p120(ctn) cDNA. Like
beta-catenin and plakoglobin, the predicted protein contains copies of a
repeat originally identified in the Drosophila 'Armadillo' protein.

Keirsebilck et al. (1998) identified human p120(ctn) isoforms, which
they designated 1 to 4, that arise by alternative use of start codons
and additional isoforms that differ due to alternative splicing of 3
exons, which they named A, B, and C. The longest isoform was of type
1ABC and contained 968 amino acids. Isoform 1A contains 933 amino acids
and is 97% identical to mouse p120(ctn). Human p120(ctn) contains up to
10 Armadillo repeats. Keirsebilck et al. (1998) used RT-PCR to
demonstrate tissue-specific and cell line-specific expression of various
isoforms.

Independently, Nagase et al. (1997) identified KIAA0384, a human
p120(ctn) cDNA that encodes isoform 1AC, in a screen for brain cDNAs
encoding proteins larger than 100 kD. RT-PCR detected expression in all
tissues examined except skeletal muscle. Highest expression was detected
in placenta, lung, liver, and kidney, followed by ovary and small
intestine.

GENE FUNCTION

Dillon et al. (1998) reported that a complete loss of p120(ctn)
expression was observed in approximately 10% of invasive ductal breast
carcinomas investigated.

Wildenberg et al. (2006) found that depletion of p120-catenin in NIH3T3
mouse fibroblasts by small interfering RNA caused constitutive
activation of Rho (RHOA; 165390), cell transformation, loss of contact
inhibition, and growth in the absence of serum. Moreover, Pdgfr and
integrin (see 135630) signaling pathways involved in remodeling the
actin cytoskeleton were selectively impaired. Wildenberg et al. (2006)
traced these effects to obligatory roles of p120-catenin and Arhgap5
(602680) in a pathway that connects Rac (RAC1; 602048) activation to Rho
inhibition. They concluded that p120-catenin and ARHGAP5 use Rho GTPases
to mediate crosstalk between a wide variety of receptors to coordinate
cadherin function with other activities that direct cell adhesion,
motility, and proliferation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Keirsebilck et al. (1998) determined that the human p120(ctn) gene
contains 21 exons, potentially encoding up to 32 protein isoforms as
products of alternative splicing.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Reynolds et al. (1996) determined
that the human gene, symbolized CTNND, is localized immediately adjacent
to the centromere in band 11q11. By interspecific backcross analysis,
they assigned the murine gene, symbolized Catns, to the middle of mouse
chromosome 2. By analysis of radiation hybrids, Nagase et al. (1997)
confirmed that the p120 gene maps to human chromosome 11. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization and analysis of a somatic cell hybrid
mapping panel, Bonne et al. (1998) mapped the CTNND1 gene to chromosome
11q11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using conditional targeting of p120(ctn) in mouse epidermis,
Perez-Moreno et al. (2006) found that p120-null neonatal epidermis
exhibited reduced intercellular adherens junction components, but no
overt disruption in barrier function or intercellular adhesion. As the
mice aged, they displayed epidermal hypoplasia and chronic inflammation,
typified by hair degeneration and loss of body fat. Use of skin
engraftments and antiinflammatory drugs showed that these features were
not due to reductions in junctional cadherins and catenins, but rather
to NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activation. Both in vivo and in vitro,
p120-null epidermal cells activated NF-kappa-B, triggering a cascade of
proinflammatory NF-kappa-B targets. NF-kappa-B activation in p120-null
keratinocytes was accompanied by alterations in Rho GTPase activity that
appeared to reside upstream from NF-kappa-B activation and downstream
from p120 loss.

REFERENCE 1. Bonne, S.; van Hengel, J.; van Roy, F.: Chromosomal mapping of
human armadillo genes belonging to the p120(ctn)/plakophilin subfamily. Genomics 51:
452-454, 1998.

2. Dillon, D. A.; D'Aquila, T.; Reynolds, A. B.; Fearon, E. R.; Rimm,
D. L.: The expression of p120ctn protein in breast cancer is independent
of alpha- and beta-catenin and E-cadherin. Am. J. Path. 152: 75-82,
1998.

3. Keirsebilck, A.; Bonne, S.; Staes, K.; van Hengel, J.; Nollet,
F.; Reynolds, A.; van Roy, F.: Molecular cloning of the human p120(ctn)
catenin gene (CTNND1): expression of multiple alternatively spliced
isoforms. Genomics 50: 129-146, 1998.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

5. Perez-Moreno, M.; Davis, M. A.; Wong, E.; Pasolli, H. A.; Reynolds,
A. B.; Fuchs, E.: p120-catenin mediates inflammatory responses in
the skin. Cell 124: 631-644, 2006.

6. Reynolds, A. B.; Herbert, L.; Cleveland, J. L.; Berg, S. T.; Gaut,
J. R.: p120, a novel substrate of protein tyrosine kinase receptors
and of p60v-src, is related to cadherin-binding factors beta-catenin,
plakoglobin and armadillo. Oncogene 7: 2439-2445, 1992.

7. Reynolds, A. B.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland, N. G.;
Shapiro, D. N.; Wu, J.; Daniel,  J. M.: The gene encoding p120(cas),
a novel catenin, localizes on human chromosome 11q11 (CTNND) and mouse
chromosome 2 (Catns). Genomics 31: 127-129, 1996.

8. Wildenberg, G. A.; Dohn, M. R.; Carnahan, R. H.; Davis, M. A.;
Lobdell, N. A.; Settleman, J.; Reynolds, A. B.: p120-catenin and
p190RhoGAP regulate cell-cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism
between Rac and Rho. Cell 127: 1027-1039, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/2/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2009
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 11/2/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/7/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/7/1996

EDITED mgross: 05/21/2013
mgross: 9/27/2011
terry: 9/2/2011
mgross: 12/9/2010
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/22/2009
mgross: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/30/2009
mgross: 11/12/2008
terry: 10/31/2008
psherman: 11/3/1999
psherman: 11/2/1999
alopez: 6/7/1999
dkim: 10/12/1998
alopez: 9/8/1998
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
mark: 2/7/1996

610663	TITLE *610663 SET AND MYND DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; SMYD2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SET domain-containing proteins, such as SMYD2, catalyze lysine
methylation (Brown et al., 2006).

CLONING

By database analysis, Brown et al. (2006) identified mammalian Smyd2.
The deduced 433-amino acid protein has a SET domain that is split into 2
segments by a MYND domain, followed by a cysteine-rich domain. Northern
blot analysis of mouse tissues detected highest expression in heart,
brain, liver, kidney, and ovary. In situ hybridization of day-13.5 mouse
embryos showed Smyd2 expression in heart and hypothalamus.

GENE FUNCTION

Brown et al. (2006) showed that the SET domain of mammalian Smyd2
mediated demethylation of lys36 of histone H3 (see 602810), and Smyd2
repressed transcription from an SV40 reporter plasmid. Exogenous
expression of Smyd2 in mouse fibroblasts decreased cell growth.

Huang et al. (2006) reported that the lysine methyltransferase SMYD2
methylates a previously unidentified site, lys370, in p53 (191170). This
methylation site, in contrast to the known site lys372, is repressing to
p53-mediated transcriptional regulation. SMYD2 helps to maintain low
concentrations of promoter-associated p53. Huang et al. (2006) showed
that reducing SMYD2 concentrations by siRNA enhances p53-mediated
apoptosis. They further found that SET9 (606594)-mediated methylation of
lys372 inhibits SMYD2-mediated methylation of lys370, providing
regulatory crosstalk between posttranslational modifications. In
addition, Huang et al. (2006) showed that the inhibitory effect of
lys372 methylation on lys370 methylation is caused, in part, by blocking
the interaction between p53 and SMYD2. Thus, similar to histones, p53 is
subject to both activating and repressing lysine methylation. Huang et
al. (2006) suggested that their results also predicted that Smyd2 may
function as a putative oncogene by methylating p53 and repressing its
tumor suppressive function.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SMYD2
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP SHGC-76339).

REFERENCE 1. Brown, M. A.; Sims, R. J., III; Gottlieb, P. D.; Tucker, P. W.
: Identification and characterization of Smyd2: a split SET/MYND domain-containing
histone H3 lysine 36-specific methyltransferase that interacts with
the Sin3 histone deacetylase complex. Molec. Cancer 5: 26, 2006.
Note: Electronic Article.

2. Huang, J.; Perez-Burgos, L.; Placek, B. J.; Sengupta, R.; Richter,
M.; Dorsey, J. A.; Kubicek, S.; Opravil, S.; Jenuwein, T.; Berger,
S. L.: Repression of p53 activity by Smyd2-mediated methylation. Nature 444:
629-632, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/1/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/19/2006

EDITED mgross: 02/04/2013
alopez: 2/5/2007
terry: 2/1/2007
mgross: 12/19/2006

601416	TITLE *601416 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 39 (ZINC TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 7; SLC39A7
;;KE4, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; HKE4;;
D6S2244E
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc is an essential cofactor for more than 50 classes of enzymes. It is
involved in protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism,
as well as in the control of gene transcription, growth, development,
and differentiation. Zinc cannot passively diffuse across cell membranes
and requires specific transporters, such as SLC39A7, to enter the
cytosol from both the extracellular environment and the intracellular
storage compartments (summary by Taylor et al., 2004).

CLONING

Among the many non-HLA genes that have been identified in the region of
the major histocompatibility complex (6p21.3) in mouse and human are the
genes symbolized Ke4 and Ke6 in the mouse. Ando et al. (1996) stated
that the function of these genes is unknown, although Ke6 may be
involved in the manifestation of polycystic kidney disease (PKD; 173900)
because of its aberrant expression in 2 different murine models of PKD
(Aziz et al., 1993; Aziz et al., 1994). Ando et al. (1996) isolated cDNA
clones corresponding to the human Ke4 and Ke6 (601417) genes (designated
HKE4 and HKE6 by them). The predicted amino acid sequences of HKE4 and
HKE6 exhibit 81.5 and 85.6% identity to the mouse homologs,
respectively. Ando et al. (1996) speculated that HKE4 may encode a
membrane protein with histidine-rich charge clusters.

Taylor et al. (2004) cloned HKE4. The deduced 469-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 50 kD. It contains a cleavable signal
peptide, a long cytosolic N terminus, 8 transmembrane domains, and a
short C terminus. The N-terminal half contains several histidine-rich
repeats, and HKE4 has a central catalytic zinc-binding site and a
cytoplasmic dileucine motif that predicts retention in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). Deglycosylation experiments and Western blot analysis
indicated that HKE4 is a protein of about 50 kD that contains no
N-linked glycans. Fluorescence microscopy of Chinese hamster ovary cells
transfected with HKE4 revealed staining of a perinuclear network and
colocalization with an ER marker protein. RNA dot blot analysis
indicated low but ubiquitous expression of HKE4, with highest levels in
placenta, liver, pituitary, pancreas, salivary gland, kidney, and
prostate.

GENE FUNCTION

By transient transfection in Chinese hamster ovary cells, Taylor et al.
(2004) showed that HKE4 increased intracellular free zinc in a time-,
temperature-, and concentration-dependent manner.

MAPPING

Ando et al. (1996) determined that the HKE4 and HKE6 genes are located
at the centromeric end of the HLA region on human 6p21.3.

Kikuti et al. (1997) examined YAC clone Y42, which contains the MHC
class II region of chromosome 6q21.3. This region has a relatively high
gene density. They identified the following human genes (in order from
centromere toward telomere): HSET
(603763)--HKE1.5--HKE2--HKE3--RING1--(602045)--HKE6 (601417)--HKE4--RXRB
(180246)--COL11A2 (120290)--DPB2.

REFERENCE 1. Ando, A.; Kikuti, Y. Y.; Shigenari, A.; Kawata, H.; Okamoto, N.;
Shiina, T.; Chen, L.; Ikemura, T.; Abe, K.; Kimura, M.; Inoko, H.
: cDNA cloning of the human homologues of the mouse Ke4 and Ke6 genes
at the centromeric end of the human MHC region. Genomics 35: 600-602,
1996.

2. Aziz, N.; Maxwell, M. M.; Brenner, B. M.: Coordinate regulation
of 11-beta-HSD and Ke6 gene in cpk mouse: implications for steroid
metabolic defect in PKD. Am. J. Physiol. 267: F791-F797, 1994.

3. Aziz, N.; Maxwell, M. M.; St.-Jacques, B.; Brenner, B. M.: Downregulation
of Ke 6, a novel gene encoded within the major histocompatibility
complex, in murine polycystic kidney disease. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13:
1847-1853, 1993. Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 6614 only,
1993.

4. Kikuti, Y. Y.; Tamiya, G.; Ando, A.; Chen, L.; Kimura, M.; Ferreira,
E.; Tsuji, K.; Trowsdale, J.; Inoko, H.: Physical mapping 220 kb
centromeric of the human MHC and DNA sequence analysis of the 43-kb
segment including the RING1, HKE6, and HKE4 genes. Genomics 42:
422-435, 1997.

5. Taylor, K. M.; Morgan, H. E.; Johnson, A.; Nicholson, R. I.: Structure-function
analysis of HKE4, a member of the new LIV-1 subfamily of zinc transporters. Biochem.
J. 377: 131-139, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/18/2004
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 10/13/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1996

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
terry: 4/19/2011
alopez: 9/14/2007
mgross: 6/24/2004
terry: 6/18/2004
psherman: 7/21/2000
psherman: 6/19/2000
alopez: 4/22/1999
alopez: 10/27/1997
alopez: 10/13/1997
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
mark: 9/11/1996
terry: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/9/1996

612339	TITLE *612339 GAMMA-GLUTAMYLTRANSFERASE, LIGHT CHAIN 2; GGTLC2
;;GGT, TYPE III;;
GGTL4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Gamma-glutamyltransferase-1 (GGT1; 612346) is a membrane-bound
extracellular enzyme that cleaves gamma-glutamyl peptide bonds in
glutathione and other peptides and transfers the gamma-glutamyl moiety
to acceptors. Autocatalytic cleavage of the GGT1 precursor polypeptide
produces a heavy chain and a light chain that associate with each other
to form the functional enzyme. Light chain-only GGTs, such as GGTLC2,
contain a region corresponding to the GGT1 light chain, but they lack
the membrane-anchoring heavy chain region (Heisterkamp et al., 2008).

CLONING

Courtay et al. (1994) obtained partial genomic sequences of several GGT
genes and pseudogenes, including GGTLC2, which they designated clone 1.
Compared with other GGTs, GGTLC2 has a mutation at the splice donor of
an 81-bp intron, resulting in an unspliced intron. RT-PCR detected
GGTLC2 expression in sigmoid colon and placenta, with weaker expression
in lung and thyroid, but not in other tissues examined.

By 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of placenta cDNA, Leh et al. (1996) cloned
GGTLC2, which they designated GGT type III. The deduced 260-amino acid
protein lacks the large GGT subunit, but it retains the small GGT
subunit. Compared with other GGTs, GGTLC2 has a 27-amino acid insertion
due to the unspliced 81-bp intron. RT-PCR detected GGTLC2 in lymphocytes
from nearly half of patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, but not
in lymphocytes from healthy subjects nor in any hematopoietic cell line
examined.

Heisterkamp et al. (2008) noted that the glutamate-binding site of GGT1
includes 8 residues in its light chain and 1 residue (arg107) in its
heavy chain. They determined that GGTLC2 contains residues corresponding
to the 8 glutamate-binding residues in the GGT1 light chain, but it
lacks a residue equivalent to arg107 in the GGT1 heavy chain. EST
database analysis suggested that GGTLC2 expression is restricted to
testis and germ cell tumors.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Heisterkamp et al. (2008) mapped the
GGTLC2 gene to chromosome 22q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Courtay, C.; Heisterkamp, N.; Siest, G.; Groffen, J.: Expression
of multiple gamma-glutamyltransferase genes in man. Biochem. J. 297:
503-508, 1994.

2. Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen, J.; Warburton, D.; Sneddon, T. P.: The
human gamma-glutamyltransferase gene family. Hum. Genet. 123: 321-332,
2008.

3. Leh, H.; Courtay, C.; Gerardin, P.; Wellman, M.; Siest, G.; Visvikis,
A.: Cloning and expression of a novel type (III) of human gamma-glutamyltransferase
truncated mRNA. FEBS Lett. 394: 258-262, 1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/3/2008

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2008
mgross: 10/6/2008

604477	TITLE *604477 CHROMOBOX HOMOLOG 3; CBX3
;;HP1, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, GAMMA;;
HP1-GAMMA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

At the nuclear envelope in higher eukaryotic cells, the nuclear lamina
and the heterochromatin are adjacent to the inner nuclear membrane.
Using the nucleoplasmic N terminus of lamin B receptor (LBR; 600024), an
integral protein of the inner nuclear membrane, as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Ye and Worman (1996) showed
that LBR binds to 2 chromodomain proteins that are homologs of
Drosophila HP1. One of these proteins, CBX3, contains 173 amino acids
and shows 65% sequence similarity with the other protein, CBX5 (604478).

GENE FUNCTION

Ye and Worman (1996) found that LBR fusion proteins bound to CBX
proteins synthesized by in vitro translation and present in cell
lysates. LBR also coimmunoprecipitated the CBX proteins from cell
extracts. Ye and Worman (1996) suggested that the interaction between
LBR and the chromodomain proteins may explain, in part, the association
of heterochromatin with the inner nuclear membrane.

Following overexpression of MIS12 (609178) in HeLa cells, Obuse et al.
(2004) immunoprecipitated several proteins, including HP1-gamma, that
interacted with MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex. Both
HP1-alpha (CBX5) and HP1-gamma interacted directly with MIS12 and
C20ORF172 (609175). Using HP1 RNA interference (RNAi), Obuse et al.
(2004) found that HP1-alpha and HP1-gamma were functionally redundant.
In double HP1 RNAi, the integrity of kinetochores was abolished and
micronuclei were formed. Obuse et al. (2004) hypothesized that the firm
association of heterochromatic HP1 with the MIS12 complex may be a
fundamental feature of human kinetochore formation.

Fischle et al. (2005) demonstrated that HP1-alpha (604478), HP1-beta
(604511), and HP1-gamma are released from chromatin during the M phase
of the cell cycle even though trimethylation levels of histone H3 (see
602810) lys9 remain unchanged. However, the additional transient
modification of histone H3 by phosphorylation of ser10 next to the more
stable methyl-lys9 mark is sufficient to eject HP1 proteins from their
binding sites. Inhibition or depletion of the mitotic kinase Aurora B
(604970), which phosphorylates histone H3 on ser10, causes retention of
HP1 proteins on mitotic chromosomes, suggesting that H3 ser10
phosphorylation is necessary for the dissociation of HP1 from chromatin
in M phase. Fischle et al. (2005) concluded that their findings
establish a regulatory mechanism of protein-protein interactions,
through a combinatorial readout of 2 adjacent posttranslational
modifications: a stable methylation and a dynamic phosphorylation mark.

Smallwood et al. (2007) demonstrated that DNMT1 (126375) could interact
with HP1-alpha, HP1-beta, and HP1-gamma in a human colon carcinoma cell
line, resulting in stimulation of DNMT1 methyltransferase activity. The
HP1 proteins were sufficient to target DNMT1 activity in vivo, and
HP1-dependent repression required DNMT1. Smallwood et al. (2007)
demonstrated that HP1-alpha and HP1-beta were recruited to the survivin
(BIRC5; 603352) promoter in a DNMT1-dependent manner, whereas HP1-gamma
was present when the survivin gene was active. They concluded that
direct interactions between HP1 proteins and DNMT1 mediate silencing of
euchromatic genes.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Mapping Consortium mapped the CBX3 gene to
chromosome 7 (TMAP SHGC-57830).

REFERENCE 1. Fischle, W.; Tseng, B. S.; Dormann, H. L.; Ueberheide, B. M.; Garcia,
B. A.; Shabanowitz, J.; Hunt, D. F.; Funabiki, H.; Allis, C. D.:
Regulation of HP1-chromatin binding by histone H3 methylation and
phosphorylation. Nature 438: 1116-1122, 2005.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

3. Smallwood, A.; Esteve, P.-O.; Pradhan, S.; Carey, M.: Functional
cooperation between HP1 and DNMT1 mediates gene silencing. Genes
Dev. 21: 1169-1178, 2007.

4. Ye, Q.; Worman, H. J.: Interaction between an integral protein
of the nuclear envelope inner membrane and human chromodomain proteins
homologous to Drosophila HP1. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 14653-14656, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/30/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 7/10/2007
alopez: 1/13/2006
terry: 1/12/2006
carol: 9/13/2005
mgross: 1/28/2005
alopez: 8/9/2000
carol: 1/31/2000

189964	TITLE *189964 GENERAL TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR IIE, POLYPEPTIDE 2; GTF2E2
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR IIE, BETA SUBUNIT;;
TFIIE, BETA SUBUNIT; TF2E2
DESCRIPTION See 189962. Imbert et al. (1996) studied the chromosomal region 8p21-p12
by constructing an integrated physical and genetic map extending from
the genes NEFL (162280) located at 8p21, to FGFR1 (136350) located at
8p11.2-p11.1. The map comprised a series of contigs of YACs. Imbert et
al. (1996) precisely mapped the GTFE2 gene within the YAC contigs.

REFERENCE 1. Imbert, A.; Chaffanet, M.; Essioux, L.; Noguchi, T.; Adelaide,
J.; Kerangueven, F.; Le Paslier, D.; Bonaiti-Pellie, C.; Sobol, H.;
Birnbaum, D.; Pebusque, M.-J.: Integrated map of the chromosome 8p12-p21
region, a region involved in human cancers and Werner syndrome. Genomics 32:
29-38, 1996.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/10/1992

EDITED mark: 03/13/1996
mark: 3/11/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
jason: 6/16/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/10/1992

609475	TITLE *609475 A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN 8-LIKE PROTEIN; AKAP8L
;;AKAP8-LIKE PROTEIN;;
HOMOLOGOUS TO AKAP95; HA95;;
NEIGHBOR OF AKAP95; NAKAP95; NAKAP;;
HELICASE A-BINDING PROTEIN, 95-KD; HAP95
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to AKAP95 (AKAP8; 604692), followed
by 5-prime RACE of a skeletal muscle cDNA library and screening an
amnion cell cDNA library, Orstavik et al. (2000) cloned AKAP8L, which
they designated HA95. The deduced 646-amino acid protein shares 61%
homology with AKAP95. Northern blot analysis showed ubiquitous and
uniform expression of a 5.0-kb HA95 transcript. The N-terminal half of
HA95 localized to the nucleus during interphase in a transfected human
lymphoma cell line.

Seki et al. (2000) cloned AKAP8L, which they designated NAKAP95, from a
fetal brain cDNA library. The deduced 646-amino acid protein shares 30%
identity with AKAP95. Both contain 2 C2H2-type zinc finger motifs at
similar positions and a nuclear localization signal, but NAKAP95 lacks
the protein kinase A (PKA; see 176911)-binding motif found in AKAP95.
PCR analysis detected NAPAK95 in all tissues examined.

Using the C-terminal domain of RNA helicase A (RHA, or DDX9; 603115) as
bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a leukocyte cDNA library, followed by
screening a T-cell lymphoma cell line, Westberg et al. (2000) cloned
AKAP8L, which they designated HAP95. The predicted protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 72 kD, but SDS-PAGE showed an apparent
molecular mass of about 100 kD. The N terminus of HAP95 contains both
tandem and nontandem YG dipeptide repeats, followed by 3 FG repeats and
a central nuclear localization signal. The C-terminal half contains 2
zinc finger motifs and 2 proline-rich SH3-binding domains. Northern blot
analysis detected transcripts of 2.0 and 4.0 kb in all cell lines
examined. Fluorescence-tagged HAP95 primarily localized to the nucleus
of transfected HeLa cells, with exclusion from nucleoli. Heterokaryon
assays indicated that HAP95 shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation of epitope-tagged proteins, Orstavik et al.
(2000) found that HA95 interacted with itself, but not with AKAP95.

By coimmunoprecipitation of transfected HeLa cells, Westberg et al.
(2000) confirmed that HAP95 interacts with the C-terminal domain of RHA.
HAP95 also interacted with the type D retrovirus constitutive transport
element (CTE), which mediates nuclear export of unspliced viral
transcripts, in transfected human embryonic kidney cells. CTE RNA
immunoprecipitated with HAP95 and with TAP (NXF1; 602647). HAP95
overexpression upregulated CTE-dependent gene expression, but it had no
effect on general gene expression or expression mediated by the Rev/Rev
response element of human immunodeficiency virus-1.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Sayer et al. (2005) found that mouse Hypa
(PRPF40A; 612941) interacted with human NAKAP. Deletion mapping
indicated that the binding occurred via a proline-rich domain of NAKAP
and the WW domain of Hypa. In human embryonic kidney cells, NAKAP and
HYPA localized within the nucleus and copurified with the nuclear
matrix. NAKAP associated with HYPA in normal human brain, and both
proteins copurified with a portion of huntingtin (613004) protein in
Huntington disease (143100) brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Orstavik et al. (2000) determined that the coding region of the AKAP8L
gene contains 14 exons and spans about 37 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Orstavik et al. (2000) mapped the AKAP8L
gene maps to chromosome 19p13.1 immediately upstream of the AKAP95 gene.
The 2 genes are oriented in tandem on the same DNA strand and lie about
280 bp apart.

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Seki et al. (2000)
mapped the AKAP8L gene to chromosome 19p13.12-p13.11.

REFERENCE 1. Orstavik, S.; Eide, T.; Collas, P.; Han, I.; Tasken, K.; Kieff,
E.; Jahnsen, T.; Skalhegg, B. S.: Identification, cloning and characterization
of a novel nuclear protein, HA95, homologous to A-kinase anchoring
protein 95. Biol. Cell 92: 27-37, 2000.

2. Sayer, J. A.; Manczak, M.; Akileswaran, L.; Reddy, P. H.; Coghlan,
V. M.: Interaction of the nuclear matrix protein NAKAP with HypA
and huntingtin: implications for nuclear toxicity in Huntington's
disease pathogenesis. NeuroMolec. Med. 7: 297-310, 2005.

3. Seki, N.; Ueki, N.; Yano, K.; Saito, T.; Masuho, Y.; Muramatsu,
M.: cDNA cloning of a novel human gene NAKAP95, neighbor of A-kinase
anchoring protein 95 (AKAP95) on chromosome 19p13.11-p13.12 region. J.
Hum. Genet. 45: 31-37, 2000.

4. Westberg, C.; Yang, J.-P.; Tang, H.; Reddy, T. R.; Wong-Staal,
F.: A novel shuttle protein binds to RNA helicase A and activates
the retroviral constitutive transport element. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
21396-21401, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/28/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2005

EDITED carol: 09/15/2009
mgross: 7/28/2009
mgross: 7/14/2005

609780	TITLE *609780 CARBOXYPEPTIDASE, VITELLOGENIC-LIKE; CPVL
;;HVLP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display PCR to identify macrophage-restricted genes,
Mahoney et al. (2001) identified and subsequently cloned a novel serine
carboxypeptidase, which they called CPVL, from human spleen cDNA. CPVL
encodes a deduced 476-amino acid protein with a 22-amino acid putative
signal peptide, 4 potential N-linked glycosylation sites, an intact
serine carboxypeptidase active site, and strong similarity to a large
number of serine carboxypeptidases from higher and lower eukaryotes.
CPVL shares 43% sequence identity with the vitellogenic carboxypeptidase
protein that is expressed in mosquito ovaries. RT-PCR revealed strong
CPVL expression in monocytic cells lines, but not in cell lines
representing B cells, fibroblasts, or epithelial cells. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected a CPVL transcript in
monocyte/macrophage-rich sources including spleen, leukocytes and
placenta, but also in heart and kidney, suggesting a role for CPVL
outside of the immune system. CPVL rabbit antiserum detected a protein
of about 67 kD on Western blots of lysates from transfected cells, but a
58-kD band in primary human macrophages. Mahoney et al. (2001)
speculated that this difference may represent removal of a propeptide
from CPVL in macrophages.

GENE FUNCTION

By Western blot analysis, Mahoney et al. (2001) found that expression of
CPVL is induced during the maturation of monocytes into macrophages.
Although the authors found no CPVL protein in monocytes, Northern blot
analysis indicated that monocytes express CPVL mRNA in amounts
comparable to mature macrophages, implying that macrophage lineage
expression of CPVL protein is regulated at the level of translation
rather than transcription. Western blots did not detect CPVL protein in
lymphocytes or neutrophils.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mahoney et al. (2001) determined that the CPVL gene contains 13 exons
and encompasses more than 150 kb. The sizes of the introns vary widely,
from 398 bp to nearly 35 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Mahoney et al. (2001) mapped the CPVL gene to
chromosome 7p15-p14.

REFERENCE 1. Mahoney, J. A.; Ntolosi, B.; DaSilva, R. P.; Gordon, S.; McKnight,
A. J.: Cloning and characterization of CPVL, a novel serine carboxypeptidase,
from human macrophages. Genomics 72: 243-251, 2001.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/13/2005

EDITED carol: 12/13/2005

600424	TITLE *600424 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 19 (FOLATE TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 1; SLC19A1
;;FOLATE TRANSPORTER; FOLT;;
REDUCED FOLATE CARRIER 1; RFC1;;
INTESTINAL FOLATE CARRIER 1; IFC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Transport of folate compounds into mammalian cells can occur via
receptor-mediated (see 136430) or carrier-mediated mechanisms. A
functional coordination between these 2 mechanisms has been proposed to
be the method of folate uptake in certain cell types. Methotrexate (MTX)
is an antifolate chemotherapeutic agent that is actively transported by
the carrier-mediated uptake system. RFC1 plays a role in maintaining
intracellular concentrations of folate.

CLONING

Several groups independently cloned cDNAs encoding the 591-amino acid
human folate transporter. Using a mouse reduced folate carrier (RFC)
partial cDNA as a probe, Wong et al. (1995) cloned a human RFC cDNA from
a library prepared from MTX transport-upregulated erythroleukemia cells.
Using homologous murine cDNAs as probes, Williams and Flintoff (1995),
Prasad et al. (1995), and Nguyen et al. (1997) independently isolated
human folate transporter cDNAs from lymphoblast, placenta, and small
intestine libraries, respectively.

Prasad et al. (1995) reported that the human folate transporter, which
they symbolized FOLT, had 65% amino acid sequence identity to mouse and
hamster folate transporters. When transfected into COS-1 and HeLa cells,
the human FOLT cDNA caused a significant increase in the uptake of
5-methyltetrahydrofolate. By Northern blot analysis, mRNA transcripts
hybridizing to the human FOLT cDNA were detected in placenta and liver
and also in several cell lines of human origin. The principal transcript
was approximately 2.7 kb.

Williams and Flintoff (1995) and Wong et al. (1995) observed that human
folate transport cDNAs expressed in MTX transport-deficient Chinese
hamster ovary cells restored MTX transport and sensitivity.

Nguyen et al. (1997) injected human intestinal folate carrier-1 (IFC1)
cRNA into Xenopus oocytes and observed increased uptake of
methyltetrahydrofolic acid. Northern blot analysis revealed that the
IFC1 gene was expressed as a 3.3-kb mRNA at a high level in placenta and
at lower levels in a variety of other tissues, including the small
intestine. In situ hybridization of thin sections of intestinal
epithelia demonstrated IFC1 expression localized to the villus and crypt
cells, particularly the upper half of the villi.

GENE FUNCTION

In luminal epithelial cells isolated from mouse small intestine, Chiao
et al. (1997) found increased PH-dependent folate influx associated with
RFC1 gene expression in the form of a 2.5-kb transcript and a 58-kD
brush border membrane protein detected by folate-based affinity labeling
and with antibodies against the transporter. The authors concluded that
RFC1 mediates intestinal folate transport.

GENE STRUCTURE

Point mutations in the reduced folate carrier-1 gene and alterations
resulting in the downregulation of its message are major factors in the
resistance to antifolate chemotherapeutic agents. As a framework for
understanding the significance of such changes in relation to gene
expression and function, Williams and Flintoff (1998) described the
organization of the RFC1 gene from human lymphoblasts. They found that
the gene contains 5 exons (2 to 6) coding for protein. At least 4
5-prime exons, used in a mutually exclusive manner in the production of
RFC1 message from lymphoblast cells, are spliced to exon 2, which
contains the translational start site. Semiquantitative PCR indicated
that exon 1 is preferentially used. The major transcriptional start site
was mapped by RACE and RNase protection to a region 109 to 135 bp
5-prime to the start of exon 1.

MAPPING

Yang-Feng et al. (1995) used the human folate transporter cDNA and a
human genomic clone hybridizing to the cDNA to perform chromosomal
mapping of the FOLT gene. Human/rodent somatic cell hybrid analysis
using the cDNA as the probe demonstrated perfect segregation with
chromosome 21. Isotopic in situ hybridization with the cDNA probe mapped
the gene to 21q22.3. Fluorescence in situ hybridization using the
genomic clone confirmed this chromosomal localization.

GENETIC VARIABILITY

Tolner et al. (1998) identified 3 splice variants of RFC1, incorporating
3 alternatives of exon 1 and 5 additional exons. By functional deletion
analysis, they identified 2 TATA-less promoters that show substantial
differences in the efficiency with which they drive transcription.
L1210/D3 mouse leukemia cells are resistant to
5,10-dideazatetrahydrofolate due to expansion of cellular folate pools
which block polyglutamation of the drug. These cells were found to have
2 point mutations in the RFC, resulting in the replacement of
isoleucine-48 by phenylalanine (I48F) and of tryptophan-105 by glycine
(W105G). Each mutation contributes to the resistance phenotype. Genomic
DNA from resistant cells contained both the wildtype and mutant alleles,
but wildtype message was not detected. Folic acid was a much better
substrate, and 5-formyltetrahydrofolate was a poorer substrate, for
transport in L1210/D3 cells relative to L1210 cells. Enhanced transport
of folic acid was due to a marked, approximately 20-fold, decrease in
the influx K(m). Influx of methotrexate and 5,10-dideazatetrahydrofolate
were minimally altered. Tse et al. (1998) concluded that the I48F and
W105G mutations in RFC caused resistance to
5,10-dideazatetrahydrofolate, that the region of the RFC protein near
these 2 positions defines the substrate-binding site, that the wildtype
allele was silenced during the multistep development of resistance, and
that this mutant phenotype represents a genetically dominant trait.

Using data from a California population-based case-control interview
study, Shaw et al. (2002) investigated whether spina bifida risk was
influenced by an interaction between a polymorphism of infant RFC1 at
nucleotide 80 (A80G) and maternal periconceptional use of vitamins
containing folic acid. Although the study did not find an increased
spina bifida risk for infants who were heterozygous or homozygous for
RFC1 A80G, it did reveal modest evidence for a gene-nutrient interaction
between infant homozygosity for the G80/G80 genotype and maternal
periconceptional intake of vitamins containing folic acid on the risk of
spina bifida.

REFERENCE 1. Chiao, J. H.; Roy, K.; Tolner, B.; Yang, C.-H.; Sirotnak, F. M.
: RFC-1 gene expression regulates folate absorption in mouse small
intestine. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 11165-11170, 1997.

2. Nguyen, T. T.; Dyer, D. L.; Dunning, D. D.; Rubin, S. A.; Grant,
K. E.; Said, H. M.: Human intestinal folate transport: cloning, expression,
and distribution of complementary RNA. Gastroenterology 112: 783-791,
1997.

3. Prasad, P. D.; Ramamoorthy, S.; Leibach, F. H.; Ganapathy, V.:
Molecular cloning of the human placental folate transporter. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 206: 681-687, 1995.

4. Shaw, G. M.; Lammer, E. J.; Zhu, H.; Baker, M. W.; Neri, E.; Finnell,
R. H.: Maternal periconceptional vitamin use, genetic variation of
infant reduced folate carrier (A80G), and risk of spina bifida. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 108: 1-6, 2002. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Med. Genet.
113: 392 only, 2002.

5. Tolner, B.; Roy, K.; Sirotnak, F. M.: Structural analysis of the
human RFC-1 gene encoding a folate transporter reveals multiple promoters
and alternatively spliced transcripts with 5-prime end heterogeneity. Gene 211:
331-341, 1998.

6. Tse, A.; Brigle, K.; Taylor, S. M.; Moran, R. G.: Mutations in
the reduced folate carrier gene which confer dominant resistance to
5,10-dideazatetrahydrofolate. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 25953-25960, 1998.

7. Williams, F. M. R.; Flintoff, W. F.: Structural organization of
the human reduced folate carrier gene: evidence for 5-prime heterogeneity
in lymphoblast mRNA. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 24: 143-156, 1998.

8. Williams, F. M. R.; Flintoff, W. F.: Isolation of a human cDNA
that complements a mutant hamster cell defective in methotrexate uptake. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 2987-2992, 1995.

9. Wong, S. C.; Proefke, S. A.; Bhushan, A.; Matherly, L. H.: Isolation
of human cDNAs that restore methotrexate sensitivity and reduced folate
carrier activity in methotrexate transport-defective Chinese hamster
ovary cells. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 17468-17475, 1995.

10. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Ma, Y.-Y.; Liang, R.; Prasad, P. D.; Leibach,
F. H.; Ganapathy, V.: Assignment of the human folate transporter
gene to chromosome 21q22.3 by somatic cell hybrid analysis and in
situ hybridization. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 210: 874-879,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/8/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/14/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/8/1999
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 5/22/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/20/1995

EDITED carol: 04/18/2013
terry: 5/21/2004
cwells: 11/12/2003
alopez: 2/18/2002
terry: 2/8/2002
carol: 6/14/2001
alopez: 8/1/2000
terry: 7/28/2000
jlewis: 6/17/1999
terry: 6/8/1999
alopez: 5/22/1998
jenny: 4/4/1997
mark: 9/17/1995
carol: 2/20/1995

611764	TITLE *611764 CORNIFELIN; CNFN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential screening of cDNA libraries from normal and psoriatic
(see 177900) human skin in order to search for genes upregulated in
psoriatic skin, Michibata et al. (2004) cloned CNFN. The deduced
112-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 12.3 kD and
shares 97% amino acid identity with mouse Cnfn. Northern blot analysis
detected a 0.7-kb transcript in human uterus, cervix, and fetal skin
only. Michibata et al. (2004) stated that Robinson et al. (1997)
obtained an amino acid sequence ARELKIRE by cyanogen bromide treatment
of cornified envelope fragments that matches the C-terminal sequence of
CNFN. Michibata et al. (2004) suggested that CNFN is a component of the
cornified envelope and may be crosslinked to other components.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transgenic mice expressing human CNFN, Michibata et al. (2004)
showed that overexpression of CNFN was associated with a decrease in
endogenous loricrin (LOR; 152445) expression and an increase in
involucrin (IVL; 147360) expression. However, they observed no
detectable differences of epidermal differentiation in the
CNFN-transgenic mice.

GENE STRUCTURE

Michibata et al. (2004) determined that the CNFN gene contains 4 exons
spanning 3.3 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Michibata et al. (2004) mapped the CNFN
gene to chromosome 19q13. They mapped the mouse Cnfn gene chromosome 7
in a region showing homology of synteny to human 19q13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using PCR-based expression profiling analysis of RNA from 7 normal and
10 psoriatic skin samples, Michibata et al. (2004) found an 18.5-fold
increase in CNFN expression in psoriatic skin compared to normal skin.
Increases of 14.3-fold and 4.6-fold in CNFN expression were detected in
atopic dermatitis and mycosis fungoides skin samples, respectively,
compared to normal skin. In situ hybridization detected CNFN expression
in the granular cell layer in normal skin. CNFN expression in psoriatic
skin, but not normal or uninvolved psoriatic skin, was detected up to
the upper-spinous layer. Immunohistochemical studies detected CNFN
protein in the horny cell layer of normal skin, as well as uninvolved
and involved psoriatic skin.

REFERENCE 1. Michibata, H.; Chiba, H.; Wakimoto, K.; Seishima, M.; Kawasaki,
S.; Okubo, K.; Mitsui, H.; Torii, H.; Imai, Y.: Identification and
characterization of a novel component of the cornified envelope, cornifelin. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 318: 803-813, 2004.

2. Robinson, N. A.; Lapic, S.; Welter, J. F.; Eckert, R. L.: S100A11,
S100A10, annexin I, desmosomal proteins, small proline-rich proteins,
plasminogen activator inhibitor-2, and involucrin are components of
the cornified envelope of cultured human epidermal keratinocytes. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 12035-12046, 1997.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 1/30/2008

EDITED wwang: 01/30/2008

612308	TITLE *612308 ZINC FINGER AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING 4; ZBTB4
;;KIAA1538
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned ZBTB4, which they designated
KIAA1538. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate to high expression in all adult
and fetal tissues examined. Highest expression was detected in adult
heart, brain, ovary, and spinal cord, in fetal brain, and in all
specific adult brain regions examined.

By searching the human genome for sequences encoding KAISO (300329)-like
triple zinc finger domains, Filion et al. (2006) identified ZBTB4 and
ZBTB38 (612218). The deduced 1,013-amino acid ZBTB4 protein contains an
N-terminal BTB/PPZ domain followed by 4 zinc fingers, a proline-rich
domain, a glutamate-rich domain, 2 additional zinc fingers, and an
additional C-terminal proline-rich region. The BTB/POZ domain of ZBTB4
is interrupted by a 60-amino acid stretch, and the N-terminal zinc
finger region of ZBTB4 contains the KAISO-like triple zinc finger
domain. Northern blot analysis detected Zbtb4 in all mouse tissues
examined, with highest expression in brain, lung, kidney, muscle, and
heart. In situ hybridization of mouse brain detected Zbtb4 mainly in
neurons. Expression was highest in hippocampus, in structures involved
in olfaction, in arcuate nuclei, in motor nuclei of the brainstem, and
in granular layer of the cerebellum. Upon transfection into mouse
fibroblasts, ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 localized to chromocenters, which are
heavily methylated chromosome aggregates found in mouse, but not human,
cells; however, their positions did not completely overlap. Both
proteins had a more diffuse nuclear localization in mouse cells impaired
in DNA methylation.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a gel retardation assay, Filion et al. (2006) showed that the
isolated zinc finger domains of KAISO, ZBTB4, and ZBTB38 bound
methylated CpGs, and that all 3 proteins repressed the expression of a
methylated reporter gene. ZBTB4 lacking the KAISO-like zinc fingers was
inactive. ZBTB4, but not ZBTB38, also bound the KAISO-binding sequence
TCCTGCNA. Filion et al. (2006) also showed that the zinc finger domains
of ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 homo- and heterodimerize.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the ZBTB4 gene
to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Filion, G. J. P.; Zhenilo, S.; Salozhin, S.; Yamada, D.; Prokhortchouk,
E.; Defossez, P.-A.: A family of human zinc finger proteins that
bind methylated DNA and repress transcription. Molec. Cell. Biol. 26:
169-181, 2006.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/19/2008

EDITED alopez: 09/19/2008

123995	TITLE *123995 CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE, SUBUNIT VIIa, POLYPEPTIDE 1; COX7A1
;;CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE, SUBUNIT VIIa, MUSCLE ISOFORM; COX7AM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX; EC 1.9.3.1), the last component of the
mitochondrial respiratory chain, catalyzes the transfer of electrons
from reduced cytochrome c to molecular oxygen. In mammals, the
apoprotein is composed of 3 large catalytic subunits, encoded by the
mitochondrial genome (516030, 516040, and 516050), and by 10 smaller,
nuclear-encoded subunits which may play a regulatory role. Subunit VIIa
of mammalian COX exists in at least 2 isoforms, liver (see 123996) and
muscle.

CLONING

Arnaudo et al. (1992) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding the COX7A
muscle isoform. The deduced polypeptide shares 78% identity with the
bovine muscle form but only 63% identity with the human liver isoform.
Northern blot analysis of primate tissues demonstrated that mRNA for the
muscle form is present only in muscle tissues; in contrast, liver mRNA
is present in both muscle and nonmuscle tissues.

Fabrizi et al. (1989) reported the sequence of the human COX7A1 gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wolz et al. (1997) described the genomic sequence and organization of
the human COX7A1 gene and compared it with its bovine homolog. The
coding region of the gene extends over 1.45 kb of genomic sequence and
is organized into 4 exons. Intron-exon boundaries are well conserved
between cattle and humans. Although COX7A1 is a gene for a
tissue-specific isoform, it has some features of a housekeeping gene: it
is located in a CpG island, like its bovine homolog, and no TATA or
CCAAT boxes are found in the 5-prime flanking sequence.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of human/rodent cell hybrid genomic DNA,
Arnaudo et al. (1992) determined that the COX7A muscle form is encoded
by a single locus, designated COX7A1, on chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Arnaudo, E.; Hirano, M.; Seelan, R. S.; Milatovich, A.; Hsieh,
C.-L.; Fabrizi, G. M.; Grossman, L. I.; Francke, U.; Schon, E. A.
: Tissue-specific expression and chromosome assignment of genes specifying
two isoforms of subunit VIIa of human cytochrome c oxidase. Gene 119:
299-305, 1992.

2. Fabrizi, G. M.; Rizzuto, R.; Nakase, H.; Mita, S.; Lomax, M. I.;
Grossman, L. I.; Schon, E. A.: Sequence of a cDNA specifying subunit
VIIa of human cytochrome c oxidase. Nucleic Acids Res. 17: 7107
only, 1989.

3. Wolz, W.; Kress, W.; Mueller, C. R.: Genomic sequence structure
and organization of the human gene for cytochrome c oxidase subunit
(COX7A1) VIIa-M. Genomics 45: 438-442, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/8/1993

EDITED mgross: 09/15/2003
mark: 12/14/1997
terry: 12/8/1997
carol: 9/22/1993
carol: 9/8/1993

186591	TITLE *186591 SYNTAXIN 4; STX4
;;STX4A;;
SYNTAXIN, PLACENTAL;;
p35-2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1994) described the nucleotide sequence of STX4A, a syntaxin
gene isolated from a placenta library. (The gene was previously
symbolized STX2.) It encodes a predicted 297-amino acid protein that is
89% identical to the amino acid sequence of rat Stx4a.

By immunohistochemical analysis of rat brain sections, Kennedy et al.
(2010) showed that Stx4 was expressed throughout brain. In rat
hippocampal neurons, Stx4 showed a punctate distribution in the
somatodendritic compartment, and Stx4 clusters often localized to
dendritic spines. Immunogold electron microscopy of CA1 rat hippocampus
revealed frequent Stx4 labeling near spine membranes at sites lateral to
postsynaptic densities, with occasional labeling of presynaptic
membranes. Biochemical fractionation of mouse brain revealed Stx4 in
synaptosome fractions, but not in synaptic vesicle fractions.

GENE FUNCTION

Mandon et al. (1996) stated that vesicle-associated membrane proteins
(VAMPs) or synaptobrevins (see 185880) are proposed to bind to cognate
vesicle-targeting receptors in target membranes, which include several
members of the syntaxin family. The molecular mechanisms responsible for
targeting of vesicles containing aquaporin-2 (AQP2; 107777) to the
apical plasma membrane of renal collecting duct cells may involve the
vesicle-targeting protein STX4. Among the known syntaxin isoforms, only
STX1 (STX1A; 186590) and STX4 bind VAMP2 (185881) with high affinity.
Thus, STX1 and STX4 could be considered candidates for a role in
targeting of the AQP2/VAMP2-containing vesicles to the apical plasma
membrane in collecting duct cells. In contrast to STX1, which is
expressed predominantly in the central nervous system, STX4 is expressed
in a variety of tissues including the kidney. Mandon et al. (1996) used
sequence data for rat Stx1a, Stx1b (601485), and Stx4 from Bennett et
al. (1993) to design PCR primers for RT-PCR analysis of rat tissues.
They detected Stx4 mRNA in the apical plasma membrane of collecting duct
principal cells. They also demonstrated in the rat kidney the presence
of a protein with the characteristics of Stx4 in the apical plasma
membrane of inner medullary-collecting duct cells.

To clarify the physiologic function of STXBP3 (608339) in
insulin-stimulated GLUT4 (SLC2A4; 138190) exocytosis, Kanda et al.
(2005) generated mouse embryos deficient in the Stx4-binding protein
Stxbp3 and developed Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes from their mesenchymal
fibroblasts. The insulin-induced appearance of Glut4 at the cell surface
was enhanced in Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes compared to +/+ cells. Wortmannin,
an inhibitor of PI3K, inhibited insulin-stimulated Glut4 externalization
in +/+ but not -/- adipocytes. Kanda et al. (2005) suggested that
disruption of the interaction between STX4 and STXBP3 in adipocytes
might result in enhancement of insulin-stimulated GLUT4 externalization.

Using RT-PCR, immunoblot analysis, and immunofluorescence microscopy,
Sander et al. (2008) demonstrated that human intestinal mast cells (MCs)
expressed SNAP23 (602534), STX1B, STX2 (132350), STX3 (STX3A; 600876),
STX4, and STX6 (603944), but not SNAP25 (600322). MCs also expressed
VAMP3 (603657), VAMP7 (300053), and VAMP8 (603177), but, in contrast
with rodent MCs, they expressed only low levels of VAMP2 (185881). VAMP7
and VAMP8 translocated to the plasma membrane and interacted with SNAP23
and STX4 upon activation. Inhibition of STX4, SNAP23, VAMP7, or VAMP8,
but not VAMP2 or VAMP3, resulted in markedly reduced high-affinity IgE
receptor-mediated histamine release. Sander et al. (2008) concluded that
human MCs express a specific pattern of SNAREs and that VAMP7 and VAMP8,
but not VAMP2, are required for rapid degranulation.

Using rat hippocampal neurons, Kennedy et al. (2010) showed that
exocytosis of recycling endosomes at dendritic spines occurred at
Stx4-enriched sites immediately lateral to postsynaptic densities.
Disruption of Stx4 either acutely or chronically blocked membrane fusion
and cargo delivery triggered by synaptic activation, and acute
inhibition of Stx4 abolished long-term potentiation. Kennedy et al.
(2010) concluded that STX4 is a central component of the SNARE machinery
that mediates rapid, activity-dependent fusion of recycling endosomes in
dendritic spines.

REFERENCE 1. Bennett, M. K.; Garcia-Arraras, J. E.; Elferink, L. A.; Peterson,
K.; Fleming, A. M.; Hazuka, C. D.; Scheller, R. H.: The syntaxin
family of vesicular transport receptors. Cell 74: 863-873, 1993.

2. Kanda, H.; Tamori, Y.; Shinoda, H.; Yoshikawa, M.; Sakaue, M.;
Udagawa, J.; Otani, H.; Tashiro, F.; Miyazaki, J.; Kasuga, M.: Adipocytes
from Munc18c-null mice show increased sensitivity to insulin-stimulated
GLUT4 externalization. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 291-301, 2005.

3. Kennedy, M. J.; Davison, I. G.; Robinson, C. G.; Ehlers, M. D.
: Syntaxin-4 defines a domain for activity-dependent exocytosis in
dendritic spines. Cell 141: 524-535, 2010.

4. Li, H.; Hodge, D. R.; Pei, G. K.; Seth, A.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of the human syntaxin-encoding gene. Gene 143: 303-304,
1994.

5. Mandon, B.; Chou, C.-L.; Nielsen, S.; Knepper, M. A.: Syntaxin-4
is localized to the apical plasma membrane of rat renal collecting
duct cells: possible role in aquaporin-2 trafficking. J. Clin. Invest. 98:
906-913, 1996.

6. Sander, L. E.; Frank, S. P. C.; Bolat, S.; Blank, U.; Galli, T.;
Bigalke, H.; Bischoff, S. C.; Lorentz, A.: Vesicle associated membrane
protein (VAMP)-7 and VAMP-8, but not VAMP-2 or VAMP-3, are required
for activation-induced degranulation of mature human mast cells. Europ.
J. Immun. 38: 855-863, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/9/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 10/25/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/20/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1992

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
mgross: 10/12/2009
mgross: 10/9/2009
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
psherman: 10/27/1998
mark: 10/25/1996
carol: 9/10/1992

604665	TITLE *604665 COP9, SUBUNIT 3; COPS3
;;SGN3
DESCRIPTION To identify new components of the 26S proteasome, Seeger et al. (1998)
obtained peptide sequences from a 45-kD protein. By micropeptide
sequence analysis and probing of cDNA libraries, Seeger et al. (1998)
isolated a cDNA encoding COPS3, which they termed SGN3, for subunit 3 of
a novel 450-kD signalosome complex that also includes TRIP15 (604508),
COPS5 (604850), GPS1 (601934), and 4 other subunits. Sequence analysis
predicted that COPS3 is a 403-amino acid protein which contains regions
with homology to the 26S proteasome S3 regulatory subunit.
Autoradiographic analysis showed that the complex phosphorylates JUN
(165160), IKBA (164008), and the C-terminal part of the p105 precursor
of NFKB (164011). The 26S proteasome is not a phosphorylation target,
although immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that the 450-kD
complex has a cytosolic localization, concentrated around the nucleus.

Elsea et al. (1999) reported the localization and partial
characterization of SGN3. They mapped the SGN3 gene to 17p11.2 by
somatic cell hybrid analysis. By analysis of genomic clones, they
further localized the SGN3 gene to the distal end of the Smith-Magenis
syndrome (SMS) critical region (182290), near marker D17S71. Although
SMS patients were haploinsufficient for SGN3, analyses showed that the
SGN3 protein was present at equivalent levels in patient and parental
control cells, and that the COP9 signalosome complex was assembled and
in normal quantities in transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from
patients. Elsea et al. (1999) concluded that SGN3 probably does not play
a significant role with respect to SMS, although its involvement could
not be ruled out since the importance of the COP9 signalosome in
embryogenesis or differentiation was not well understood.

REFERENCE 1. Elsea, S. H.; Mykytyn, K.; Ferrell, K.; Coulter, K. L.; Das, P.;
Dubiel, W.; Patel, P. I.; Metherall, J. E.: Hemizygosity for the
COP9 signalosome subunit gene, SGN3, in the Smith-Magenis syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 87: 342-348, 1999.

2. Seeger, M.; Kraft, R.; Ferrell, K.; Bech-Otschir, D.; Dumdey, R.;
Schade, R.; Gordon, C.; Naumann, M.; Dubiel, W.: A novel protein
complex involved in signal transduction possessing similarities to
26S proteasome subunits. FASEB J. 12: 469-478, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/12/2000

CREATED Sonja A. Rasmussen: 3/8/2000

EDITED carol: 10/26/2000
mcapotos: 10/19/2000
terry: 10/12/2000
mgross: 3/8/2000

602917	TITLE *602917 REGULATOR OF CALCINEURIN 1; RCAN1
;;DOWN SYNDROME CRITICAL REGION GENE 1; DSCR1;;
MYOCYTE-ENRICHED CALCINEURIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; MCIP1;;
MODULATORY CALINEURIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1;;
CALCIPRESSIN 1; CSP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The study of patients with partial trisomy 21 has defined an area of
approximately 3 Mb at chromosomal region 21q22 as the minimal candidate
region for the Down syndrome phenotype (190685). Using a novel exon
cloning strategy, Fuentes et al. (1995) identified several putative
exons from region 21q22.1-q22.2. One exon was used to isolate fetal
brain cDNAs corresponding to the RCAN1 gene, which the authors
designated DSCR1. The predicted 171-amino acid protein contains 2
proline-rich regions, a putative DNA-binding domain, and an acidic
region. Northern blot analysis revealed that the 2.2-kb DSCR1 transcript
is expressed at the highest levels in fetal brain and adult heart and at
lower levels in various other tissues. An additional 2-kb mRNA was
detected in fetal and adult liver. Increased expression in the brains of
young rats compared with adults suggested to Fuentes et al. (1995) that
DSCR1 plays a role during central nervous system development.

By screening a human liver cDNA library and by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE
of whole human fetus, fetal brain, adult cerebellum, and adult brain,
Fuentes et al. (1997) identified splice variants of DSCR1 containing 4
alternative first exons. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of
transcripts containing exon 1 or exon 4 in a wide range of tissues, and
both transcripts were about 2.2 kb. Transcripts containing exon 1 were
expressed at highest levels in fetal brain and adult heart, brain, and
skeletal muscle. Transcripts containing exon 4 were expressed at highest
levels in fetal kidney and adult heart, skeletal muscle, and placenta.
RT-PCR detected transcripts containing exon 2 in fetal brain and liver,
but no transcripts containing exon 3 were observed.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fuentes et al. (1997) determined that RCAN1 spans nearly 45 kb and
contains 7 exons, including 4 alternative first exons. They identified
potential promoter regions upstream of exons 1, 2, and 4. The promoter
regions associated with exons 1 and 2 contain CpG islands with numerous
SP1 (189906)-binding sites, but no CAAT or TATA box elements. The
promoter region associated with exon 4 contains a possible TATA box, but
no SP1-binding sites.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and YACs, Fuentes et al. (1995)
confirmed that the RCAN1 gene is located at chromosome 21q22.1-q22.2.
Strippoli et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Rcan1 gene to chromosome 16.

GENE FUNCTION

Fuentes et al. (2000) demonstrated that DSCR1 protein is overexpressed
in the brain of Down syndrome fetuses, and interacts physically and
functionally with calcineurin A (114105), the catalytic subunit of the
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase PP2B. The DSCR1-binding
region in calcineurin A is located in the linker region between the
calcineurin A catalytic domain and the calcineurin B-binding domain,
outside of other functional domains previously defined in calcineurin A.
DSCR1 belongs to a family of evolutionarily conserved proteins with 3
members in humans: DSCR1, RCAN2 (604876), and RCAN3 (605860).
Overexpression of DSCR1 and RCAN2 inhibited calcineurin-dependent gene
transcription through the inhibition of NFAT (see 600489) translocation
to the nucleus. The authors hypothesized that members of this family of
human proteins are endogenous regulators of calcineurin-mediated
signaling pathways and may be involved in many physiologic processes.

In mice and humans, MCIP1 (RCAN1) is expressed primarily in cardiac and
skeletal muscles (Rothermel et al., 2000), and transcription of the
MCIP1 gene, but not of the MCIP2 (RCAN2) gene, is potently stimulated by
activated calcineurin, thereby establishing a negative feedback
mechanism that presumably serves to protect cells from otherwise
deleterious consequences of unrestrained calcineurin activity (Yang et
al., 2000). Yang et al. (2000) identified an alternative
calcineurin-responsive promoter 5-prime of exon 4 in the MCIP1 gene.

Kingsbury and Cunningham (2000) referred to the proteins encoded by the
MCIP genes as calcipressins. Functional analysis showed that when
expressed in yeast, DSCR1 and RCAN2 inhibited calcineurin function. The
authors proposed that increased expression of DSCR1 in trisomy-21
individuals may contribute to the neurologic, cardiac, or immunologic
defects of Down syndrome.

Ermak et al. (2001) showed significant expression of DSCR1 in brain,
spinal cord, kidney, liver, mammary gland, skeletal muscle, and heart.
Within the brain, DSCR1 was predominantly expressed in neurons of the
cerebral cortex, hippocampus, substantia nigra, thalamus, and medulla
oblongata without regard to age in humans or rats. Postmortem studies of
8 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) and 8 controls showed
that DSCR1 expression in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of AD
patients was approximately double that of controls, and moreover, that
DSCR1 levels in brains with extensive neurofibrillary tangles were 3
times higher than in controls. Previous studies had shown that decreased
calcineurin phosphatase activity allowed accumulation of
hyperphosphorylated tau protein and cytoskeletal changes in the brain
similar to those observed in AD (Kayyali et al., 1997). Since DSCR1
inhibits calcineurin activity, Ermak et al. (2001) suggested that
increased DSCR1 levels may cause accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau
protein and production of neurofibrillary tangles, thereby promoting the
development of AD. Cell studies showed that toxic levels of aggregated
amyloid beta 1-42 peptide directly stimulated DSCR1 expression, perhaps
as a protective mechanism against calcineurin-induced apoptosis. The
authors suggested that while DSCR1 overexpression may initially be
protective, chronic overexpression may eventually lead to the formation
of neurofibrillary tangles associated with AD.

Yao and Duh (2004) demonstrated that DSCR1 was induced in human
endothelial cells in response to VEGF (192240), TNFA (191160), and
calcium mobilization, and this upregulation was inhibited by inhibitors
of the calcineurin (see 114105)-NFAT (see 600490) signaling pathway, as
well as by PKC (see 176960) inhibition and a calcium chelator. Yao and
Duh (2004) hypothesized that upregulation of DSCR1 in endothelial cells
may act as an endogenous feedback inhibitor of angiogenesis by
regulating the calcineurin-NFAT signaling pathway.

Using DNA microarray analysis, Minami et al. (2004) found that treatment
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) with VEGF or thrombin
(F2; 176930) upregulated expression of DSCR1 variant-4, which contains
exons 4 through 7. DSCR1 expression was induced by VEGF and thrombin via
KDR (191306) and PAR1 (F2R; 187930), respectively, and involved
cooperative binding of NFATC and GATA2 (137295)/GATA3 (131320) to
neighboring consensus motifs in the DSCR1 internal promoter between
exons 3 and 4. Cyclosporine A, a calcineurin inhibitor, inhibited both
VEGF- and thrombin-induced DSCR1 induction. In HUVECs, VEGF induced
formation of capillary or tube-like structures, and DSCR1 overexpression
reduced tube formation. DSCR1 treatment also reduced blood vessel
density and tumor size in mice injected subcutaneously with B16 melanoma
cells. Minami et al. (2004) concluded that VEGF- and thrombin-mediated
induction of endothelial cell proliferation triggers a negative feedback
loop of DSCR1 induction leading to reduced NFAT signaling.

Arron et al. (2006) reported that 2 genes, DSCR1 and DYRK1A (600855),
that lie within the Down syndrome critical region of human chromosome 21
act synergistically to prevent nuclear occupancy of NFATc transcription
factors (see 600489), which are regulators of vertebrate development.
Arron et al. (2006) used mathematical modeling to predict that
autoregulation within the pathway accentuates the effects of trisomy of
DSCR1 and DYRK1A, leading to failure to activate NFATc target genes
under specific conditions. The authors' observations of calcineurin- and
Nfatc-deficient mice, Dscr1- and Dyrk1a-overexpressing mice, mouse
models of Down syndrome, and human trisomy 21 are consistent with these
predictions. Arron et al. (2006) suggested that the 1.5-fold increase in
dosage of DSCR1 and DYRK1A cooperatively destabilizes a regulatory
circuit, leading to reduced NFATc activity and many of the features of
Down syndrome. Arron et al. (2006) concluded that more generally, their
observations suggest that the destabilization of regulatory circuits can
underlie human disease.

To investigate the role of DSCR1 overexpression in Down syndrome and
development, Kluetzman et al. (2005) injected mouse embryos with
full-length human DSCR1, including extensive upstream and downstream
sequence. They found that DSCR1 overexpression was embryonic lethal and
proposed that other genes overrepresented in trisomy 21 may suppress the
lethality of DSCR1 overexpression.

Kim et al. (2006) stated that DSCR1 inhibits the induction of genes
involved in the inflammatory response. They found that overexpression of
the DSCR1 variant-4 attenuated phorbol ester-induced COX2 (PTGS2;
600262) upregulation in a human glioblastoma cell line. This response
was independent of calcineurin and involved stabilization
I-kappa-B-alpha (NFKBIA; 164008), an inhibitor of the transcription
factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011). Both full-length DSCR1 variant-4 and an
N-terminally truncated variant-4 decreased the steady-state activity of
NF-kappa-B as well as phorbol ester-induced activation of NF-kappa-B.

Using mouse cortical neurons, Porta et al. (2007) showed that Rcan1
increased neuronal susceptibility to oxidative stress.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human fetal brain library, Lee et al.
(2008) showed that DSCR1 interacted with NF-kappa-B-inducing kinase
(NIK, or MAP3K14; 604655). NIK phosphorylated the C-terminal region of
Dscr1 in a rat hippocampal cell line and in primary cortical neurons.
NIK-mediated phosphorylation of Dscr1 increased its protein stability
and blocked its proteasomal degradation, which led to increased levels
of soluble and insoluble Dscr1. Insoluble Dscr1 formed cytosolic
aggregates. Whereas formation of Dscr1 aggregates was not neurotoxic,
overexpression of Dscr1 without formation of aggregates led to
apoptosis.

Using microarray and RT-PCR analyses, Belmont et al. (2008) showed that
Rcan1 variant-4 was induced in mouse heart by activation of the Atf6
gene (605537), a transcription factor involved in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response that fosters cell survival. Rcan1 was
also induced in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes following ER stress.
Overexpression of activated Atf6 in cultured cardiomyocytes induced the
Rcan1 promoter, upregulated Rcan1 mRNA, inhibited calcineurin
phosphatase activity, and inhibited cell growth. These effects were
inhibited by Rcan1-targeted small interfering RNA.

Baek et al. (2009) demonstrated that DSCR1 expression is increased in
tissue samples from Down syndrome (190685) patients and in a mouse model
of Down syndrome. Furthermore, the modest increase in expression
afforded by a single extra transgenic copy of Dscr1 in mice is
sufficient to confer significant suppression of tumor growth, and such
resistance is a consequence of a deficit in tumor angiogenesis arising
from suppression of the calcineurin pathway. Baek et al. (2009) also
provided evidence that attenuation of calcineurin activity by DSCR1,
together with another chromosome 21 gene Dyrk1a, may be sufficient to
markedly diminish angiogenesis. Baek et al. (2009) concluded that their
data provided a mechanism for the reduced cancer incidence of Down
syndrome and identified the calcineurin signaling pathway, and its
regulators DSCR1 and DYRK1A, as potential therapeutic targets in cancer
arising in all individuals.

Using an integrative genomics approach, Lee et al. (2010) identified
DSCR1 (RCAN1) as an NFAT-dependent injury-response gene in mouse smooth
muscle cells (SMC). Induction of DSCR1 inhibited calcineurin/NFAT
signaling through a negative feedback mechanism. DSCR1 overexpression
attenuated NFAT transcriptional activity and COX2 protein expression,
whereas knockdown of endogenous DSCR1 enhanced NFAT transcriptional
activity. Lee et al. (2010) concluded that DSCR1 is a novel
NFAT-dependent, injury-inducible, early gene that may serve to
negatively regulate SMC phenotypic switching.

CYTOGENETICS

Eggermann et al. (2010) reported a patient with a paternally inherited
0.46-Mb duplication of chromosome 21q22, including the KCNE1 (176261)
and RCAN1 genes, who did not have typical facial or cardiac features of
Down syndrome. The patient had a clinical phenotype resembling
Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS; 180860), which is characterized by poor
growth, but typical epigenetic changes associated with SRS were
excluded. The duplication was inherited from his unaffected father.
Eggermann et al. (2010) concluded that the RCAN1 gene is not sufficient
for generating the phenotypic features associated with Down syndrome.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate the involvement of MCIP1 in cardiac hypertrophy in vivo,
Vega et al. (2003) generated Mcip1-null mice and subjected them to a
variety of stress stimuli that induced cardiac hypertrophy. In the
absence of stress, Mcip1 -/- animals exhibited no overt phenotype.
However, the lack of Mcip1 exacerbated the hypertrophic response to
activated calcineurin expressed from a muscle-specific transgene,
consistent with the role of MCIP1 as the negative regulator of
calcineurin signaling. Paradoxically, however, cardiac hypertrophy in
response to pressure overload or chronic adrenergic stimulation was
blunted in Mcip1 -/- mice. These findings suggested that MCIP1 can
facilitate or suppress cardiac calcineurin signaling depending on the
nature of the hypertrophic stimulus. These opposing roles of MICP1 have
important implications for therapeutic strategies to regulate cardiac
hypertrophy through modulation of calcineurin-MCIP1 activity.

Ryeom et al. (2003) showed that Csp1-deficient mice had altered
transactivation thresholds for a number of genes triggered in an immune
response. The transactivation thresholds were shifted due to enhanced
calcineurin activity, which drove Fasl (TNFSF6; 134638) expression and
led to premature death of Th1 cells, resulting in defective Th1
responses. Ryeom et al. (2003) concluded that CSP1 acts to ensure that
high-threshold genes, such as FASL, remain silent during the primary
stimulation associated with the clonal expansion of T cells.

REFERENCE 1. Arron, J. R.; Winslow, M. M.; Polleri, A.; Chang, C.-P.; Wu, H.;
Gao, X.; Neilson, J. R.; Chen, L.; Heit, J. J.; Kim, S. K.; Yamasaki,
N.; Miyakawa, T.; Francke, U.; Graef, I. A.; Crabtree, G. R.: NFAT
dysregulation by increased dosage of DSCR1 and DYRK1A on chromosome
21. Nature 441: 595-600, 2006.

2. Baek, K.-H.; Zaslavsky, A.; Lynch, R. C.; Britt, C.; Okada, Y.;
Siarey, R. J.; Lensch, M. W.; Park, I.-H.; Yoon, S. S.; Minami, T.;
Korenberg, J. R.; Folkman, J.; Daley, G. Q.; Aird, W. C.; Galdzicki,
Z.; Ryeom, S.: Down's syndrome suppression of tumour growth and the
role of the calcineurin inhibitor DSCR1. Nature 459: 1126-1130,
2009.

3. Belmont, P. J.; Tadimalla, A.; Chen, W. J.; Martindale, J. J.;
Thuerauf, D. J.; Marcinko, M.; Gude, N.; Sussman, M. A.; Glembotski,
C. C.: Coordination of growth and endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling
by regulator of calcineurin 1 (RCAN1), a novel ATF6-inducible gene. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 14012-14021, 2008.

4. Eggermann, T.; Schonherr, N.; Spengler, S.; Jager, S.; Denecke,
B.; Binder, G.; Baudis, M.: Identification of a 21q22 duplication
in a Silver-Russell syndrome patient further narrows down the Down
syndrome critical region. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 356-359, 2010.

5. Ermak, G.; Morgan, T. E.; Davies, K. J. A.: Chronic overexpression
of the calcineurin inhibitory gene DSCR1 (Adapt78) is associated with
Alzheimer's disease. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 38787-38794, 2001.

6. Fuentes, J.-J.; Pritchard, M. A.; Planas, A. M.; Bosch, A.; Ferrer,
I.; Estivill, X.: A new human gene from the Down syndrome critical
region encodes a proline-rich protein highly expressed in fetal brain
and heart. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1935-1944, 1995.

7. Fuentes, J. J.; Genesca, L.; Kingsbury, T. J.; Cunningham, K. W.;
Perez-Riba, M.; Estivill, X.; de la Luna, S.: DSCR1, overexpressed
in Down syndrome, is an inhibitor of calcineurin-mediated signaling
pathways. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1681-1690, 2000.

8. Fuentes, J. J.; Pritchard, M. A.; Estivill, X.: Genomic organization,
alternative splicing, and expression patterns of the DSCR1 (Down syndrome
candidate region 1) gene. Genomics 44: 358-361, 1997.

9. Kayyali, U. S.; Zhang, W.; Yee, A. G.; Seidman, J. G.; Potter,
H.: Cytoskeletal changes in the brains of mice lacking calcineurin
A-alpha. J. Neurochem. 68: 1668-1678, 1997.

10. Kim, Y. S.; Cho, K.-O.; Lee, H. J.; Kim, S. Y.; Sato, Y.; Cho,
Y.-J.: Down syndrome candidate region 1 increases the stability of
the I-kappa-B-alpha protein: implications for its anti-inflammatory
effects. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 39051-39061, 2006.

11. Kingsbury, T. J.; Cunningham, K. W.: A conserved family of calcineurin
regulators. Genes Dev. 14: 1595-1604, 2000.

12. Kluetzman, K. S.; Perez, A. V.; Crawford, D. R.: DSCR1 (ADAPT78)
lethality: evidence for a protective effect of trisomy 21 genes? Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 337: 595-601, 2005.

13. Lee, E. J.; Seo, S. R.; Um, J. W.; Park, J.; Oh, Y.; Chung, K.
C.: NF-kappa-B-inducing kinase phosphorylates and blocks the degradation
of Down syndrome candidate region 1. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 3392-3400,
2008.

14. Lee, M. Y.; Garvey, S. M.; Baras, A. S.; Lemmon, J. A.; Gomez,
M. F.; Schoppee Bortz, P. D.; Daum, G.; LeBoeuf, R. C.; Wamhoff, B.
R.: Integrative genomics identifies DSCR1 (RCAN1) as a novel NFAT-dependent
mediator of phenotypic modulation in vascular smooth muscle cells. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 468-479, 2010.

15. Minami, T.; Horiuchi, K.; Miura, M.; Abid, M. R.; Takabe, W.;
Noguchi, N.; Kohro, T.; Ge, X.; Aburatani, H.; Hamakubo, T.; Kodama,
T.; Aird, W. C.: Vascular endothelial growth factor- and thrombin-induced
termination factor, Down syndrome critical region-1, attenuates endothelial
cell proliferation and angiogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 50537-50554,
2004.

16. Porta, S.; Serra, S. A.; Huch, M.; Valverde, M. A.; Llorens, F.;
Estivill, X.; Arbones, M. L.; Marti, E.: RCAN1 (DSCR1) increases
neuronal susceptibility to oxidative stress: a potential pathogenic
process in neurodegeneration. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1039-1050,
2007.

17. Rothermel, B.; Vega, R. B.; Yang, J.; Wu, H.; Bassel-Duby, R.;
Williams, R. S.: A protein encoded within the Down syndrome critical
region is enriched in striated muscles and inhibits calcineurin signaling. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 8719-8725, 2000.

18. Ryeom, S.; Greenwald, R. J.; Sharpe, A. H.; McKeon, F.: The threshold
pattern of calcineurin-dependent gene expression is altered by loss
of the endogenous inhibitor calcipressin. Nature Immun. 4: 874-881,
2003.

19. Strippoli, P.; Petrini, M.; Lenzi, L.; Carinci, P.; Zannotti,
M.: The murine DSCR1-like (Down syndrome candidate region 1) gene
family: conserved synteny with the human orthologous genes. Gene 257:
223-232, 2000.

20. Vega, R. B.; Rothermel, B. A.; Weinheimer, C. J.; Kovacs, A.;
Naseem, R. H.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Williams, R. S.; Olson, E. N.: Dual
roles of modulatory calcineurin-interacting protein 1 in cardiac hypertrophy. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 669-674, 2003.

21. Yang, J.; Rothermel, B.; Vega, R. B.; Frey, N.; McKinsey, T. A.;
Olson, E. N.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Williams, R. S.: Independent signals
control expression of the calcineurin inhibitory proteins MCIP1 and
MCIP2 in striated muscles. Circ. Res. 87: E61-E68, 2000.

22. Yao, Y.-G.; Duh, E. J.: VEGF selectively induces Down syndrome
critical region 1 gene expression in endothelial cells: a mechanism
for feedback regulation of angiogenesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 321:
648-656, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/7/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/18/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/31/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/19/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/2/1998

EDITED terry: 07/21/2011
wwang: 7/14/2011
ckniffin: 7/7/2011
wwang: 1/14/2011
terry: 1/5/2011
mgross: 3/22/2010
terry: 3/18/2010
alopez: 7/16/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
mgross: 1/9/2009
terry: 12/31/2008
carol: 9/24/2008
alopez: 7/31/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 2/4/2005
alopez: 9/2/2003
mgross: 8/28/2003
terry: 6/9/2003
mgross: 2/21/2003
terry: 2/12/2003
carol: 2/11/2003
ckniffin: 2/4/2003
alopez: 6/4/2001
mgross: 4/19/2001
mgross: 4/12/2001
mgross: 4/11/2001
terry: 4/11/2001
alopez: 9/19/2000
alopez: 8/21/1998
alopez: 8/2/1998

601955	TITLE *601955 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 7; CDK7
;;CELL DIVISION PROTEIN KINASE 7;;
MO15, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF;;
SERINE/THREONINE PROTEIN KINASE 1; STK1;;
KINASE SUBUNIT OF CAK; CAK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Levedakou et al. (1994) used degenerate PCR to clone a novel
serine/threonine protein kinase which they termed STK1. Levedakou et al.
(1994) cloned the STK1 cDNA from a human breast carcinoma cell line; the
gene encodes a 346-amino acid polypeptide. Based on amino acid sequence
analysis, Levedakou et al. (1994) considered STK1 to be the human
homolog of Xenopus MO15, a cell cycle-associated kinase. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the STK1 gene is expressed as an mRNA of 1.4 kb
in heart and several other tissues. Levedakou et al. (1994) noted that
levels of STK1 mRNA remain invariant throughout the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

CDK-activating kinases (CAKs) are multisubunit proteins that
phosphorylate and thus activate certain cyclin-dependent protein kinases
in the regulation of cell cycle progression. Fisher and Morgan (1994)
purified a mammalian CAK and found that it was composed of 2 major
polypeptides: a 37-kD cyclin termed cyclin H (601953) and the 42-kD CDK7
kinase.

Shiekhattar et al. (1995) purified transcription factor IIH (TFIIH;
189972) and found that it contained material that reacted with
antibodies to CDK7 and cyclin H. The authors confirmed the presence of
the CAK complex as a distinct component of TFIIH, suggesting a link
between TFIIH (by the phosphorylation of CDC2 (116940) or CDK2 (116953))
and the processes of transcription, DNA repair, and cycle cell
progression.

Mammalian CDK8 (603184) and cyclin C (123838) are components of the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme complex, where they function as a protein
kinase that phosphorylates the C-terminal domain of the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II. The CDK8/cyclin C protein complex is also found in
a number of mammalian 'Mediator'-like protein complexes, which repress
activated transcription independently of the C-terminal domain in vitro.
Akoulitchev et al. (2000) demonstrated that CDK8/cyclin C can regulate
transcription by targeting the CDK7/cyclin H subunits of TFIIH. CDK8
phosphorylates mammalian cyclin H at serine 5 and serine 304 both in
vitro and in vivo, in the vicinity of its functionally unique N- and
C-terminal alpha-helical domains. This phosphorylation represses both
the ability of TFIIH to activate transcription and its C-terminal kinase
activity. In addition, mimicking CDK8 phosphorylation of cyclin H in
vivo has a dominant-negative effect on cell growth. Akoulitchev et al.
(2000) concluded that their results linked the Mediator complex and the
basal transcription machinery by a regulatory pathway involving 2
cyclin-dependent kinases. This pathway appears to be unique to higher
organisms.

The CDK-activating kinase, or CAK complex, consists of CDK7, cyclin H,
and MAT1 (602659). As the kinase subunit of TFIIH, CDK7 participates in
basal transcription by phosphorylating the carboxy-terminal domain of
the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. As part of CAK, CDK7 also
phosphorylates other CDKs, an essential step for their activation. Chen
et al. (2003) showed that the Drosophila TFIIH component Xpd, whose
human homolog is ERCC2 (126340), negatively regulates the cell cycle
function of Cdk7, the CAK activity. Excess Xpd titrated CAK activity,
resulting in decreased Cdk T-loop phosphorylation, mitotic defects, and
lethality, whereas a decrease in Xpd resulted in increased CAK activity
and cell proliferation. Moreover, Chen et al. (2003) showed that Xpd is
downregulated at the beginning of mitosis when Cdk1 (116940), a cell
cycle target of Cdk7, is most active. Downregulation of Xpd thus seems
to contribute to the upregulation of mitotic CAK activity and to
regulate mitotic progression positively. Chen et al. (2003) concluded
that the downregulation of Xpd might be a major mechanism of mitotic
silencing of basal transcription.

Larochelle et al. (2007) replaced wildtype CDK7 in a human colon
carcinoma cell line with a mutant CDK7 sensitive to inhibition by a
nonhydrolyzable ATP analog. Selective inhibition of CDK7 in synchronized
cells during G1 prevented activation, but not formation, of CDK2/cyclin
complexes and delayed entry into S phase. Inhibition of CDK7 in G2
blocked entry into mitosis and disrupted CDK1 (CDC2)/cyclin B (CCNB1;
123836) complex assembly. Larochelle et al. (2007) concluded that CDK7
functions in both cyclin binding and T-loop phosphorylation and that
these 2 steps of CDK1 activation are mutually dependent.

MAPPING

By PCR amplification on DNA from a panel of monochromosomal human-rodent
hybrids, Levedakou et al. (1994) mapped the CDK7 gene to chromosome
2p15-cen.

NOMENCLATURE

Note: This STK1 is distinct from the FLT3 gene, also referred to as
STK1.

REFERENCE 1. Akoulitchev, S.; Chuikov, S.; Reinberg, D.: TFIIH is negatively
regulated by cdk8-containing mediator complexes. Nature 407: 102-106,
2000.

2. Chen, J.; Larochelle, S.; Li, X.; Suter, B.: Xpd/Ercc2 regulates
CAK activity and mitotic progression. Nature 424: 228-232, 2003.

3. Fisher, R. P.; Morgan, D. O.: A novel cyclin associates with MO15/CDK7
to form the CDK-activating kinase. Cell 78: 713-724, 1994.

4. Larochelle, S.; Merrick, K. A.; Terret, M.-E.; Wohlbold, L.; Barboza,
N. M.; Zhang, C.; Shokat, K. M.; Jallepalli, P. V.; Fisher, R. P.
: Requirements for Cdk7 in the assembly of Cdk1/cyclin B and activation
of Cdk2 revealed by chemical genetics in human cells. Molec. Cell 25:
839-850, 2007.

5. Levedakou, E. N.; He, M.; Baptist, E. W.; Craven, R. J.; Cance,
W. G.; Welcsh, P. L.; Simmons, A.; Naylor, S. L.; Leach, R. L.; Lewis,
T. B.; Bowcock, A.; Liu, E. T.: Two novel human serine/threonine
kinases with homologies to the cell cycle regulating Xenopus MO15,
and NIMA kinases: cloning and characterization of their expression
pattern. Oncogene 9: 1977-1988, 1994.

6. Shiekhattar, R.; Mermelstein, F.; Fisher, R. P.; Drapkin, R.; Dynlacht,
B.; Wessling, H. C.; Morgan, D. O.; Reinberg: Cdk-activating kinase
complex is a component of human transcription factor TFIIH. Nature 374:
283-287, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/15/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 8/22/1997

EDITED mgross: 05/30/2007
terry: 5/15/2007
carol: 4/24/2006
carol: 8/18/2003
alopez: 8/6/2003
terry: 8/4/2003
alopez: 9/7/2000
alopez: 9/6/2000
dholmes: 2/25/1998
dholmes: 9/4/1997
dholmes: 8/27/1997
dholmes: 8/26/1997

604581	TITLE *604581 ATPase FAMILY GENE 3-LIKE 2; AFG3L2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

AFG3L2 is the catalytic subunit of the m-AAA protease, an ATP-dependent
proteolytic complex of the mitochondrial inner membrane that degrades
misfolded proteins and regulates ribosome assembly (summary by Koppen et
al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching an EST database with the sequence of paraplegin (SPG7;
602783) and screening a fetal brain cDNA library, Banfi et al. (1999)
identified a cDNA for AFG3L2. AFG3L2 encodes a deduced 797-amino acid
protein whose sequence shows 69% similarity to the yeast Afg3
mitochondrial ATPase and 49% identity to paraplegin. AFG3L2 contains an
AAA (for ATPase associated with diverse cellular activities) domain of
about 190 amino acids with an ATP/GTP-binding site, a zinc-dependent
binding domain, and an RNA-binding region. Northern blot analysis
revealed that AFG3L2 is expressed ubiquitously as a 3.2-kb transcript in
fetal and adult tissues, with greatest expression in heart and skeletal
muscle. Fluorescence microscopy showed that AFG3L2 is localized in
mitochondria. Thus, AFG3L2 and paraplegin share a similar expression
pattern and the same localization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Di Bella et al. (2010) noted that the AFG3L2 gene contains 17 exons
spanning 48 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Banfi et al. (1999) mapped the AFG3L2 gene
to chromosome 18p11. Di Bella et al. (2010) noted that the AFG3L2 gene
maps to chromosome 18p11.21.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro protein binding assays and immunoprecipitation analysis,
Koppen et al. (2007) showed that paraplegin interacted with AFG3L2 in
the m-AAA protease complex. AFG3L2 also interacted with itself. Loss of
paraplegin in Spg7 -/- mice or in SPG7 patient fibroblasts resulted in
m-AAA protease complexes made up of only homodimerized AFG7L2 that were
proteolytically active against misfolded mitochondrial membrane proteins
in yeast complementation assays.

Di Bella et al. (2010) found expression of the AFG3L2 gene in Purkinje
cell bodies and dendrites of the human cerebellum and in large neurons
of the deep cerebellar layer. AFG3L2 and paraplegin were also expressed
in pyramidal cortical neurons and spinal motor neurons. Similar
expression was found in mouse tissues.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Spinocerebellar Ataxia 28

In affected members of 5 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
spinocerebellar ataxia-28 (SCA28; 610246), Di Bella et al. (2010)
identified 5 different heterozygous mutations in the AFG3L2 gene
(604581.0001-604581.0005). Studies in yeast showed that the mutations
affected respiratory and proteolytic functions of the protein by both
dominant-negative (E691K; 604581.0001), and loss-of-function (see, e.g.,
S674L, 604581.0002) mechanisms. Di Bella et al. (2010) hypothesized that
AFG3L2 or specific substrates of AFG3L2 may have an essential function
in protecting the cerebellum from neurodegeneration.

Cagnoli et al. (2010) identified 6 different missense mutations in exons
15 and 16 of the AFG3L2 gene (see, e.g., 604581.0006-604581.0009) in 9
(2.6%) of 366 Caucasian European probands with autosomal dominant SCA
who were negative for the most common triplet expansions in other genes.
All mutations affected the highly conserved C-terminal peptidase-M41
domain and were predicted to destabilize the AFG3L2 complex. Pathogenic
copy number variations affecting the AFG3L2 gene were not detected.

- Spastic Ataxia 5

By whole-exome sequencing of 2 brothers with early-onset spastic
ataxia-5 (SPAX5; 614487), Pierson et al. (2011) identified a homozygous
mutation in the AFG3L2 gene (Y616C; 604581.0010). The phenotype was
characterized by early-onset spasticity resulting in significantly
impaired ambulation, cerebellar ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, dystonia,
and myoclonic epilepsy. In vitro functional expression studies in yeast
showed that Y616C was a hypomorphic allele, resulting in decreased
activity of the homooligomeric enzyme, but not in complete inhibition.
The Y616C mutant protein also showed impaired ability to assemble with
itself or with paraplegin in protease complexes, resulting in low levels
of functionally active protease complexes and a functional paraplegin
defect. The report expanded the phenotype associated with AFG3L2
mutations and was reminiscent of a combined SCA28/SPG7 (607259)
phenotype with some features of a mitochondrial disorder.

ANIMAL MODEL

Martinelli et al. (2009) reported an early-onset severe neurologic
phenotype in Spg7-null/Afg3l2 +/- double-mutant mice characterized by
loss of balance, tremor, and ataxia. Double-mutant mice displayed
acceleration and worsening of the axonopathy observed in Spg7-null mice.
In addition, they showed prominent cerebellar degeneration with loss of
Purkinje cells and parallel fibers, and reactive astrogliosis.
Mitochondria from affected tissues were prone to lose mtDNA and had
unstable respiratory complexes. At late stages, neurons contained
structural abnormal mitochondria defective in COX-SDH reaction.
Martinelli et al. (2009) suggested that different neuronal populations
may have variable thresholds of susceptibility to reduced levels of the
m-AAA protease and that impaired mitochondrial proteolysis may be a
mechanism of cerebellar degeneration.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, GLU691LYS

In 11 affected members of an Italian family with autosomal dominant
spinocerebellar ataxia-28 (SCA28; 610246), reported by Cagnoli et al.
(2006), Di Bella et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2071G-A
transition in exon 16 of the AFG3L2 gene, resulting in a glu691-to-lys
(E691K) substitution within the highly conserved proteolytic domain. One
asymptomatic individual carried the mutation, which was not found in 400
controls. Molecular modeling showed that the E691K substitution affects
a residue that sits in the middle of the central pore surrounding the
exit from the proteolytic chamber on the matrix side of the complex. In
vitro studies in yeast showed that the mutant protein was expressed but
unable to restore an endogenous respiration defect. Coexpression with
wildtype AFG3L2 or paraplegin (602783) did not restore respiration,
consistent with a dominant-negative effect. Further studies showed that
the mutant protein had impaired proteolytic activity.

.0002
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, 2-BP DEL/2-BP INS, NT2021

In a father and son with SCA28 (610246), Di Bella et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion/2-bp insertion (2021delCCinsTA)
in exon 16 of the AFG3L2 gene, resulting in a ser674-to-leu (S674L)
substitution in a portion of the proteolytic domain. In vitro studies in
yeast showed that the mutant protein was expressed but unable to restore
an endogenous respiration defect. The mechanism appeared to be loss of
function and haploinsufficiency, since coexpression with either wildtype
AFG3L2 or paraplegin (602783) restored respiration. Further studies
showed that the mutant protein had impaired proteolytic activity.

.0003
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, ALA694GLU

In a man with SCA28 (610246), Di Bella et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 2081C-A transversion in exon 16 of the AFG3L2 gene,
resulting in an ala694-to-glu (A694E) substitution in a portion of the
proteolytic domain. His deceased father was also affected. In vitro
studies in yeast showed that the mutant protein was expressed but unable
to restore an endogenous respiration defect. The mechanism appeared to
be loss of function and haploinsufficiency, since coexpression with
either wildtype AFG3L2 or paraplegin (602783) restored respiration.
Further studies showed that the mutant protein had impaired proteolytic
activity.

.0004
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, ARG702GLN

In a 40-year-old woman with SCA28 (610246), Di Bella et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous 2105G-A transition in exon 16 of the AFG3L2
gene, resulting in an arg702-to-gln (R702Q) substitution in a portion of
the proteolytic domain. The patient had onset at age 28 years of
progressive gait and limb ataxia, with later development of dysarthria,
ophthalmoplegia, and pyramidal signs. Brain MRI showed marked cerebellar
atrophy. Two clinically unaffected family members in their seventies
also carried the mutation; they both reported a subjective sense of
unsteadiness and showed moderate cerebellar atrophy on brain MRI. In
vitro studies in yeast showed that the mutant protein was expressed but
unable to restore an endogenous respiration defect. The mechanism
appeared to be loss of function and haploinsufficiency, since
coexpression with either wildtype AFG3L2 or paraplegin (602783) restored
respiration. Further studies showed that the mutant protein had impaired
proteolytic activity.

.0005
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, ASN432THR

In 6 affected members of a family with SCA28 (610246), Di Bella et al.
(2010) identified a heterozygous 1296A-C transversion in exon 10 of the
AFG3L2 gene, resulting in an asn432-to-thr (N432T) substitution within a
highly conserved region of the ATPase domain. Molecular modeling showed
that the N432T substitution occurs in a conserved residue in the central
pore region on the membrane side of the channel through which substrates
are translocated into the proteolytic chamber. In vitro studies in yeast
showed that the mutant protein was expressed but unable to restore an
endogenous respiration defect at high temperatures. Coexpression with
wildtype AFG3L2 or paraplegin (602783) did not restore respiration,
consistent with a dominant-negative effect. Further studies showed that
the mutant protein had impaired proteolytic activity.

.0006
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, MET666VAL

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
SCA28 (610246), Cagnoli et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1996A-G
transition in exon 16 of the AFG3L2 gene, resulting in a met666-to-val
(M666V) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal
proteolytic peptidase-M41 domain. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder
effect. The mutation was not identified in 380 French or Italian control
chromosomes.

.0007
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, MET666ARG

In 2 affected members a family with autosomal dominant SCA28 (610246),
Cagnoli et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1997T-G transversion in
exon 16 of the AFG3L2 gene, resulting in a met666-to-arg (M666R)
substitution in a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal proteolytic
peptidase-M41 domain. Met666 is located on the surface of the AFG3L2
complex, and the mutation was predicted to decrease the electrostatic
potential difference between the inner mitochondrial membrane side and
the matrix side of the hexameric complex, as well as decrease the
central pore dipole. These findings suggested a destabilizing effect.
The mutation was not identified in 380 French or Italian control
chromosomes.

.0008
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, GLY671ARG

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
SCA28 (610246), Cagnoli et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2011G-A
transition in exon 16 of the AFG3L2 gene, resulting in a gly671-to-arg
(G671R) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal
proteolytic peptidase-M41 domain. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder
effect. Gly671 is located on the surface of the AFG3L2 complex, and the
mutation was predicted to decrease the electrostatic potential
difference between the inner mitochondrial membrane side and the matrix
side of the hexameric complex, as well as decrease the central pore
dipole. These findings suggested a destabilizing effect. The mutation
was not identified in 380 French or Italian control chromosomes.

.0009
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 28
AFG3L2, THR654ILE

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
SCA28 (610246), Cagnoli et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1961C-T
transition in exon 15 of the AFG3L2 gene, resulting in a thr654-to-ile
(T654I) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal
proteolytic peptidase-M41 domain. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder
effect. The mutation was not identified in 380 French or Italian control
chromosomes.

.0010
SPASTIC ATAXIA 5, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AFG3L2, TYR616CYS

In 2 brothers, born of consanguineous Hispanic parents from Colombia,
with autosomal recessive spastic ataxia-5 (SPAX5; 614487), Pierson et
al. (2011) identified a homozygous 1847G-A transition in the AFG3L2
gene, resulting in a tyr616-to-cys (Y616C) substitution in a highly
conserved residue at the beginning of the proteolytic domain. The
mutation was found by whole-exome sequencing. The older patient
developed spastic gait at age 2 years and eventually lost the ability to
ambulate independently, whereas the younger brother never acquired
independent ambulation and died at age 13 years of pneumonia. Both
developed progressive myoclonic epilepsy associated with generalized
tonic-clonic seizures at age 8 years. This was followed by progressive
dysarthria, dysphagia, motor degeneration, and lower extremity weakness
with distal muscle atrophy. The older brother showed dysmetria,
dysdiadochokinesia, ataxic dysarthria, ptosis, oculomotor apraxia, and
dystonic movements. Cognition was normal. Brain MRI showed moderate
cerebellar atrophy, and nerve conduction studies showed an axonal
sensorimotor neuropathy of the lower extremities. Electron microscopy of
skeletal muscle showed misplaced mitochondria associated with large
lipid droplets, and there was decreased mtDNA copy number. Both parents
were without neurologic complaints and had normal neurologic and
ophthalmologic exams, although the mother had mild cerebellar atrophy on
brain imaging. In vitro functional expression studies in yeast showed
that Y616C was a hypomorphic allele, resulting in decreased activity of
the homooligomeric enzyme, but not in complete inhibition. The Y616C
mutant protein also showed impaired ability to assemble with itself or
with paraplegin (SPG7; 602783) in protease complexes, resulting in low
levels of functionally active protease complexes and a functional
paraplegin defect. The report expanded the phenotype associated with
AFG3L2 mutations and was reminiscent of a combined SCA28/SPG7 (607259)
phenotype with some features of a mitochondrial disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Banfi, S; Bassi, M. T.; Andolfi, G.; Marchitiello, A.; Zanotta,
S.; Ballabio, A.; Casari, G.; Franco, B.: Identification and characterization
of AFG3L2, a novel paraplegin-related gene. Genomics 59: 51-58,
1999.

2. Cagnoli, C.; Mariotti, C.; Taroni, F.; Seri, M.; Brussino, A.;
Michielotto, C.; Grisoli, M.; Di Bella, D.; Migone, N.; Gellera, C.;
Di Donato, S.; Brusco, A.: SCA28, a novel form of autosomal dominant
cerebellar ataxia on chromosome 18p11.22-q11.2. Brain 129: 235-242,
2006.

3. Cagnoli, C.; Stevanin, G.; Brussino, A.; Barberis, M.; Mancini,
C.; Margolis, R. L.; Holmes, S. E.; Nobili, M.; Forlani, S.; Padovan,
S.; Pappi, P.; Zaros, C.; Leber, I.; Ribai, P.; Pugliese, L.; Assalto,
C.; Brice, A.; Migone, N.; Durr, A.; Brusco, A.: Missense mutations
in the AFG3L2 proteolytic domain account for ~1.5% of European autosomal
dominant cerebellar ataxias. Hum. Mutat. 31: 1117-1124, 2010.

4. Di Bella, D.; Lazzaro, F.; Brusco, A.; Plumari, M.; Battaglia,
G.; Pastore, A.; Finardi, A.; Cagnoli, C.; Tempia, F.; Frontali, M.;
Veneziano, L.; Sacco, T.; and 14 others: Mutations in the mitochondrial
protease gene AFG3L2 cause dominant hereditary ataxia SCA28. Nature
Genet. 42: 313-321, 2010.

5. Koppen, M.; Metodiev, M. D.; Casari, G.; Rugarli, E. I.; Langer,
T.: Variable and tissue-specific subunit composition of mitochondrial
m-AAA protease complexes linked to hereditary spastic paraplegia. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 27: 758-767, 2007.

6. Martinelli, P.; La Mattina, V.; Bernacchia, A.; Magnoni, R.; Cerri,
F.; Cox, G.; Quattrini, A.; Casari, G.; Rugarli, E. I.: Genetic interaction
between the m-AAA protease isoenzymes reveals novel roles in cerebellar
degeneration. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2001-2013, 2009.

7. Pierson, T. M.; Adams, D.; Bonn, F.; Martinelli, P.; Cherukuri,
P. F.; Teer, J. K.; Hansen, N. F.; Cruz, P.; Mullikin, J. C.; Blakesley,
R. W.; Golas, G.; Kwan, J.; and 9 others: Whole-exome sequencing
identifies homozygous AFG3L2 mutations in a spastic ataxia-neuropathy
syndrome linked to mitochondrial m-AAA proteases. PLoS Genet. 7:
e1002325, 2011. Note: Electronic Article.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/24/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/6/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/24/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/2/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/19/2000

EDITED terry: 04/10/2012
carol: 4/6/2012
terry: 3/2/2012
carol: 3/2/2012
ckniffin: 2/20/2012
wwang: 3/18/2011
ckniffin: 2/24/2011
wwang: 5/18/2010
ckniffin: 5/6/2010
wwang: 2/26/2010
terry: 2/24/2010
mgross: 6/2/2009
terry: 6/2/2009
cwells: 11/5/2003
carol: 2/21/2000

603889	TITLE *603889 SIGNAL REGULATORY PROTEIN, BETA-1; SIRPB1
DESCRIPTION Signaling through receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) regulates the growth
of many cell types. The transmembrane protein SIRP-alpha-1 (602461) is a
substrate of activated RTKs and binds to SH2 domains. Kharitonenkov et
al. (1997) defined 2 subfamilies of SIRPs (signal regulatory proteins).
Members of the SIRP-alpha subfamily have a cytoplasmic SHP2-binding
domain; members of the SIRP-beta subfamily lack this cytoplasmic tail.
Kharitonenkov et al. (1997) cloned 4 homologous SIRP genes. The
SIRP-beta-1 gene encodes a 398-amino acid polypeptide which lacks the
C-terminal SHP2-binding cytoplasmic domain.

REFERENCE 1. Kharitonenkov, A.; Chen, Z.; Sures, I.; Wang, H.; Schilling, J.;
Ullrich, A.: A family of proteins that inhibit signalling through
tyrosine kinase receptors. Nature 386: 181-186, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 6/8/1999

EDITED carol: 12/27/2001
carol: 12/11/2000
alopez: 6/8/1999

603771	TITLE *603771 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1, REGULATORY SUBUNIT 10; PPP1R10
;;PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1 NUCLEAR TARGETING SUBUNIT; PNUTS;;
PP1 NUCLEAR TARGETING SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) is a serine/threonine phosphatase that
exerts control over many aspects of cellular physiology by reversing the
actions of protein kinases. The activity of its catalytic subunit (e.g.,
PPP1CA; 176875) is thought to be directed by interaction with a family
of regulatory proteins. PPP1R10 belongs to a subfamily of PP1 regulatory
proteins, referred to as targeting subunits, that may target PP1 to
specific subcellular locations and modulate its activity toward specific
substrates at these sites (summary by Allen et al., 1998).

CLONING

Totaro et al. (1996) isolated a partial cDNA corresponding to a novel
gene, PPP1R10, located within the HLA class I region at chromosome
6p21.3. By screening human fetal brain and colon carcinoma cell line
(CaCo2) cDNA libraries with this partial cDNA, Totaro et al. (1998)
cloned cDNAs representing the full-length transcript of PPP1R10, which
they named FB19. Northern blot analysis showed that PPP1R10 was widely
expressed as a 4.5-kb transcript. The deduced 940-amino acid PPP1R10
protein contains a glycine-rich region.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with
the alpha isoform of Pp1 (Ppp1ca), Allen et al. (1998) cloned rat cDNAs
encoding Ppp1r10, which they called Pnuts. Pnuts exhibited a discrete
nuclear compartmentalization and colocalized with chromatin at distinct
phases during mitosis. Western blot analysis of human cell line extracts
using antibodies against Pnuts detected an approximately 120-kD protein.

Lee et al. (2010) reported that the PPP1R10 protein contains a
transcription elongation factor S II (TCEA1; 601425) N-terminal (TFS2N)
domain, a consensus RVxF motif for binding PP1, and a C-terminal zinc
finger motif.

GENE FUNCTION

Allen et al. (1998) showed that rat Pnuts formed a stable complex with
Pp1 in mammalian cell lysates and modulated Pp1 catalytic activity
toward exogenous substrate in vitro. They concluded that PNUTS is a
targeting subunit for the regulation of nuclear PP1 function.

By immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analysis of PP1 complexes
in HEK293 cells, Lee et al. (2010) identified a complex containing
PNUTS, TOX4 (614032), WDR82 (611059), and any 1 of the 3 PP1 catalytic
subunits, PP1-alpha, PP1-beta (PPP1CB; 600590), or PP1-gamma (PPP1CC;
176914). The complex, which they called PTW/PP1, had an apparent
molecular mass of about 200 kD, suggesting that it contains 1 molecule
of each subunit. Analysis of individual interactions revealed that mouse
Pnuts directly bound human TOX4, WDR82, and PP1, and no direct
interactions were observed between TOX4, WDR82, and PP1. Mutation
analysis of mouse Pnuts revealed that its TFS2N domain, RVxF motif, and
a central domain interacted with human TOX4, PP1, and WDR82,
respectively. The PTW/PP1 complex efficiently dephosphorylated the
isolated C-terminal domain of the large subunit of mouse RNA polymerase
II (POLR2A; 180660) in vitro. The PTW/PP1 complex was stable throughout
the cell cycle in HEK293 cells, but its association with chromatin was
regulated. PTW/PP1 associated with chromatin during interphase, was
excluded from condensed chromosomes during early mitosis, and was
reloaded onto chromosomes at late telophase. Expression of a PP1
interaction-defective mutant of mouse Pnuts or knockdown of PNUTS via
small interfering RNA in HEK293 cells disrupted the PTW/PP1 complex and
destabilized individual subunits, blocked cell cycle progression at
G2/M, and resulted in apoptosis. Lee et al. (2010) concluded that the
PTW/PP1 complex is essential for the transition from mitosis to
interphase, and they hypothesized that PTW/PP1 is involved in chromatin
remodeling.

In mice, Boon et al. (2013) showed that Mir34a (611172) is induced in
the aging heart and that in vivo silencing or genetic deletion of Mir34a
reduced age-associated cardiomyocyte cell death. Moreover, Mir34a
inhibition reduced cell death and fibrosis following acute myocardial
infarction and improved recovery of myocardial function.
Mechanistically, Boon et al. (2013) identified Pnuts as a novel direct
Mir34a target that reduces telomere shortening, DNA damage responses,
and cardiomyocyte apoptosis, and improves functional recovery after
acute myocardial infarction. Boon et al. (2013) concluded that their
results identified age-induced expression of MIR34A and inhibition of
its target PNUTS as a key mechanism that regulates cardiac contractile
function during aging and after acute myocardial infarction, by inducing
DNA damage responses and telomere attrition.

MAPPING

Totaro et al. (1996) determined that the PPP1R10 gene maps within the
HLA class I region at chromosome 6p21.3, approximately 70 kb centromeric
to the HLA-E gene (143010).

REFERENCE 1. Allen, P. B.; Kwon, Y.-G.; Nairn, A. C.; Greengard, P.: Isolation
and characterization of PNUTS, a putative protein phosphatase 1 nuclear
targeting subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 4089-4095, 1998.

2. Boon, R. A.; Iekushi, K.; Lechner, S.; Seeger, T.; Fischer, A.;
Heydt, S.; Kaluza, D.; Treguer, K.; Carmona, G.; Bonauer, A.; Horrevoets,
A. J. G.; Didier, N.; and 9 others: MicroRNA-34a regulates cardiac
ageing and function. Nature 495: 107-110, 2013.

3. Lee, J.-H.; You, J.; Dobrota, E.; Skalnik, D. G.: Identification
and characterization of a novel human PP1 phosphatase complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 24466-24476, 2010.

4. Totaro, A.; Grifa, A.; Carella, M.; Rommens, J. M.; Valentino,
M. A.; Roetto, A.; Zelante, L.; Gasparini, P.: Cloning of a new gene
(FB19) within HLA class I region. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 250:
555-557, 1998.

5. Totaro, A.; Rommens, J. M.; Grifa, A.; Lunardi, C.; Carella, M.;
Huizenga, J. J.; Roetto, A.; Camaschella, C.; De Sandre, G.; Gasparini,
P.: Hereditary hemochromatosis: generation of a transcription map
within a refined and extended map of the HLA class I region. Genomics 31:
319-326, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/11/2011

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 4/23/1999

EDITED alopez: 05/20/2013
mgross: 6/8/2011
terry: 4/11/2011
psherman: 4/27/1999

610741	TITLE *610741 TRINUCLEOTIDE REPEAT-CONTAINING GENE 6C; TNRC6C
;;KIAA1582
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a fetal brain cDNA library, Nagase et
al. (2000) cloned TNRC6C, which they designated KIAA1582. The deduced
1,448-amino acid protein contains an RNA recognition motif and a
ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate
expression in heart, kidney, testis, ovary, adult and fetal brain, and
all specific adult brain regions examined. Low expression was detected
in skeletal muscle, and no expression was detected in lung, liver,
pancreas, spleen, and fetal liver.

Schneider et al. (2006) stated that the TNRC6C protein contains a
glycine/tryptophan (GW)-rich N-terminal domain, followed by a UBA
domain, a glutamine-rich region, and a C-terminal RNA recognition motif.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human-rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the
TNRC6C gene to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

2. Schneider, M. D.; Najand, N.; Chaker, S.; Pare, J. M.; Haskins,
J.; Hughes, S. C.; Hobman, T. C.; Locke, J.; Simmonds, A. J.: Gawky
is a component of cytoplasmic mRNA processing bodies required for
early Drosophila development. J. Cell Biol. 174: 349-358, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2007

601273	TITLE *601273 CLATHRIN, HEAVY POLYPEPTIDE-LIKE 1; CLTCL1
;;CLATHRIN, HEAVY POLYPEPTIDE D; CLTD;;
CLH22;;
CHC22
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a YAC clone containing the velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS;
192430) critical region on chromosome 22q11 as a substrate for cDNA
selection, Sirotkin et al. (1996) derived a cDNA, which they designated
CLTD, that encodes a protein with a high degree of homology at the amino
acid level to human rat and Drosophila clathrin heavy chain. The CLTD
protein is 7% divergent at the amino acid level from that of the human
clathrin heavy chain gene (CLTC; 118955) located on chromosome
17q11-qter.

Kedra et al. (1996) cloned and characterized a clathrin heavy chain
gene, which they referred to as CLH22. The gene was cloned using a
software-based exon-trapping approach based on sequencing of genomic DNA
present in chromosome 22q11 contigs combined with the use of
exon-prediction computer programs. The 5,470-bp sequence covering the
entire open reading frame encodes a 1,640-amino acid polypeptide that is
identical to the polypeptide described by Sirotkin et al. (1996).
Although expression of the CLTD gene was ubiquitous, it was relatively
low in all tissues except skeletal muscle, testis, and heart. The main
transcript was 6 kb, and alternate transcripts were detected in several
tissues. Kedra et al. (1996) demonstrated loss of expression of the CLTD
gene in 37 out of 46 sporadic meningiomas examined. In genomic DNA from
82 sporadic meningiomas, they demonstrated aberrant restriction patterns
consistent with intragenic rearrangements in 4 tumors. Based on these
findings, the authors proposed that CLTD may be considered a candidate
meningioma tumor suppressor gene.

Long et al. (1996) cloned and characterized a gene they symbolized CLTCL
for 'CLTC-like.' The gene was expressed in all fetal tissues tested and
was selectively expressed in certain adult tissues, particularly
skeletal muscle. They observed alternative splicing of an exon near the
C terminus of the predicted polypeptide.

GENE FUNCTION

Intracellular trafficking of the glucose transporter GLUT4 (138190) from
storage compartments to the plasma membrane is triggered in muscle and
fat during the body's response to insulin. Clathrin is involved in
intracellular trafficking, and in humans, the clathrin heavy-chain
isoform CHC22 is highly expressed in skeletal muscle. Vassilopoulos et
al. (2009) found a role for CHC22 in the formation of insulin-responsive
GLUT4 compartments in human muscle and adipocytes. CHC22 also associated
with expanded GLUT4 compartments in muscle from patients with type 2
diabetes (125853). Tissue-specific introduction of CHC22 in mice, which
have only a pseudogene for this protein, caused aberrant localization of
GLUT4 transport pathway components in their muscle, as well as features
of diabetes. Thus, Vassilopoulos et al. (2009) concluded that
CHC22-dependent membrane trafficking constitutes a species-restricted
pathway in human muscle and fat with potential implications for type 2
diabetes.

MAPPING

Long et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map CLTCL
to proximal 22q near the region commonly deleted in DiGeorge syndrome
(DGS; 188400) and VCFS.

In the course of comparative mapping of the human 22q11 region in mice,
Puech et al. (1997) found that CLTCL gene, which lies in the center of a
cluster of genes whose homologs reside on chromosome 16, is not located
there in the mouse. A gene they referred to as Cltd-rs-4 was located in
the central region of mouse chromosome 11 that shares a large region of
homology with human chromosome 17. A second human clathrin heavy chain
gene, CLTC, which is 84.7% identical to CLTD, maps to 17q11-qter. Puech
et al. (1997) interpreted their findings as suggesting that either Cltc
and Cltd are tandemly duplicated loci that map to the central region of
mouse chromosome 11 or that the mouse genome does not contain a gene
corresponding to human CLTD. They favored the latter hypothesis.

CYTOGENETICS

Holmes et al. (1997) reported characterization of a balanced
translocation t(21;22)(p12;q11) within the minimal DiGeorge syndrome
critical region in a patient with some features of DGS/VCFS, including
facial dysmorphia, mental retardation, long slender digits, and genital
anomalies (first-degree hypospadias and bilateral cryptorchidism).
Holmes et al. (1997) cloned the breakpoint of the translocation and
showed that it interrupted the CLTCL gene within the DGCR. The
breakpoint of the translocation partner was in a repeated region
telomeric to the rDNA cluster on chromosome 21p, making it unlikely that
the patient's findings were caused by interruption of sequences on 21p.
The chromosome 22 breakpoint, on the other hand, disrupted the 3-prime
coding region of the CLTCL gene and led to a truncated transcript.

REFERENCE 1. Holmes, S. E.; Riazi, M. A.; Gong, W.; McDermid, H. E.; Sellinger,
B. T.; Hua, A.; Chen, F.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, G.; Roe, B.; Gonzalez,
I.; McDonald-McGinn, D. M.; Zackai, E.; Emanuel, B. S.; Budarf, M.
L.: Disruption of the clathrin heavy chain-like gene (CLTCL) associated
with features of DGS/VCFS: a balanced (21;22)(p12;q11) translocation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 357-367, 1997.

2. Kedra, D.; Peyrard, M.; Fransson, I.; Collins, J. E.; Dunham, I.;
Roe, B. A.; Dumanski, J. P.: Characterization of a second human clathrin
heavy chain polypeptide gene (CLH-22) from chromosome 22q11. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 625-631, 1996.

3. Long, K. R.; Trofatter, J. A.; Ramesh, V.; McCormick, M. K.; Buckler,
A. J.: Cloning and characterization of a novel human clathrin heavy
chain gene (CLTCL). Genomics 35: 466-472, 1996.

4. Puech, A.; Saint-Jore, B.; Funke, B.; Gilbert, D. J.; Sirotkin,
H.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Kucherlapati, R.; Morrow, B.;
Skoultchi, A. I.: Comparative mapping of the human 22q11 chromosomal
region and the orthologous region in mice reveals complex changes
in gene organization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14608-14613, 1997.

5. Sirotkin, H.; Morrow, B.; DasGupta, R.; Goldberg, R.; Patanjali,
S. R.; Shi, G.; Cannizzaro, L.; Shprintzen, R.; Weissman, S. M.; Kucherlapati,
R.: Isolation of a new clathrin heavy chain gene with muscle-specific
expression from the region commonly deleted in velo-cardio-facial
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 617-624, 1996.

6. Vassilopoulos, S.; Esk, C.; Hoshino, S.; Funke, B. H.; Chen, C.-Y.;
Plocik, A. M.; Wright, W. E.; Kucherlapati, R.; Brodsky, F. M.: A
role for the CHC22 clathrin heavy-chain isoform in human glucose metabolism. Science 324:
1192-1196, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 6/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Moyra Smith: 5/21/1996

EDITED alopez: 06/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
carol: 4/23/1999
mark: 2/15/1998
terry: 2/6/1998
alopez: 6/4/1997
mark: 6/3/1997
mark: 4/21/1997
terry: 4/8/1997
mark: 5/28/1996
carol: 5/22/1996

182144	TITLE *182144 SERINE HYDROXYMETHYLTRANSFERASE, CYTOSOLIC; SHMT1
DESCRIPTION Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT), a pyridoxal phosphate-containing
enzyme, catalyzes the reversible conversion of serine and
tetrahydrofolate to glycine and 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate. Some
eukaryotic cells, including human cells, contain both cytosolic and
mitochondrial forms of SHMT. Mammalian cells that lack mitochondrial
SHMT activity are auxotrophic for glycine (SHMT2; 138450). It has been
suggested that glycine synthesis from serine occurs in the mitochondria,
whereas cytosolic SHMT may catalyze the conversion of glycine to serine,
although direct evidence for this proposal is lacking. Garrow et al.
(1993) cloned human cDNAs for cytosolic and mitochondrial SHMT by
functional complementation of an Escherichia coli glyA mutant with a
human cDNA library. The cDNA for the cytosolic enzyme encoded a
483-residue protein of M(r) 53,020. The deduced protein sequence shared
63% identity with that of the SHMT2 protein. By isotopic in situ
hybridization, Garrow et al. (1993) assigned the cytosolic and
mitochondrial SHMT genes to 17p11.2 and 12q13, respectively. The high
degree of nucleotide sequence identity between the 2 isozymes as well as
the presence of keratin genes in both chromosomal regions was consistent
with these regions of chromosomes 12 and 17 having arisen by a
duplication event.

Folate-dependent one-carbon metabolism is critical for the synthesis of
numerous cellular constituents required for cell growth, and SHMT is
central to this process. Elsea et al. (1995) found that the SHMT1 gene
maps to the critical interval for Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; 182290)
on 17p11.2. They found that the gene spans approximately 40 kb. It was
found to be deleted in all 26 SMS patients examined by PCR, fluorescence
in situ hybridization, and/or Southern analysis. Furthermore,
haploinsufficiency was indicated by the fact that SHMT enzyme activity
in patient lymphoblasts was approximately 50% that of unaffected parent
lymphoblasts. They suggested that haploinsufficiency may play a role in
the SMS phenotype and that this finding may point to possible
therapeutic interventions.

Byrne et al. (1996) described an SHMT pseudogene with 90% identity to
SHMT cDNA. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, they mapped the
pseudogene to 1p33-p32.3.

REFERENCE 1. Byrne, P. C.; Shipley, J. M.; Chave, K. J.; Sanders, P. G.; Snell,
K.: Characterisation of a human serine hydroxymethyltransferase pseudogene
and its localisation of 1p32.3-33. Hum. Genet. 97: 340-344, 1996.

2. Elsea, S. H.; Juyal, R. C.; Jiralerspong, S.; Finucane, B. M.;
Pandolfo, M.; Greenberg, F.; Baldini, A.; Stover, P.; Patel, P. I.
: Haploinsufficiency of cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferase
in the Smith-Magenis syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1342-1350,
1995.

3. Garrow, T. A.; Brenner, A. A.; Whitehead, V. M.; Chen, X.-N.; Duncan,
R. G.; Korenberg, J. R.; Shane, B.: Cloning of human cDNAs encoding
mitochondrial and cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferases and chromosomal
localization. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 11910-11916, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/6/1993

EDITED psherman: 04/07/1998
alopez: 7/29/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 2/22/1996
terry: 2/20/1996
mark: 12/15/1995
terry: 12/14/1995
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 7/6/1993

604795	TITLE *604795 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 9; TAS2R9
;;T2R9;;
TASTE RECEPTOR, FAMILY B, MEMBER 6; TRB6
DESCRIPTION See TRB2 (604791). Matsunami et al. (2000) used in silico methods to
identify a family of candidate taste receptors that are members of the G
protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily and that are specifically
expressed in taste receptor cells. Using the TRB2 sequence to search the
human chromosome 12 database, Matsunami et al. (2000) identified 8
related genes, all in the same contig. Six encode receptors related to
TRB2, and 2 are pseudogenes. All TRB genes have the 7 transmembrane
domain structure characteristic of GPCRs, but lack a long extracellular
N-terminal domain proposed to bind ligand, suggesting that they use a
different mode of ligand binding. Matsunami et al. (2000) concluded that
the TRBs are diverse in protein sequence, which is consistent with an
ability to detect a variety of tastants with very different chemical
structures.

Adler et al. (2000) identified members of a family of 40 to 80 human and
rodent GPCRs expressed in subsets of taste receptor cells of the tongue
and palate epithelia. These candidate taste receptors, which the authors
called T2Rs, are organized in the genome in clusters and are genetically
linked to loci that influence bitter perception in mice and humans. Each
T2R gene encodes a 7-transmembrane receptor protein. The amino acid
sequence identities between human and mouse T2Rs range from 46 to 67%.
The authors determined that a single taste receptor cell expresses a
large repertoire of T2Rs, suggesting that each cell may be capable of
recognizing multiple tastants. In situ hybridization demonstrated that
T2Rs are exclusively expressed in taste receptor cells that contain the
G protein subunit gustducin, implying that they function as
gustducin-linked receptors. Adler et al. (2000) identified T2R9, which
is identical to the TRB6 gene reported by Matsunami et al. (2000), in a
BAC clone from 12p13.

Kinnamon (2000) reviewed the role of taste receptors in taste
transduction.

REFERENCE 1. Adler, E.; Hoon, M. A.; Mueller, K. L.; Chandrashekar, J.; Ryba,
N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.: A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100:
693-702, 2000.

2. Kinnamon, S. C.: A plethora of taste receptors. Neuron 25: 507-510,
2000.

3. Matsunami, H.; Montmayeur, J.-P.; Buck, L. B.: A family of candidate
taste receptors in human and mouse. Nature 404: 601-604, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/21/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 4/5/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/22/2001
alopez: 7/10/2000
mgross: 4/24/2000
mgross: 4/21/2000
alopez: 4/5/2000

300826	TITLE *300826 STROMAL ANTIGEN 2; STAG2
;;SA2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Stromal cells from blood-forming organs provide the physical support for
hematopoietic cell organization. The stroma also produces signals for
seeding, renewal, proliferation, and differentiation of stem cells. By
screening a human thymus cDNA library with a mouse SA1 cDNA, Carramolino
et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding STAG2, which they named SA2. The
deduced protein has 1,162 amino acids, and its sequence is 78% similar
to that of STAG1 (604358).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

By immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analyses, Sumara et al. (2000)
showed that STAG2 is expressed as an approximately 140-kD protein that
assembles with the cohesin proteins, SMC1 (300040), SMC3 (606062), and
SCC1 (RAD21; 606462). The cohesin complex also coprecipitates with PDS5
(see 613200), but in a less stable way than the proteins in the cohesin
assembly. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated nonnucleolar
expression of STAG2 in interphase and early prophase, but expression did
not occur again until telophase, with the onset of chromosome
decondensation. The expression pattern paralleled those of STAG1, PDS5,
and the other cohesin subunits. Cohesin dissociation was found to be
independent of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC; see 603462). Sumara
et al. (2000) proposed that there is a prophase pathway that removes the
bulk of cohesin complexes, thereby enabling chromosome condensation
while releasing cohesion between chromosome arms, and that residual
cohesin is removed by an anaphase pathway.

GENE FUNCTION

Renault et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting that the STAG2 gene
may play a role in familial skewed X inactivation-2 (SXI2; 300179). In a
Canadian family with hemophilia A (HEMA; 306700) in which 3 affected
females showed skewed X inactivation (Renault et al., 2007), Renault et
al. (2011) found linkage to a 16.7-cM region on Xq25-q27, which contains
the STAG2 gene. Although no pathogenic mutations were found in STAG2,
its function as a core component of the ring-like cohesin complex
involved in sister chromatid cohesion during mitosis made it a candidate
gene for the trait.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Solomon et al. (2011) found that diverse range of tumor types harbor
deletions or inactivating mutations of STAG2, the gene encoding a
subunit of the cohesin complex, which regulates the separation of sister
chromatids during cell division. Because STAG2 is on the X chromosome,
its inactivation requires only a single mutational event. Studying a
near-diploid human cell line with a stable karyotype, Solomon et al.
(2011) found that targeted inactivation of STAG2 led to chromatid
cohesion defects and aneuploidy, whereas in 2 aneuploid human
glioblastoma cell lines, targeted correction of the endogenous mutant
alleles of STAG2 led to enhanced chromosomal stability. Thus, Solomon et
al. (2011) concluded that genetic disruption of cohesin is a cause of
aneuploidy in human cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Carramolino, L.; Lee, B. C.; Zaballos. A.; Peled, A.; Barthelemy,
I.; Shav-Tal, Y.; Prieto, I.; Carmi, P.; Gothelf, Y.; Gonzalez de
Buitrago, G.; Aracil, M.; Marquez, G.; Barbero, J. L.; Zipori, D.
: SA-1, a nuclear protein encoded by one member of a novel gene family:
molecular cloning and detection in hemopoietic organs. Gene 195:
151-159, 1997. Note: Erratum: Gene 206: 283 only, 1998.

2. Renault, N. K.; Dyack, S.; Dobson, M. J.; Costa, T.; Lam, W.
L.; Greer, W. L.: Heritable skewed X-chromosome inactivation leads
haemophilia A expression in heterozygous females. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 15: 628-637, 2007.

3. Renault, N. K. E.; Renault, M. P.; Copeland, E.; Howell, R. E.;
Greer, W. L.: Familial skewed X-chromosome inactivation linked to
a component of the cohesin complex, SA2. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 390-397,
2011.

4. Solomon, D. A.; Kim, T.; Diaz-Martinez, L. A.; Fair, J.; Elkahloun,
A. G.; Harris, B. T.; Toretsky, J. A.; Rosenberg, S. A.; Shukla, N.;
Ladanyi, M.; Samuels, Y.; James, C. D.; Yu, H.; Kim, J.-S.; Waldman,
T.: Mutational inactivation of STAG2 causes aneuploidy in human cancer. Science 333:
1039-1043, 2011.

5. Sumara, I.; Vorlaufer, E.; Gieffers, C.; Peters, B. H.; Peters,
J.-M.: Characterization of vertebrate cohesin complexes and their
regulation in prophase. J. Cell Biol. 151: 749-761, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/14/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2011

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 11/8/2010

EDITED carol: 12/15/2011
ckniffin: 12/14/2011
terry: 9/7/2011
wwang: 11/9/2010
carol: 11/8/2010

